ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/37
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and supply of property management services to a non-resident
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID no longer reflects the ATO view. The ATO view on this issue is covered in GST Fact Sheet - GST and real estate services for non-resident property owners-supplied on or after 1 April 2005.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a real estate agent, making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-190(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it supplies property management services to a non-resident property owner?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-190(1) of the GST Act when it supplies property management services to a non-resident property owner.
Facts
The entity is a real estate agent. The entity is providing property management services to a non-resident who owns a residential property in Australia. When the entity provides the services, the non-resident property owner is not in Australia.
The non-resident property owner leases the residential property to a tenant at market rates on a regular and continuous basis. There is no private use of the property. This supply is an input taxed supply under section 40-35 of the GST Act. These are the only supplies that the non-resident makes. The non-resident is not registered for goods and services tax (GST).
The entity is registered for GST.
Reasons for Decision
Under section 38-190 of the GST Act, certain supplies of things other than goods or real property, for consumption outside of Australia, are GST-free. As a property management service is not a supply of goods or real property, its GST status is appropriately considered under section 38-190 of the GST Act.
Of most relevance to this case is item 2 in the table in subsection 38-190(1) of the GST Act (Item 2).
Under Item 2, a supply made to a non-resident is GST-free if:

•the non-resident is not in Australia when the thing supplied is done, and under paragraph (b)
•the non-resident makes the acquisition in carrying on its enterprise; and
•the non-resident is not registered or required to be registered for GST.

The non-resident is not in Australia when the property management services are supplied.
The rental of the residential property is an enterprise under paragraph 9-20(1)(c) of the GST Act. Therefore, the non-resident has acquired the property management services in the carrying on of its enterprise.
The non-resident is not registered, nor is it required to be registered for GST. This is because an entity is only required to be registered if it is carrying on an enterprise and its annual turnover meets the registration turnover threshold (section 23-5 of the GST Act). The only supplies the non-resident makes are input taxed supplies of residential accommodation under section 40-35 of the GST Act. Input taxed supplies are excluded from the calculation of an entity's annual turnover under Division 188 of the GST Act. Therefore, the non-resident's annual turnover does not meet the registration turnover threshold and accordingly, the non-resident is not required to be registered.
All of the requirements for a supply to be GST-free under paragraph (b) of Item 2 are, therefore, satisfied. Accordingly, the entity is making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-190(1) of the GST Act when it supplies property management services to a non-resident property owner that is not in Australia when the services are performed.
Date of decision:
  4 October 2001

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   paragraph 9-20(1)(c)   section 23-5   section 38-190   subsection 38-190(1)   subsection 38-190(1) table item 2   subsection 38-190(1) table item 2 paragraph (b)   section 40-35   Division 188

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 Exports
 Consumption outside Australia
 GST free
 GST registration
 GST turnover threshold
 GST offshore supplies

Business Line:
  GST

Date of publication:
  24 January 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 4 October 2001
Original statement

You are here
12 August 2005
Archived