ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/621
==================================================

Income Tax
 Deductibility: Purchase price of Cleaning Contract
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn. Guidance on the issue contained in this ATO ID can be found in ATO ID 2004/656.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the cost of acquiring a cleaning contract which was subsequently lost, deductible under section 8-1 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. The cost of acquiring a cleaning contract is not deductible under section 8-1 of the ITAA 1997. The expenditure is capital in nature and the subsequent loss of the contract does not alter the nature of the payment.
Facts
The taxpayer operates a cleaning business as a sole trader. The taxpayer approached a broker through whom the taxpayer acquired a number of cleaning contracts.
The taxpayer was required to make an upfront payment to acquire each contract. The contracts gave the taxpayer the right to clean customer's offices or shops for a pre-determined fee. The contracts were for guaranteed minimum periods of up to two years and if any contract was terminated before the expiry of the guaranteed minimum period, through no fault of the taxpayer, then a replacement contract was to be provided to the taxpayer.
The taxpayer lost one contract and a replacement contract was not provided.
Reasons for Decision
Section 8-1 of the ITAA 1997 allows a deduction for any losses or outgoings to the extent to which they are incurred in gaining or producing assessable income, or are necessarily incurred in carrying on a business for the purpose of gaining or producing assessable income. However, no deduction is allowed under section 8-1 of the ITAA 1997 for expenses to the extent that they are of a capital, private or domestic nature.
The judgment of Dixon J in Sun Newspapers Ltd v. FC of T (1938) 61 CLR 337 (the Sun Newspapers Case) is a leading exposition of the matters that must be examined in order to differentiate whether an amount is capital or revenue in nature.
Accordingly the following indicators, consistent with the matters raised by Dixon J, in the Sun Newspapers Case point towards an expense being capital in nature:

'The expenditure is related to the business structure itself. This includes the establishment, replacement or enlargement of the profit yielding structure of business rather than the money earning process.

The nature of the asset has lasting and enduring benefit to the business.

The payment is made 'once and for all' being a single final provision for the future use or enjoyment of the asset or advantage rather than on a regular basis, such as weekly, monthly or yearly or for a specific period.'

It must be borne in mind that the statements made by Dixon J are not exhaustive or ultimately definitive of the relevant matters to be considered in each case.
The courts have held, in the absence of special circumstances, that expenditure is capital in nature where it is made with the view to bring into existence an asset or an advantage whether tangible or intangible for enduring benefit of the business: British Insulated & Helsby Cables v. Atherton (1926) AC 205.
The term enduring was referred to by Rich J at page 547 in Herring v. FCT (1946) 72 CLR 543, who stated that 'by enduring it is not meant that the asset or advantage should last forever. It is a matter of degree and only one element to be considered.'
In determining the essential character of the cleaning contract, it is necessary to clarify what the payment actually represents.
Applying the indicators consistent with the Sun Newspapers Case, the following factors indicate that the expenditure incurred by the taxpayer in acquiring cleaning contracts are capital in nature:

•The purchase price of each contract is a 'once and for all' payment
•The expenditure incurred in respect of payment for cleaning contracts is made with a view to acquiring an income-producing asset that has an enduring benefit for the business
•The expenditure relates to enlarging the profit yielding structure of the taxpayer's business. That is, it relates to the structure within which profits from cleaning will be derived.

Accordingly, the cost of purchasing the cleaning contract is not deductible under section 8-1 of the ITAA 1997. The fact that the taxpayer lost the contract does not alter the fact that the cost of acquiring each contract is capital in nature.
Date of decision:
  27 March 2002

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2001

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   section 8-1

Case References:

Sun Newspapers Ltd and Associated Newspapers Ltd v. FCT   (1938) 61 CLR 337   (1938) 5 ATD 87   45 ALR 10   (1938) 1 AITR 403

Herring v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation   (1946) 72 CLR 543 52   [1946] QWN 23   (1946) 20 ALJR 159   (1946) 52 Arg LR 296   (1946) 8 ATD 130

British Insulated and Helsby Cables v. Atherton   [1926] AC 205

Keywords

Deductions & expenses
 Capital expenditure
 Cleaning expenses
 Capital assets
 Non deductible expenses

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  31 May 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
27 March 2002
Original statement

You are here
22 August 2014
Archived