ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/353
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and adjustment of input tax credit after legislative change for supply of retirement village accommodation
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a supplier of retirement village accommodation, entitled to make an adjustment under Division 19 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act) or revise its previous business activity statements (BASs) to claim input tax credits for the construction costs of the retirement village incurred in prior tax periods as a result of the introduction of section 38-260 of the GST Act?
Decision
No. The entity is not entitled to make an adjustment under Division 19 of the GST Act or revise its previous BASs. The correct method of determining the entitlement to input tax credits not previously claimed is to make an adjustment under Division 129 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a charitable institution that built a retirement village and is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The entity accounts for GST on a non-cash basis.
Prior to 14 December 2004, the entity entered a construction contract that required monthly progressive payments. Before construction commenced, the entity determined that the supply of accommodation would be input taxed, therefore no input tax credits were claimed when it made progressive payments for the construction costs.
On 14 December 2004, section 38-260 of the GST Act was introduced. This section provides that if certain conditions are met, the supply of accommodation in a retirement village operated by a charitable institution is GST-free. The entity meets these conditions and its supplies of accommodation in the retirement village are GST-free.
Reasons for Decision
For Division 19 of the GST Act to apply, the introduction of section 38-260 into the GST Act must be an 'adjustment event'. A change in the law with prospective application (such as section 38-260 which only applies to supplies made on or after 14 December 2004) is not considered to give rise to an adjustment event in these circumstances as it does not cause acquisitions associated with the construction of the retirement village to become creditable acquisitions (paragraph 19-10(c) of the GST Act).
At the time the entity made the acquisitions (prior to 14 December 2004), the acquisitions related to making supplies that would be input taxed. Consequently, the acquisitions were not made for a creditable purpose. The introduction of section 38-260 of the GST Act does not cause an acquisition made prior to 14 December 2004 which was not made for a creditable purpose to become creditable at the time of acquisition or at any other time prior to 14 December 2004.
Similarly, an entity can only revise a previous BAS where it has made an error or omission, for example, it did not claim input tax credits on creditable acquisitions. In this instance, the entity has not made an error in a previous BAS as it was not entitled to claim an input tax credit at the time of acquisition. As section 38-260 of the GST Act only applies prospectively, it does not result in the acquisition becoming creditable at the time of acquisition.
An adjustment under Division 129 of the GST Act arises for an acquisition in an adjustment period where:

•there is a difference between the actual use and the planned (or intended) use of the thing for a creditable purpose, or
•there is a difference between the actual use of the thing up to the end of one adjustment period and the actual use of the thing up to the end of the previous adjustment period.

The actual application of the thing acquired is the extent to which it is applied for a creditable purpose during the period:

•starting at the time when it was acquired, and
•ending at the end of the relevant adjustment period.

At the time that the entity made the progressive payments under the construction contract, input tax credits were not claimed as it had determined that the supplies of accommodation would be input taxed. It is the subsequent introduction of section 38-260 of the GST Act, which only applies to supplies made on or after 14 December 2004, that has caused the entity to review the extent of creditable purpose of these acquisitions.
Therefore, as section 38-260 of the GST Act only applies to supplies made on or after 14 December 2004, the appropriate method of determining the entitlement to input tax credits on the construction costs of the retirement village is to make an adjustment under Division 129 of the GST Act.

Note: Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2000/24 provides details on making adjustments for changes in extent of creditable purpose under Division 129 of the GST Act.

Date of decision:
  9 August 2005

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   Division 19   paragraph 19-10(c)   section 38-260   Division 129

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

GSTR 2000/24

Keywords

GST free
 GST non-profit
 GST charities
 GST input tax credits and creditable acquisitions
 GST net amounts and adjustments
 Adjustments
 GST property and construction
 GST retirement villages
 GST supplies and acquisitions
 Creditable acquisition
 Creditable purpose
 Input taxed supplies

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  4736586

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  16 December 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782