ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2009/13
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of discount on options granted under an employee share scheme by an Australian resident company to a director who is a resident of South Africa
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the discount on options granted under an employee share scheme to a taxpayer, a South African resident, in respect of services provided in Australia by the taxpayer as a non-executive director of an Australian resident company, assessable income under subsection 6-10(5) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. The discount on options granted under an employee share scheme to a taxpayer, a South African resident, in respect of services provided in Australia by the taxpayer as a non-executive director of an Australian resident company is assessable income under subsection 6-10(5) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is a resident of South Africa for taxation purposes and is a non-resident for Australian tax purposes.
The taxpayer acted as a non-executive director of an Australian resident company under the terms of a contract entered into in Australia.
The Australian resident company granted options to the taxpayer at a discount, in respect of the services provided in Australia by the taxpayer, as a non-executive director of the Australian resident company.
The options were issued under an employee share scheme within the meaning of Division 13A of Part III of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936).
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-10(5) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a foreign resident taxpayer includes statutory income from all Australian sources and other statutory income that a provision includes as assessable income on some basis other than having an Australian source.
Section 10-5 of the ITAA 1997 lists those provisions about assessable income. Included in this list is sections 139 to 139GH (Division 13A of Part III) of the ITAA 1936 which provides for the taxation of shares and rights acquired under employee share acquisition schemes.
Pursuant to subsection 139B(1) of the ITAA 1936, the discount given in relation to a share or right acquired under an employee share scheme is included in the taxpayer's assessable income. Under subsection 139B(1A) of the ITAA 1936, the discount is not included in the taxpayer's assessable income to the extent that the discount is given in relation to the taxpayer's relevant engagement in foreign service while a non-resident.
The discount on the options granted to the taxpayer, in respect of services provided by the taxpayer as a non-executive director of the Australian company, is a discount given in relation to a right acquired under an employee share scheme pursuant to subsection 139B(1) of the ITAA 1936. As the taxpayer provided the services in Australia, the exclusion of subsection 139B(1A) of the ITAA 1936 does not apply.
Accordingly, the discount is statutory income to be included in the taxpayer's assessable income as determined under Division 13A of Part III of the ITAA 1936.
In determining liability to Australian tax, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws, but also any applicable tax treaties contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1936 and the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one.
Schedule 42 to the Agreements Act contains the tax treaty between Australia and the Republic of South Africa (the South African Agreement). This Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and South African residents.
Article 16 of the South African Agreement provides that directors' 'fees and other similar payments' derived by a resident of South Africa, in the capacity as a member of the board of directors of a company which is a resident of Australia, may be taxed in Australia.
Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13 provides the Commissioner's views on interpreting tax treaties. Paragraph 104 of TR 2001/13 provides that the 'OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital' and Commentary will often need to be considered in interpreting tax treaties. Paragraph 108 of TR 2001/13 provides that often the changes that have occurred to the relevant OECD Commentaries over time will need to be examined and considered.
Article 16 of the South African Agreement is virtually identical to that contained in the OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital. Paragraph 1.1 of the OECD Commentary on Article 16 of the OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital states that:

Member countries have generally understood the term 'fees and other similar payments' to include benefits in kind received by a person in that person's capacity as a member of the board of directors of a company (e.g. stock-options, the use of a residence or automobile, health or life insurance coverage and club memberships).

Paragraph 3.1 of the OECD Commentary on Article 16 further provides that the article will apply to any benefit derived from the option itself until it has been exercised, sold or otherwise alienated (for example upon cancellation or acquisition by the company or issuer).
The discount is a benefit that constitutes 'fees and other similar payments' to which Article 16 of the South African Agreement applies. Therefore, Australia, being the country of source, has the right to tax the discount derived by the taxpayer as a member of the board of directors of the company.
Accordingly, the discount on options granted under an employee share scheme will be included in the taxpayer's assessable income under subsection 6-10(5) of the ITAA 1997.

Note: this ATO ID also applies to the provisions of other tax treaties that contain the term 'fees and other similar payments' or 'fees and similar payments' and are equivalent to Article 16 of the South African Agreement.

Date of decision:
  3 March 2009

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2006

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   Division 13A of Part III   subsection 139B(1)   subsection 139B(1A)   sections 139 - 139GH
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-10(5)   section 10-5
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 42, Article 16

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2005/180

Other References:

OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital Condensed Version, 17 July 2008

Keywords

Directors fee income
 Directors remuneration
 Double tax agreements
 Employee share schemes & options
 Foreign income
 International tax
 Non resident individuals
 South Africa

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  6146516

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  20 March 2009

ISSN:
 1445-2782