ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/82
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of rental income received from Switzerland: foreign tax credits
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID has been amended to remove references in the Reasons for Decision to repealed legislation dealing with foreign tax credit rules. With effect from 1 July 2008 the foreign tax credit will by replaced by a foreign tax offset.
This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is rental income derived by an Australian resident taxpayer in respect of real property situated in Switzerland assessable income pursuant to subsection 6-5(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. The rental income derived by a resident taxpayer from sources in Switzerland is assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997. A foreign tax credit will be allowable in respect of the Swiss income tax paid on the rental income derived.
Facts
The taxpayer is an Australian resident for tax purposes.
The taxpayer derived rental income in respect of real property situated in Switzerland.
The taxpayer has or will pay income tax imposed in Switzerland on the rental income derived.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all sources during the income year.
Rental income is ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997. Therefore as the taxpayer is an Australian resident, rental income derived from sources within Australia or Switzerland will be assessable income pursuant to subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) and ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1936 and the ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited provisions).
Schedule 15 to the Agreements Act contains the tax treaty between Australia and Switzerland (Swiss Agreement). The Swiss Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and Swiss residents. The application of a double tax agreement is at first instance the role of the source country. In this case, Switzerland is entitled to assert source country taxing rights. Australia is treated as the country of residence.
Article 6(1) of the Swiss Agreement provides that rental income derived by an Australian resident from real property situated in Switzerland may be taxed in Switzerland.
Paragraph 23 of Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13 states that the phrase 'may be taxed' normally means the source country has a non-exclusive entitlement to tax the income. However, the taxpayer's country of residence may also tax the income subject to the laws of that country, unless the double tax agreement specifically prevents it.
The Swiss Agreement does not exclude the rental income from being taxable in Australia. Therefore, the rental income may be taxed in both Australia and Switzerland.
Article 22(1) of the Swiss Agreement provides that tax paid under the law of Switzerland and in accordance with the Agreement, in respect of income derived by a person who is a resident of Australia from sources in Switzerland, shall be allowed as a credit against Australian tax payable in respect of that income.
Accordingly, as the rental income derived by the Australian resident taxpayer from real property located in Switzerland is assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997, the taxpayer will be entitled to a foreign tax credit for the Swiss income tax paid. If the Swiss tax is less than the Australian tax payable then the taxpayer will be entitled to a full credit for the Swiss tax paid. Where the Swiss tax is greater that the Australian tax payable, the taxpayer is entitled only to a credit equal to the value of the Australian tax payable and cannot recover any excess Swiss tax paid.
Date of decision:
  24 December 2004

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2004 Year ended 30 June 2005

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(2)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 15   Schedule 15, Article 6(1)   Schedule 15, Article 22(1)

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13

Keywords

Double tax agreements
 International tax
 Rental property
 Rental property income
 Switzerland

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  4324732

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  18 March 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782