ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/193
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Cleaner Fuels) Scheme: biodiesel - blend made by biodiesel producer with purchased diesel
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn because it does not include an interpretative decision.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is an entity eligible for a grant under Part 2 of the Energy Grants (Cleaner Fuels) Scheme Act 2004 (EGCFS Act) for the manufacture of a fuel that is a blend of diesel and biodiesel where the entity manufactured the biodiesel but acquired the diesel from another source?
Decision
Yes. Where an entity manufactures a fuel that is a blend of biodiesel and diesel, and the entity manufactured the biodiesel but acquired the diesel from another source, the entity is eligible for a grant under Part 2 of the EGCFS Act.
Facts
The entity is registered for a cleaner fuel grant under section 9 of the Product Grants and Benefits Administration Act 2000.
The entity is licensed to manufacture biodiesel and to blend biodiesel with diesel.
The entity purchases diesel on which excise duty has been paid.
The entity blends the biodiesel it has manufactured with diesel.
Prior to blending, the entity did not enter the biodiesel and thus did not pay excise duty on it.
After blending, the entity enters the blended fuel and pays excise duty at the appropriate rate.
The entity wishes to claim the cleaner fuels grant to offset the excise duty which it has paid.
Reasons for Decision
Under the cleaner fuels grant scheme an entity may be entitled to a grant for an amount of cleaner fuel that it manufactures.
A 'cleaner fuel', for the purposes of the scheme, is relevantly defined in subsection 4(1) of the EGCFS Act as 'a fuel (including a fuel blend), prescribed by the regulations, that complies with each applicable fuel standard for such fuel'.
A 'biodiesel blend' is prescribed in regulation 4 of the Energy Grants (Cleaner Fuels) Scheme Regulations 2004 (EGCFS Regulations).
The definition of a 'biodiesel blend' is stated in regulation 3 of the EGCFS Regulations as meaning a fuel:

(a)for use in an internal combustion engine; and
(b)that is a blend, in any proportion, of:

(i)biodiesel; and
(ii)diesel that, if used as automotive diesel, would comply with the applicable fuel standard for automotive diesel.

The applicable fuel standard for automotive diesel is contained in the Fuel Standard (Automotive Diesel) Determination 2001 issued under section 21 of the Fuel Quality Standards Act 2000.
The term 'biodiesel' is also defined in subsection 4(1) of the EGCFS Act:

biodiesel
 means fuel:

(a)for use in an internal combustion engine; and
(b)manufactured by chemically altering vegetable oils or animal fats (including recycled oils from these sources) to form mono-alkyl esters;

that complies with the applicable fuel standard for such fuel.
The applicable fuel standard for biodiesel is contained in the Fuel Standard (Biodiesel) Determination 2003 issued under section 21 of the Fuel Quality Standards Act.
Consequently, for a blend of biodiesel and diesel to be eligible, the biodiesel blend must meet the following criteria:

(a)the fuel must be manufactured for use in an internal combustion engine
(b)the biodiesel component must meet the fuel standard for biodiesel, and
(c)the diesel component must meet the fuel standard for automotive diesel.

The statutory definition of 'biodiesel blend' does not disqualify a biodiesel blend on the basis that the diesel component was manufactured by a person other than the entity who manufactured the biodiesel.
Date of decision:
  5 January 2006

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Cleaner Fuels) Scheme Act 2004   subsection 4(1)
Energy Grants (Cleaner Fuels) Scheme Regulations 2004   regulation 3   regulation 7
Product Grants and Benefits Administration Act 2000   section 9
Fuel Quality Standards Act 2000   section 21

Other References:

Fuel Standard (Biodiesel) Determination 2003
 Fuel Standard (Automotive Diesel) Determination 2001

Keywords

Fuel
 Fuel blending
 Diesel

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  4 August 2006

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 5 January 2006
Original statement

You are here
17 October 2014
Archived