ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2008/95
================================================== Superannuation Excess contributions tax: notional taxed contributions - new entrant age FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn because subclause 3.6(2A) of Part 3 of Schedule 1A of the Income Tax Assessment Regulations 1997 was amended by Income Tax Assessment Amendment Regulations 2009 (No 3) and a new subclause 3.6(2A) substituted. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
In determining the average age of entry of defined benefit members into a superannuation fund, can an actuary take into account a member's age at the time of their entry into a previous superannuation fund where a member's defined benefit interest (along with the interests of all the other defined benefit members within a related group) has been transferred to the current fund?
Decision
Yes. For the purposes of Part 3 of Schedule 1A to the Income Tax Assessment Regulations 1997 (ITAR 1997), an actuary can take into account a defined benefit member's age at the time of their entry into a previous superannuation fund that entitled the member to defined benefits if the actuary considers that it is reasonable to do so.
Facts
The member was an employee of X Company.
With other employees of X Company, the member was a member of the employer sponsored superannuation fund, X Super.
In April 2005, X Company was taken over by Y Company.
In May 2005, all members of X Super were transferred to Y Super.
In March 2007, Y Company was taken over by Z Company.
In June 2007, all members of Y Super were transferred to Z Super.
X Super, Y Super, and Z Super were all defined benefit superannuation funds.
The member is a member of Z Super on 1 July 2007.
Reasons for Decision
Subregulation 3.6(2A) of Part 3 of Schedule 1A to the ITAR 1997 explains: If: (a)on 1 July 2007, the defined benefit members of the fund include persons who have been, before becoming members of the fund, members of a predecessor fund; and
(b)the actuary considers that it is reasonable to do so; the actuary may use the age of entry of those members into the predecessor fund in determining the average age of entry.
The Explanatory Statement to Income Tax Assessment Amendment Regulations 2007 (No. 9) states that 'in working out the new entrant rate an actuary may use the relevant entrant ages from a predecessor fund (for example, a fund that has been merged into the current fund)'.
The member's defined benefit interest must have been transferred to the current fund along with the defined benefit interests of all the other members within a related group of the previous fund. Where there has been a succession of transfers of members within a related group, the member's age of entry to the earliest fund can be used provided sufficient evidence exists to determine when they joined the earliest fund.
In this particular case, X Super and Y Super are both predecessor funds (for the purposes of subregulation 3.6(2A) of Part 3 of Schedule 1A to the ITAR 1997) of Z Super as all the defined benefit members within a related group of X Super had their benefits transferred to Y Super and all the defined benefit members within a related group of Y Super had their benefits transferred to Z Super. Subregulation 3.6(2A) will apply provided the actuary considers it reasonable to use the age of entry of the members into the earlier funds to determine the average age of entry. The actuary may use the age of entry of the member into X Super in determining the average age of entry for Z Super.
Date of decision: 5 June 2008 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2008 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Regulations 1997 Subregulation 3.6(2A) of Part 3 of Schedule 1A Keywords Concessional contributions Concessional contributions cap Defined benefit superannuation funds Employer sponsored superannuation funds Excess concessional contributions Superannuation excess contributions tax Business Line: Superannuation Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 20 June 2008 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 5 June 2008
Original statement You are here 7 May 2010
Archived