ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/934
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road entitlements: fishing operations - eligibility of barges servicing a fishing fleet
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is off-road diesel fuel being used in 'fishing operations' as defined in subsection 34(1) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA) when it is used to power a barge or other non-propelled vessel that services a fishing fleet?
Decision
Yes. Off-road diesel fuel is being used in 'fishing operations' as defined in subsection 34(1) of the EGCSA, when it is used to power a barge or other non-propelled vessel that services a fishing fleet.
Facts
The client operates a fuel bunker barge that is registered as a dumb barge. The barge is non-propelled and is anchored offshore. It provides services to an Australian fishing fleet.
Off-road diesel fuel is used on the barge to generate electricity for pumps which are used in supplying fuel and drinking water to the fleet and to power a refrigerated container for storage of the catch in emergencies, such as when the refrigeration equipment on board vessels breaks down.
Reasons for Decision
The term 'fishing operations' is defined in section 34 of the EGCSA. The activities described under the definition of 'fishing operations' include the operation of a dedicated mother vessel in connection with activities such as the taking, catching or capturing of fish or the processing of fish on board vessels.
The terms 'dedicated mother vessel', 'mother vessel' and 'mother ship' are used interchangeably within the fishing industry. The Macquarie Dictionary 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW defines a 'mother ship' as 'the larger ship which services the group of smaller ships with which it sails'.
In Frank Markert Pty Ltd v. Collector of Customs Ltd [1990] AAT 6206 the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) considered whether a stationary non-propelled vessel can be providing services to a fishing fleet under the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme, the precursor to Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme, administered under the Excise Act 1901 and the Customs Act 1901. The Customs Act contained a definition of 'fishing operations' in subsection 164(7). That definition also included the operation of a dedicated mother vessel in connection with activities such as the taking, catching or capturing of fish or the processing of fish on board vessels.
In that case, the client had barges anchored, on a semi-permanent basis, at fixed sheltered locations to provide fuel to trawler skippers who preferred to remain at sea rather than return to port to off-load their catches and/or to re-fuel. The AAT determined that:

14. In the result, I am satisfied that the fuel used in providing fishing vessels with the facility to stay at sea to fish is sufficiently proximate to the catching of fish to make the fuel used to reach the smaller barges and trawlers eligible for the statutory rebate.

15. The decision is to be set aside and the full rebate (including the amount claimed to power the generators on the three smaller barges) is allowed.

The client's fuel bunker barge is registered as a dumb barge and has no method of propulsion. Although the vessel is stationary, it is consistent with the view of the AAT that the functions of the vessel in providing services including fuel and stores and emergency refrigeration are considered to be operations of a dedicated mother vessel.
The definition of 'fishing operations' in section 34 of the EGCSA excludes activities that are conducted in whole or in part, otherwise than for the purposes of a business, or for business purposes connected with recreation, sport or tourism. In this case, the fishing fleet (and stationary vessel) are being used in the course of a fishing business and have no connection with recreation, sport or tourism.
Accordingly, diesel fuel is being used in 'fishing operations' as defined in section 34 of the EGCSA when it is used to power a barge or other non-propelled vessel that services a fishing fleet.
Date of decision:
  2 October 2003

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   subsection 34(1)
Customs Act 1901   subsection 164(7)

Case References:

Frank Markert Pty Ltd v. Collector of Customs    [1990] AAT 6206

Other References:

The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW

Keywords

EGCS off-road
 EGCS fishing operations
 EGCS operation of a dedicated mother vessel

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  17 October 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 2 October 2003
Original statement

You are here
 1 July 2012
Archived