ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/341
================================================== Income Tax Permanent Establishment: goods manufactured in Australia on behalf of a Singaporean resident FOI status: may be released This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is a portion of the sale income derived by a Singaporean resident from the sale of goods manufactured by an Australian company on its behalf assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)
Decision
Yes. A portion of the sale income derived by a Singaporean resident from the sale of goods manufactured by an Australian company on its behalf is assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
An Australian company is a 'toll manufacturer' of the Singaporean resident.
This toll manufacturer is a contract manufacturer of products where it does not take title and does not assume ownership risk in respect of raw materials, work-in-process and finished goods.
The Singaporean resident owns the raw materials used to manufacture the goods.
The Australian company manufactures the goods and provides the packaging materials for the Singaporean resident. The Singaporean resident pays the Australian company a toll fee for this service.
The Singaporean resident owns all finished goods at the end of the manufacturing process.
At the end of the manufacturing process, the Singaporean resident sells to the Australian company the finished goods that the Australian company requires for its Australian domestic market and exports the rest.
The Australian company maintains a stock of goods belonging to the Singaporean resident and regularly fills orders on behalf of the Singaporean resident.
All of the Australian company's revenue from manufacturing and warehousing services is derived from the Singaporean resident. It does not provide these services to any other entity.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a non resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all Australian sources during the income year.
In determining liability to tax on Australian sourced income received by a Singaporean resident, it is necessary to consider not only the domestic income tax laws but also the applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (Agreements Act). Schedule 5 and 5A to the Agreements Act contains the agreement between Australia and Singapore and the Protocol to that agreement (Singapore Agreement).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited provisions).
Article 5 of the Singapore Agreement provides that the profits of an enterprise of Singapore shall be taxable only in Singapore unless the enterprise carries on business in Australia through a permanent establishment situated therein.
The term 'permanent establishment' is defined in Article 4 of the Singapore Agreement. Article 4(5) of the Singapore Agreement deems a permanent establishment of the enterprise of the other Contracting State and provides that:
A person acting in one of the Contracting States on behalf of an enterprise of the other Contracting State, other than an agent of an independent status to whom paragraph (6) applies, shall be deemed to be a permanent establishment of the enterprise in the first-mentioned Contracting State if- (a)the person has, and habitually exercises in the first-mentioned Contracting State, an authority to conclude contracts for or on behalf of the enterprise unless the exercise of such authority is limited to the purchase of goods or merchandise for that enterprise; or
(b)there is maintained in the first-mentioned Contracting State a stock of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise from which he or she regularly fills orders on behalf of the enterprise; or
(c)the person habitually secures orders in the first-mentioned Contracting State wholly or principally for the enterprise itself or for any other enterprise which is controlled by it or has a controlling interest in it; or
(d)in so acting the person manufactures or processes in that State for the enterprise goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise. The Australian company fulfils paragraphs (b) and (d) of Article 4(5) of the Singapore Agreement that is maintains a stock of goods belonging to the Singaporean entity, regularly fills orders on behalf of the Singaporean entity and manufactures and processes goods. Accordingly, the Singaporean resident has a permanent establishment in Australia.
The portion of the profits derived by the Singaporean resident from the sale of goods manufactured by the Australian company on its behalf that are attributable to the permanent establishment may be taxable in Australia by Article 5 of the Singapore Agreement.
Article 17 of the Singapore Agreement provides that income derived by a resident of Singapore which, under Article 5, may be taxed in Australia, shall be deemed to be income from sources in Australia for Australian tax purposes.
Accordingly, part of the sale income derived by the Singaporean resident taxpayer from the sale of goods manufactured by the Australian company on its behalf is assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision: 12 August 2004 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2002 Year ended 30 June 2003 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subsection 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953 section 4 Schedule 5 Schedule 5A Schedule 5, Article 4, paragraph (5) Schedule 5, Article 5 Schedule 5, Article 17 Keywords Double tax agreements International tax Manufacturing Permanent establishment Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 4071787 Business Line: Public Groups and International Date of publication: 2 December 2005 ISSN: 1445-2782