ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/981
================================================== Income Tax Franking Credits: benchmark portfolio method - revocation of election FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database due to the repeal of Division 19 of Part III of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 with effect from 24 September 2007 applicable in relation to income years, statutory accounting periods and notional accounting periods starting on or after 1 July 2008. Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions up until 30 June 2008. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Does the Commissioner consent to the taxpayer revoking an earlier election to apply the benchmark portfolio method in determining whether it qualifies to receive franking rebates?
Decision
Yes. The Commissioner consents, pursuant to subsection 160APHR(6) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936), to the taxpayer revoking its earlier election, under subsection 160APHR(1) of the ITAA 1936, to apply the benchmark portfolio method in determining whether it qualifies to receive franking rebates.
Facts
The taxpayer invests in various unit trusts. Accordingly, the taxpayer does not hold assets directly, only indirectly through investment in other unit trusts.
Under subsection 160APHP(1) of the ITAA 1936 the taxpayer is a 'qualified person' as a beneficiary of a number of widely held trusts and, subject to the satisfaction of the holding period rule contained in section 160APHO of the ITAA 1936, is entitled to claim the benefit of franking rebates distributed from such trusts. For the 1997-98 and 1998-99 income years the taxpayer applied the holding period rule to determine the extent to which the taxpayer was eligible to obtain the benefits of the franking rebates distributed by its underlying investments. However, for the 1999-2000 income year, the taxpayer elected to apply the benchmark test under section 160APHR of the ITAA 1936, primarily to accommodate the move to a new custodian and their systems.
The taxpayer is now in the process of being wound up for reasons including that the underlying investments are being liquidated.
The taxpayer requests that the Commissioner consent to the revocation of its earlier election to apply the benchmark portfolio method under subsection 160APHR(1) of the ITAA 1936.
Reasons for Decision
The election mechanism in section 160APHR of the ITAA 1936 is intended as a concession to certain institutional investors for whom compliance with the holding period rules would be onerous. There is no requirement to explain why an election has been made, although there is a de facto requirement to explain why, having made an election, a taxpayer wants to resile from it.
An election under subsection 160APHR(1) of the ITAA 1936 is intended to be irrevocable, but the legislation contemplates that there will be circumstances whereby it is appropriate to permit the taxpayer to revoke its election.
However, it is not intended that revocation will be permitted at will, otherwise the taxpayer would be expressly permitted to elect in or out on a yearly basis, without the Commissioner being involved at all. Therefore, it is not enough for the taxpayer to show that it satisfies the holding period rules, and would be entitled to a greater amount of franking rebates under their application.
In the present case: •the taxpayer is in the process of being wound up, and this circumstance presents difficulties for the ongoing application of the benchmark method
•there is little or no risk that the taxpayer is pursuing a deliberate policy of picking the best result under the benchmark method or holding rules on an ongoing basis
•the circumstances that resulted in the taxpayer making the election involved the appointment of a new service provider taking over the administration duties of the taxpayer, where the service provider did not have adequate systems in place to monitor compliance with the holding period rules, and
•the taxpayer is able to easily ascertain its compliance with the holding period rules because it has had those systems in place over the relevant period. Furthermore there is no suggestion that the taxpayer has been involved in any conduct in the nature of franking credit trading, or any mischief that the integrity rules were designed to address.
Accordingly, this is an appropriate case for the Commissioner to give the consent required for the revocation to take effect under subsection 160APHR(6) of the ITAA 1936.
Date of decision: 10 September 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2002 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 section 160APHR subsection 160APHR(1) subsection 160APHR(6) Other References: ATO Compendium No. 99/4, Issued 9 August 1999, item 3. Keywords Complying superannuation funds Franking rebates Imputation system Pooled superannuation trusts Retirement income entities Superannuation Business Line: Finance and Investment Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 7 November 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 10 September 2003
Original statement You are here
10 September 2003
Archived