ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/748
================================================== Income Tax CGT small business concessions - retirement exemption - requirement to make ETP requires termination of employment FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as the ATO view on this matter is now reflected in the publication Advanced guide to capital gains tax concessions for small business. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Can the taxpayer, a private company, make an eligible termination payment (ETP) under subsection 152-325(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) in relation to its CGT concession stakeholders, without them terminating any employment with the company?
Decision
No. A private company cannot make an ETP under subsection 152-325(1) of the ITAA 1997 in relation to its CGT concession stakeholders without them terminating any employment with the company. To qualify as an ETP, the payment must be in consequence of the termination of an employment with the company.
Facts
The taxpayer, a private company, sold part of a business which was acquired after 20 September 1985. A capital gain arose on the sale of a CGT asset of the business.
The taxpayer is controlled by two individuals, both of whom are directors and employees of the company. The individuals are both also CGT concession stakeholders of the company.
The taxpayer has continued to carry on the business after the sale of the CGT asset
and the two individuals have continued as employees and directors of the company.
The taxpayer satisfies the maximum net asset value test. Reasons for Decision
A company or trust can choose to disregard all or part of a capital gain under the small business retirement exemption if, among other things, the conditions set out in subsection 152-325(1) of ITAA 1997 are satisfied. This provision requires a company or trust to make an ETP in relation to each of its CGT concession stakeholders, each time it receives an amount of capital proceeds from a CGT event for which it has chosen the retirement exemption.
An ETP in relation to a person means (subject to certain exceptions) any payment made in respect of the person in consequence of the termination of any employment of the person (paragraph (a) of the ETP definition in subsection 27A(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (the ITAA 1936)). 'Employment' includes the holding of an office (subsection 27A(1)).
Accordingly, to qualify as an ETP there must be a termination of an employment by the person. As 'employment' includes the holding of an office, this requirement will be satisfied if the person resigns/retires in a bona fide manner either as an employee or as a director.
In the taxpayer's situation, the CGT concession stakeholders are continuing in both their employee and director capacities after the sale of the CGT asset. There is no termination of either capacity and, in these circumstances, any payment made does not qualify as an ETP under subsection 27A(1) of the ITAA 1936. Accordingly, the requirement in subsection 152-325(1) of the ITAA 1997 to make an ETP in relation to each of the company's CGT concession stakeholders is not satisfied and the retirement exemption is not available.
Note: If a business is carried on by an individual there is no requirement for the individual to cease their business activities and retire in order to choose the retirement exemption. Rather, the amount an individual chooses for the retirement exemption is taken to be an ETP under subsection 152-310(2) of the ITAA 1997 and paragraph (jaa) of the definition of ETP in subsection 27A(1) of the ITAA 1936.
Date of decision: 24 July 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2002 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 subsection 27A(1)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subsection 152-310(2) subsection 152-325(1) Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2002/493 Keywords Capital gains tax CGT small business relief Basic conditions for relief CGT concession stakeholder Eligible termination payments Small business retirement exemption Business Line: Losses and CGT Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 22 August 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 24 July 2003
Original statement You are here
11 March 2005
Archived