ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/1161
================================================== Excise Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road credit - pearling operations - aquaculture facility FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the use of diesel fuel to generate power for use in and to supply water to a land based shed where spat are cultivated, pearl oysters are implanted and pearls are extracted from oysters, 'pearling operations' as defined in subsection 34(3) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. The use of diesel fuel to generate power for use in and to supply water to a land based shed where spat are cultivated, pearl oysters are implanted and pearls are extracted from oysters is 'pearling operations' as defined in subsection 34(3) of the EGCSA.
Facts
The client is engaged in pearling operations in the form of an ocean based pearl farm.
This activity is supported by a purpose built aquaculture facility.
At this facility, live pearl oysters are 'implanted' and then returned to the pearl farm for up to two years. After the pearls have fully developed, the pearl oysters are brought back to the facility where they are placed in water flow tanks to rest. Once the oysters are relaxed, the pearls are extracted from the shells. The live oysters are then returned to the pearl farm to enable them to develop another pearl.
The facility is also used as a hatchery, where spat (baby oysters) are bred in captivity. Once large enough, the spat are transferred to the ocean based pearl farm.
Diesel generators are used to generate power for use in the land based facility and to provide water to the facility.
Reasons for Decision
Under section 53 of the EGCSA, an entity is entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase diesel fuel for use by them 'in primary production'. The definition of primary production includes 'fishing operations' and 'fishing operations' is in turn defined in section 34 of the EGCSA as meaning (amongst other things) pearling operations.
'Pearling operations' are defined in subsection 34(3) of the EGCSA as: (a)the taking of pearl shell; or
(b)the culture of pearls or pearl shelland includes the taking or capturing of trochus, beche-de-mer or green snails. The Macquarie Dictionary 2001 rev. 3rd ed, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW provides the following definitions: 'culture':
the raising of plants or animals, especially with a view to their improvement. 'cultured':
cultivated; artificially nurtured or grown. 'cultured pearl':
a pearl grown around a speck of foreign matter artificially introduced into the shell of an oyster or clam. That is, the culturing of pearls or pearl shells is the nurturing or artificial growing of pearls or pearl shells.
The facility is a purpose built aquaculture facility where the client implants the live oysters, extracts the pearls from the shells and breeds baby oysters (spat). These activities are the culturing of pearls or pearl shells and are therefore 'pearling operations'.
In establishing whether a person has used diesel fuel in pearling operations (and therefore in primary production), the meaning of the term 'in' must be determined.
The preposition 'in' has been accepted as meaning 'in the course of' (see Chief Executive Officer of Customs v. WMC Resources Ltd (as agent for East Spar Alliance) (1998) 87 FCR 482). Therefore, if an activity can be said to have taken place 'in the course of' fishing operations, it can be concluded that it also takes place in fishing operations.
In Commissioner of Taxation v. Payne (2001) 202 CLR 93; 2001 ATC 4027; (2001) 46 ATR 228; Chief Executive Officer of Customs v. WMC Resources Ltd (as agent for East Spar Alliance) (1998) 158 ALR 241; Wandoo Alliance Pty Ltd v. CEO of Customs [2001] AATA 801, it was deemed pertinent to consider whether there was a causal, spatial or temporal link present in determining if an activity takes place 'in the course of' something.
Therefore, any diesel fuel used 'in the course of' undertaking the pearling operations will be considered to be part of those pearling operations.
In this instance, a causal link exists, as supplying water and power to the facility is functionally integrated with the pearling operations. There is a spatial link as the facility is a place at which pearling operations are undertaken. There is also a temporal link as the water and power are supplied to the site of pearling operations in a timely fashion and form an integral part of the activity of extracting pearls from the mature oysters and breeding baby oysters.
Accordingly, supplying water and power to the facility occurs in the course of 'pearling operations'.
Date of decision: 6 December 2003 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 section 53 section 34 subsection 34(3) Case References: Chief Executive Officer of Customs v. WMC Resources Ltd (as agent for East Spar Alliance) (1998) 87 FCR 482 Commissioner of Taxation v. Payne (2001) 202 CLR 93 (2001) 177 ALR 270 (2001) 46 ATR 228 Wandoo Alliance Pty Ltd v. CEO of Customs [2001] AATA 801 Other References: The Macquarie Dictionary 2001 rev. 3rd ed, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW Keywords EGCS fishing operations EGCS off-road EGCS pearling operations Energy grants (credits) scheme Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 24 December 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 6 December 2003
Original statement You are here 1 July 2012
Archived