ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/504
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and training provided to a parent of a child when the training is not a requirement of their child's speech therapy treatment FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as the interpretative issue is covered in the GST Fact Sheet - GST and other health services This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a speech pathologist, making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-10(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it provides training to the parent of a child, and that training is not a requirement of their child's speech therapy treatment?
Decision
No, the entity is not making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act when it provides training to the parent of a child, and that training is not a requirement of their child's speech therapy treatment.
The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a speech pathologist that supplies speech therapy to children. The entity also conducts a parents' training group to train parents in therapy strategies that are relevant to their children.
The entity has assessed a child and advised the parent that the particular therapy strategies taught at the parent's training group will not assist in treating their child's particular speech difficulty. Despite this recommendation the parent chooses to attend the training group.
The entity is a member of the relevant national professional association and is a recognised professional as defined in section 195-1 of the GST Act. The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST) and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act, an entity makes a GST-free supply of other health services if: •the entity provides a service of a kind specified in the table in subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act, or of a kind specified in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations)
•the entity is a recognised professional in relation to the supply of services of that kind, and
•the supply would generally be accepted, in the profession associated with supplying services of that kind, as being necessary for the appropriate treatment of the recipient of the supply. Speech pathology services are listed at item 19 in the table in subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act and the entity is a recognised professional in relation to the supply of speech pathology. As such, the first two requirements under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act are satisfied.
The third requirement is that the treatment must be generally accepted in the relevant health profession as being necessary for the appropriate treatment of the recipient.
'Appropriate treatment' will be established where a recognised professional, assesses the recipient's state of health and determines a process to pursue, in an attempt to preserve, restore or improve the physical or psychological wellbeing of that recipient, insofar as that professional area of training allows. It will include subsequent supplies for the determined process.
Appropriate treatment includes the principles of preventative medicine. Such treatment must be generally accepted in the profession associated with supplying services of that kind, as being necessary.
The entity has assessed a child and advised the parent that the particular therapy strategies taught at the parent's training group will not assist in treating their child's particular speech difficulty. Despite this recommendation the parent chooses to attend the training group. As this training will not assist the child, the provision of training to the parent is not appropriate treatment of the child. As such, the third requirement under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act is not satisfied. Therefore, the supply does not satisfy the requirements under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply of training to the parent satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under any other provision of Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it provides training to the parent of a child, and that training does not form part of the child's treatment.
Note: Sometimes, a parent may choose to attend a parents' training group even though their child has not yet been assessed by the entity. The provision of training to the parent in these circumstances is not appropriate treatment of the child. As such, the third requirement under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act is not satisfied and the supply is not GST-free.
Date of decision: 22 July 2002 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 9-5 Division 38 subsection 38-10(1) subsection 38-10(1) table item 19 Division 40 section 195-1
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 Table of Content Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2004/501 ATO ID 2004/502 ATO ID 2004/503 Keywords Goods and service tax GST health Section 38-10 - other health services GST supplies & acquisitions Taxable supply Business Line: GST Date of publication: 25 June 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 22 July 2002
Original statement You are here
22 June 2007
Archived