ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/942
==================================================

Excise
 Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme: horticulture - production of disease-free immature plants
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the cultivation of disease-free immature plants by a statutory body for distribution to commercial growers 'agriculture' as defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act 1901 for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme?
Decision
Yes. The cultivation of disease-free immature plants by a statutory body for distribution to commercial growers is 'agriculture' as defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme.
Facts
A statutory body established under a State Act has the objective of assisting a particular primary industry by improving the quantity and quality of their crops.
The primary use of land available to the statutory body is the growing of disease-free immature plants for distribution to local growers. The growers benefiting from clean seed are commercial growers who grow the crop as a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
Under the State Act, the commercial growers pay a levy to the statutory body. However, the amount of the charge must be no greater than is necessary to fund services to the industry by the statutory body. Any other income the statutory body receives is used to reduce the amount of the levy payable.
The production of disease-free immature plants involves standard farming practices such as the preparation of the soil, planting, irrigation, herbicide applications and allowing land to lay fallow as well as the harvesting of the immature plants ready for supply to the growers.
Reasons for Decision
Under the diesel fuel rebate scheme, a diesel fuel rebate is payable to a person who purchases diesel fuel for use by them in certain defined activities, including 'agriculture'.
For the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme, 'agriculture' is defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act to mean various activities, of which the most relevant to the client's circumstances is horticulture.
The definition of 'agriculture' also imposes an overriding test that requires most of the activities listed in the definition of agriculture, including horticulture, to be carried out for the purposes of, or for purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain profit for sale.
Given the above requirements, the client's activities will fall within the definition of 'agriculture' in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act if they can be considered:

(a)'horticulture', and
(b)are carried out for the purposes of, or for purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.

Are the activities 'horticulture'?
'Horticulture' is defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act as including:

(a)the cultivation or gathering in of fruit, vegetables, herbs, edible fungi, nuts, flowers, trees, shrubs or plants: or
(b)the propagation of trees, shrubs or plants; or
(c)the production of seeds, bulbs, corms, tubers or rhizomes.

The Macquarie Dictionary 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW defines 'horticulture' as:

1. commercial cultivation of fruit, vegetables, and flowers, including berries, grapes, vines and nuts.
2. the science or art of growing fruit, vegetables, and flowers or ornamental plants.
3. the cultivation of a garden.

As the definition of 'horticulture' in the legislation is inclusive, an activity can be considered to be 'horticulture' if it falls within the inclusive definition in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act, or falls within the ordinary meaning of horticulture.
The statutory body's activities relating to the propagation of disease-free immature plants - which include standard farming practices such as the preparation of the soil, planting, irrigation, herbicide applications and allowing land to lay fallow as well as the harvesting of the immature plants ready for supply to the growers - fall squarely within the inclusive definition of 'horticulture'. Therefore, the cultivation of immature plants is 'horticulture' under subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme.
Are the activities carried out for the purposes of, or for purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale?
The statutory body does not cultivate disease free seedlings with a view to obtaining produce for sale, as the seedlings are given away to farmers and not sold. However, the business test may still be satisfied if the statutory body's activities are undertaken for purposes that will directly benefit a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
The Macquarie Dictionary defines 'directly' as:

1. in a direct line, way or manner; straight
2. without delay; immediately
3. presently
4. absolutely; exactly; precisely

and 'benefit' relevantly as:

1. anything that is for the good of a person or thing
2. to do good; be of service to
3. gain advantage; make improvement

Therefore, an activity will directly benefit a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale if there is a close and immediate benefit (i.e. a positive effect) to the business arising from the activity in question.
In this instance, the growers who receive the disease-free immature plants are undertaking the cultivation of the crop to obtain produce for sale. The receipt of these immature plants has a positive effect on their business. The positive effect occurs immediately on receipt of the immature plants, as the commercial growers are able to immediately commence the cultivation of their crop using disease-free immature plants provided at no direct cost. Furthermore, the immature plants are cultivated and gathered in expressly to achieve this direct benefit.
Therefore, the cultivation of disease-free immature plants for distribution to commercial growers is directly benefiting a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
Conclusion
The statutory body is carrying on activities that constitute horticulture and its activities are carried out for purposes that will directly benefit a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale. Therefore, the cultivation of disease-free immature plants by the statutory body for distribution to commercial growers is 'agriculture' for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme.
Date of decision:
  2 October 2003

Legislative References:

Customs Act 1901   subsection 164(7)

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2003/943
 ATO ID 2003/944

Other References:

The Macquarie Dictionary 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW

Keywords

DFRS agriculture
 Objections

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  17 October 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 2 October 2003
Original statement

You are here
 8 January 2010
Archived