ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/33
================================================== Superannuation Superannuation Guarantee: long service leave payments from a worker entitlement fund FOI status: may be released As a consequence of amendments to the SGAA which apply from 1 July 2008, the amount against which an employer calculates the contribution necessary to meet their superannuation guarantee obligations in respect of an employee is standardised to OTE for all employees. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Will either the worker entitlement fund or employer have an obligation under the Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 (SGAA) to make superannuation contributions on long service leave payments made to an individual from the fund?
Decision
Neither the worker entitlement fund nor the employer will have an obligation under the SGAA to make superannuation contributions on long service leave payments made to an individual from the fund. This is because: •there is no employee/employer relationship between the worker entitlement fund and the individual receiving the long service leave payments, and
•the employer is not making, or is liable to make the payments to the individual. Facts
The worker entitlement fund was created for building and construction workers, who by nature of the industry, rarely complete ten years service with one employer to become eligible for long service leave.
Under the worker entitlement fund, workers can accrue long service leave credits with different employers.
Employers make contributions to the fund for the provision of the employees' long service leave.
Once the required credits have been accrued, the employees are entitled to receive a payment from the fund.
Employers are not liable to pay any of the long service leave payments to an employee when on long service leave. Nor does the fund pay the entitlement to the employer to forward to the employee.
The employee is not employed by the worker entitlement fund.
Reasons for Decision
Does the fund have an obligation to make superannuation contributions on the leave service leave payments made to the individuals?
An obligation under the SGAA to make superannuation contributions for the benefit of an individual will only arise where an employer/employee relationship exists. Section 12 of the SGAA defines the term the employee for the purposes of the SGAA. The definition includes those individuals who are common law employees and extends to those individuals who are or may not be common law employees (for example, contractors employed under a contract wholly or principally for their labour).
At common law, the relationship between an employer and employee is a contractual one, or otherwise known as a contract of employment. The ordinary meaning of employee has been the subject of a significant amount of judicial consideration. The cases have discussed a number of indicators that may be applied in determining whether an individual is a common law employee. For example, where an individual is subject to the control and direction of the paying entity, this would indicate that the individual is a common law employee.
If it is considered that the relationship at common law is one of principal and independent contractor or the determination of the status of the worker is unclear, the extended definition of employee in the SGAA must be considered.
In the circumstances of this case, the individuals receiving the long service leave payments from the worker entitlement fund have no contractual relationship with the fund. The role of the fund is to provide a particular service for the employees working within the building and construction industry, which is the collection and disbursement of long service leave entitlements. The individuals are not performing any work or providing services or labour to the fund. The workers are not receiving any consideration or remuneration from the fund in return for the performance of work or the provision of labour or services. None of the indicators that are relevant in determining whether an individual is a common law employee are present. The individuals are not employees of the fund. Accordingly, the fund will not have an obligation under the SGAA to make superannuation contributions on the long service leave payments made by the fund to the individuals.
Does the employer have an obligation to make superannuation contributions on the long service leave payments made by the fund?
Section 5 of the Superannuation Guarantee Charge Act 1992 (SGCA) imposes a Superannuation Guarantee Charge (SGC) on an employer's superannuation guarantee shortfall in a quarter where insufficient superannuation guarantee contributions have been made for an employee.
Sections 22 and 23 of the SGAA specify the method for reducing an employer's liability to the SGC. By making contributions to a complying superannuation fund, equal to a set percentage of the employee's notional earnings base, the employer may reduce the liability to the SGC to nil. In order to receive such contributions, the employee must receive a payment or earnings for work undertaken.
Ordinary Time Earning (OTE) is the standard earnings base which is used to calculate the amount against which an employer is required to calculate the contributions necessary to satisfy their superannuation obligations in respect of their eligible employees. OTE is defined in subsection 6(1) of the SGAA and does include long service leave payments except for lump sum payments of unused long service leave on termination of employment.
In relation to the facts of this case, the employees have not received a payment (in respect of their earnings base for ordinary hours worked) from the employer. As no payment has been made by the employer to the employee for the accrued long service leave, the employer has no obligation to provide superannuation guarantee contributions on the long service leave payments. [Note: Some changes have been made to this ATO ID for clarification and to maintain its currency. Because of amendments of the SGAA which applied from 1 July 2003, an employer's superannuation guarantee shortfall is calculated in respect of a quarter rather than a year. Also, because of amendments of the SGAA which apply from 1 July 2008, OTE is now the standard earnings base. The Rulings referenced to under the heading 'Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)'have been changed as SGR 93/1W and SGR 93/2W were withdrawn and replaced with SGR 2005/1 and SGR 2005/2. A reference to an additional related Ruling SGR 2009/2 has also been added]. Date of decision: 22 July 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2003 Legislative References: Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 section 12 subsection 6(1) section 22 section 23
Superannuation Guarantee Charge Act 1992 section 5
Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 section 58P Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Superannuation Guarantee Ruling SGR 2005/1
Superannuation Guarantee Ruling SGR 2005/2
Superannuation Guarantee Ruling SGR 2009/2 Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 3459225; 1-5J7AS7X; 1-8DBIDWN; 1-JT71BGC Business Line: Superannuation Date of publication: 28 January 2005 Date reviewed: 6 November 2019 ISSN: 1445-2782