ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/115
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and cinnamon buns
 FOI status: may be released

The ATO view is covered in the 'GST food guide - Part 3 - Detailed food list'.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a food supplier, making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it supplies cinnamon buns?
Decision
No, the entity is not making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the GST Act when it supplies cinnamon buns. The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a food supplier. The entity supplies uncooked frozen cinnamon buns.
The cinnamon buns do not have a sweet filling or coating. The ingredients include eggs and yeast.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
A supply of food is GST-free under section 38-2 of the GST Act provided that it does not come within any of the exclusions listed in section 38-3 of the GST Act.
Food is defined in section 38-4 of the GST Act to include food for human consumption (paragraph 38-4(1)(a) of the GST Act). Cinnamon buns are food for human consumption and, therefore, satisfy the definition of food in paragraph 38-4(1)(a) of the GST Act.
However, paragraph 38-3(1)(c) of the GST Act provides that a supply of food is not GST-free if it is food of a kind specified in the table in clause 1 of Schedule 1 to the GST Act (Schedule 1).
Item 25 of Schedule 1 (Item 25) provides that 'pastizzi, calzoni and brioche' are not GST-free. Therefore, it must be determined whether the cinnamon bun is a kind of pastizzi, calzoni or brioche.
The phrase 'of a kind' is not defined in the GST Act. Accordingly, it is appropriate to examine the ordinary meaning of that term. The Macquarie Dictionary (1997) does not define the entire phrase 'of a kind' however, it defines the word 'kind' to mean:

'1. A class or group of individuals of the same nature or character, especially a natural group of animals or plants. 2. Nature or character as determining likeness or difference between things: things differing in degree rather than in kind. 3. A person or thing as being of a particular character or class: he is a strange king of hero. 4 ...'

Accordingly, something will be 'of a kind' if it is of the same nature or character (possessing the same distinguishing qualities) as the thing or group in question.
'Brioche' is defined in The Macquarie Dictionary (1997) as 'a kind of light, sweet bun or roll, raised with eggs and yeast'. The cinnamon buns are a sweet buns whose ingredients include eggs and yeast. Accordingly, the cinnamon buns are food of the same class as brioche.
Clause 2 of Schedule 1 of the GST Act (Clause 2) operates to ensure that the foods listed at Item 25 are not GST-free regardless of whether they are supplied hot or cold, or require cooking, heating, thawing or chilling prior to consumption.
Therefore, although the cinnamon buns are supplied raw and frozen, they are still a food of a kind listed in Schedule 1. Thus, the entity is not making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the GST Act when it supplies cinnamon buns.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it supplies cinnamon buns.
Date of decision:
  7 November 2001

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 9-5   Division 38   section 38-2   section 38-3   section 38-4   paragraph 38-3(1)(c)   paragraph 38-4(1)(a)   Division 40   Schedule 1 clause 1   Schedule 1 clause 1 table item 25   Schedule 1 clause 2

Case References:

Hygienic Lily Ltd v. Deputy Commissioner of Taxation (NSW)   18 ATR 619   (1987) 13 FCR 396   (1987) 71 ALR 441   87 ATC 4327

Other References:

The Macquarie Dictionary, 1997, 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, New South Wales

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 GST free
 GST food
 Food for human consumption
 GST supplies and acquisitions
 Taxable supply

Business Line:
  GST

Date of publication:
  31 January 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 7 November 2001
Original statement

You are here
21 October 2005
Archived