ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/851
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of South African government pension received by an Australian resident
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the South African government pension paid to an Australian resident taxpayer included in their assessable income under section 27H of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936)?
Decision
No. The South African government pension paid to an Australian resident taxpayer is not included in their assessable income under section 27H of the ITAA 1936.
Facts
The taxpayer is an Australian resident for tax purposes.
The taxpayer receives a South African government pension which was in respect of services rendered in the discharge of governmental functions in South Africa.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) provides that the assessable income of a resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all sources during the income year.
Section 6-10 of the ITAA 1997 provides that a taxpayer's assessable income includes statutory income amounts that are not ordinary income but are included in assessable income by another provision. The assessable income of an Australian resident includes statutory income from all sources, whether in or out of Australia (subsection 6-10(4) of the ITAA 1997).
Section 10-5 of the ITAA 1997 lists those provisions about assessable income. Included in this list is section 27H of the ITAA 1936 which provides that annuities and pensions paid from a foreign superannuation fund or foreign scheme to provide superannuation benefits are included in assessable income.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income received by a resident it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited provisions).
Schedule 42 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement and the protocol between Australia and South Africa (South African Agreement). The South African Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and South African residents.
Article 19(2)(a) of the South African Agreement provides that any pension paid by, or out of the funds created by South Africa, or a political subdivision or a local authority of South Africa to an individual in respect of services rendered in the discharge of governmental functions shall be taxable in South Africa. However, Article 19(2)(b) provides that such a pension shall be taxable only in Australia if the individual is a resident of, and a citizen or national of Australia; and the services in respect of which that pension is paid were performed in Australia.
As the services in respect of which that pension is paid were performed in South Africa, that pension shall not be taxable in Australia.
Accordingly, the South African government service pension will be subject to tax only in South Africa and does not form part of the taxpayer's assessable income under section 27H of the ITAA 1936.
Date of decision:
  31 August 2004

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2005

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(2)   section 6-10   subsection 6-10(4)   section 10-5
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   section 27H
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 42   Schedule 42, Article 19(2)

Keywords

Double tax agreements
 Foreign pension
 International tax
 South Africa

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  4161090

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  29 October 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782