ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/590
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and export of goods by supplier
 FOI status: may be released

This decision is withdrawn from 29 August 2002 because it is not indicative of the ATO view.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a supplier of goods, making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-185(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it sells goods to a purchaser who then exports the goods from Australia within 60 days of making payment to the entity?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-185(1) of the GST Act when it sells good to a purchaser who then exports the goods from Australia within 60 days of making payment to the entity.
Facts
The entity is a supplier of goods. The entity sells its goods to a purchaser. The entity obtains a signed declaration from the purchaser affirming the following facts.

•The purchaser exports the goods from Australia within 60 days of making payment to the entity;
•The goods are not reimported into Australia;
•The purchaser is not registered or required to be registered for goods and services tax (GST);
•The purchaser has entered the goods for export within the meaning of section 113 of the Customs Act 1901; and
•Since the supply to the purchaser, the goods have not been altered or used in any way, except to the extent (if any) necessary to prepare them for export.

The entity also has documentary evidence, in the form of a bill of lading, to show that the goods are being exported.
The entity is registered for GST.
Reasons for Decision
Under Subdivision 38-E of the GST Act, certain exports and supplies for consumption outside Australia are GST-free. Item 1 in the table in subsection 38-185(1) of the GST Act (Item 1) provides that a supply of goods is GST-free if the supplier exports the goods before, or within 60 days after the earlier of consideration being received or an invoice being issued.
In this case, the supplier (the entity) is not exporting goods from Australia. The purchaser is the party that is exporting the goods from Australia.
However, subsection 38-185(3) of the GST Act states that a supplier of goods is treated as having exported those goods from Australia for the purposes of Item 1 if:

•before the goods are exported, the supplier supplies them to an entity (the purchaser) that is not registered or required to be registered;
•the purchaser exports the goods from Australia;
•the goods have been entered for export within the meaning of section 113 of the Customs Act 1901;
•since their supply to the purchaser, the goods have not been altered or used in any way except to the extent (if any) necessary to prepare them for export; and
•the supplier has sufficient documentary evidence to show that the goods were exported.

Subsection 38-185(3) of the GST Act also provides that if goods are reimported into Australia, the supply is not GST-free unless the reimportation is a taxable importation.
Whilst there is no legal requirement for a supplier to obtain a declaration from the purchaser affirming that the requirements in paragraphs (a) to (e) of subsection 38-185(3) of the GST Act are satisfied; a supplier may choose to obtain such a declaration. It is considered that the purchaser's declaration is evidence that the requirements in paragraphs (a) to (d) in subsection 38-185(3) of the GST Act are satisfied; but only if the supplier does not become aware of anything that contradicts the purchaser's declaration.
In relation to paragraph (e) of subsection 38-185(3) of the GST Act, a purchaser's declaration is not considered to be sufficient documentary evidence that the goods were exported. However, documentation such as a bill of lading is considered to be sufficient documentary evidence for the purposes of paragraph (e) of subsection 38-185(3) of the GST Act.
From the facts in this situation, all of the requirements of subsection 38-185(3) of the GST Act are satisfied. The entity possesses documentary evidence, in the form of a purchaser's declaration, that the requirements in paragraphs (a) to (d) of subsection 38-185(3) of the GST Act are satisfied. The entity also possesses a bill of lading that shows that the purchaser exported the goods as per the requirement in paragraph (e) of subsection 38-185(3) of the GST Act. As such, for the purposes of Item 1, the entity is treated as having exported the goods from Australia.
As the purchaser exports the goods from Australia within 60 days of payment, the requirements in Item 1 are also satisfied. Therefore, the entity is making a GST-free supply under Item 1 when it sells goods to a purchaser who then exports those goods from Australia within 60 days of making payment to the entity.
Date of decision:
  21 September 2001

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   Subdivision 38-E   subsection 38-185(1) table item 1   subsection 38-185(3)
Customs Act 1901   section 113

Keywords

Goods and services tax
 Exports
 Consumption outside Australia
 Export of goods

Business Line:
  GST

Date of publication:
  15 November 2001

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
21 September 2001
Original statement

You are here
29 August 2002
Archived