ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/348
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of dividend income sourced in the United States (US) received by an Australian resident individual
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID has been amended to remove references in the Reasons for Decision to repealed legislation dealing with foreign tax credit rules. With effect from 1 July 2008 the foreign tax credit system will be replaced by the foreign tax offset system.
This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Are US sourced dividends received by an Australian resident individual assessable under subsection 6-10(4) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. US sourced dividends received by an Australian resident individual are assessable under subsection 6-10(4) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is a resident of Australia for taxation purposes.
The taxpayer receives dividends from US sources.
Reasons for Decision
Section 6-10 of the ITAA 1997 provides that a taxpayer's assessable income includes statutory income amounts that are not ordinary income but are included in assessable income by another provision. The assessable income of an Australian resident taxpayer includes statutory income from all sources, whether in or out of Australia (subsection 6-10(4) of the ITAA 1997).
Section 10-5 of the ITAA 1997 lists the provisions about assessable income. Included in this list is subsection 44(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) which deals with dividends.
Paragraph 44(1)(a) of the ITAA 1936 provides that, subject to certain provisions, the assessable income of an Australian resident taxpayer, who is a shareholder of a company (whether the company is a resident or non-resident), includes dividends paid to the taxpayer by the company out of profits derived by it from any source.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws, but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1936 and the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one.
Schedule 2 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and the US (US Convention). The US Convention operates to avoid double taxation of income received by Australian and US residents.
Article 10(1) of the US Convention provides that dividends paid by a US company, being dividends to which a resident of Australia is beneficially entitled, may be taxed in Australia.
Article 10(2) of the US Convention provides that the dividends paid by a US company may also be taxed in the US, according to the law of the US. However, the tax shall not exceed 15 per cent of the gross amount of the dividend.
Article 22(2) of the US Convention provides that a credit against Australian tax for tax paid in the US shall be allowed (in accordance with the law of Australia) where tax has been paid under US law and in accordance with the US Convention.
As the taxpayer is a resident of Australia, the dividend income forms part of their assessable income under subsection 6-10(4) of the ITAA 1997. If US tax is paid in relation to this dividend income, a foreign tax credit will be allowed.
Date of decision:
  6 April 2004

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2001

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   paragraph 44(1)(a)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-10(4)   section 10-5
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 2   Schedule 2, Article 10(1)   Schedule 2, Article 10(2)

Keywords

Dividend income
 Double tax agreements
 Foreign income
 United States

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3946481

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  23 April 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782