ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2010/50
================================================== Excise Excise: subitem 15.2 and process oils FOI status: may be released While the ATO view expressed within the ATOID is technically correct, the way the position has been explained within the ATOID could lead to some unintended interpretations and outcomes. If it is determined that an ATOview is still required then a replacement ATO ID will be drafted. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is a product which is derived from used oil through a recycling process consisting of propane de-asphalting and then vacuum distillation, and that has the characteristics of a process oil or base oil, classified to subitem 15.2 in the table in the Schedule to the Excise Tariff Act 1921 (subitem 15.2)?
Decision
Yes, a product which is derived from used oil through a recycling process consisting of propane de-asphalting and then vacuum distillation, and that has the characteristics of a process oil or base oil, is classified to subitem 15.2.
Facts
A recycler of used oil manufactures a product through the recycling of petroleum-based oil. The recycling process involves propane de-asphalting followed by vacuum distillation.
The product can be used as a chain bar lubricant, mould release oil, low grade lubricant or as a process oil in manufacturing rubber.
The product does not meet the criteria of an aromatic process oil as defined in the table in paragraph 3(6)(c) of the Excise Tariff Act 1921 (Tariff Act).
The product is not for use as a fuel.
Reasons for Decision
Item 15 of the Schedule to the Tariff Act (item 15) includes goods that fall within subitems 15.1 to 15.4 other than: (a)goods for use as a fuel; and
(b)exempt oils and hydraulic fluids. Under subsection 3(1) of the Tariff Act, 'exempt oils and hydraulic fluids' include aromatic process oils which meet the criteria in the table in paragraph 3(6)(c) of the Tariff Act. Aromatic process oils are used as ingredients in the manufacture of a product, for example in the manufacture of rubber.
The facts refer to a product with properties which make it suitable for use as a process oil, however, as it does not meet the criteria in the table in paragraph 3(6)(c) of the Tariff Act it is not an exempt oil for the purposes of item 15.
Goods for use as an oil are classified to subitem 15.2 where they are derived from the recycling of petroleum-based oil, grease or their synthetic equivalents. Goods for use as a grease and derived in similar circumstances are classified to subitem 15.4 in the table in the Schedule to the Tariff Act.
As the facts refer to a product that is not for use as a grease it is not classifiable to subitem 15.4 of the table to the Schedule to the Tariff Act. However, it must be determined whether the product is classifiable to subitem 15.2.
Subitem 15.2 states the following: Item Subitem Description of goods Rate of Duty 15
15.2
Petroleum-based oils (including lubricant/fluid/oil products and greases) and their synthetic equivalents, recycled for use as oils (including lubricant/fluid/oil products) but not greases.
$0.05449 per litre The description of goods classifiable to subitem 15.2 includes the requirement that the good is 'for use as oils (including lubricant/fluid/oil products)'.
The Prefatory Notes to the Schedule give the meaning of the phrase 'lubricant/fluid/oil products' as: lubricant
/ fluid
/ oil products means the following: (a)lubricant base oils;
(b)prepared lubricant additives containing carrier oils;
(c)lubricants for engines, gear sets, pumps and bearings;
(d)hydraulic fluids;
(e)brake fluids;
(f)transmission oils;
(g)transformer and heat transfer oils. Therefore it can be concluded that, where recycling has occurred, a good for use as an oil listed in the definition of 'lubricant/fluid/oil products' is a good that is for use as oil for the purposes of subitem 15.2.
For the purposes of the subitem, we need to determine whether the uses a recycled product is for are limited to those uses in the definition of lubricant/fluid/oil products. Pearce and Geddes in Statutory Interpretation in Australia, 6th ed (2006) at 6.56 to 6.60 discuss the meaning of 'includes' in interpreting definitions in legislation. While the description in Column 3 of the Table in the Schedule to the Tariff Act is not a definition per se, the meaning of 'includes' is the same. Pearce and Geddes conclude that in most instances 'includes' is used to extend the normal meaning of a term. They do acknowledge that the Courts have found in some cases that 'includes' has a limiting effect but it must be clear that this is the intent.
Taking into account subitem 15.2 and the other impacting provisions, it is not reasonable to conclude that the term 'including' should have a limiting effect.
Exempt oils and hydraulic fluids were included in the Tariff Act under the Excise Tariff Amendment Act (No. 1) 2000. One of the exempt oils is 'aromatic process oil' that meets specified criteria. The purpose of excluding recycled oil of this type from item 15 is explained in paragraph 2.3 of the Explanatory Memorandum to the amending Act as follows:
The intention of the Product Stewardship Arrangements is to reduce the impacts of waste oil through an excise style levy imposed on virgin oils and lubricants. Where oils are used in the manufacture of another product, are not contributing to the waste oil problem and are clearly distinguishable from oils that do, these oils should be excluded, where feasible, from the levy. The Government has decided to exempt certain oil products meeting these criteria from the PSO levy...
Additionally the following is from the Second Reading speech to the amending Bill:
The changes exempt from the levy those products which have been identified to be solely used for the manufacture of other products and do not result in waste oil.
Process oils are not listed in the definition of lubricant/fluid/oil products, therefore they would not come within the description oils in item 15 if 'including' is given a limiting effect. If process oils do not come within item 15 then there is no need to provide an exemption for specified process oils within the table in paragraph 3(6)(c) of the Tariff Act. There is nothing in the extrinsic material relating to the exempt oils that indicates that 'aromatic process oils' would not ordinarily be considered oils for the purposes of item 15. To achieve the intended outcome of not imposing the levy on certain types of aromatic process oils an explicit exemption was required.
It follows that a process oil is an oil and use as a process oil is use as an oil.
Therefore, a product that is derived from the recycling of petroleum-based oil, grease and their synthetic equivalent that is for use as a process oil, and that does not meet the criteria of an exempt oil, is for use as an oil and therefore classifiable to subitem 15.2.
Date of decision: 18 February 2010 Legislative References: Excise Tariff Act 1921 subsection 3(1) paragraph 3(6)(c) Schedule table item 15 Schedule table subitem 15.1 Schedule table subitem 15.2 Schedule table subitem 15.3 Schedule table subitem 15.4 Schedule Prefatory Notes
Excise Tariff Amendment Act (No. 1) 2000 The Act Other References: Explanatory Memorandum to the Excise Tariff Amendment Bill 2000 Pearce, DC & Geddes, RS 2006, Statutory Interpretation in Australia 6th ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, Chatswood Keywords Excise Excise collections Excisable goods Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 1-1WOBLXG Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 26 February 2010 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 18 February 2010
Original statement You are here
17 January 2019
Archived