ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/782
================================================== Income Tax Assessability of employment income earned by a dual resident of Australia and the United States (US) working in the US as a Locally Engaged Staff (LES) for an Australian Government organisation FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as the issue is now dealt with in Taxation Ruling 2005/8. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the income derived by a dual resident of Australia and the US working in the US as a LES for an Australian Government organisation assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. The income derived by a dual resident of Australia and the US working in the US for an Australian Government organisation is not assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is an Australian citizen.
The taxpayer is a resident of Australia for taxation purposes as the taxpayer is a member of a superannuation scheme established under the Superannuation Act 1990.
The taxpayer is also a resident of the US for taxation purposes.
The taxpayer works for an Australian Government organisation in the US.
The taxpayer is employed as a locally engaged staff by an Australian government organisation in the US.
The taxpayer's employment does not involve the discharge of governmental functions within the meaning of Article 19 of Schedule 2 to the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
The taxpayer receives salary and wages in respect of their employment.
The taxpayer maintains a home in the US but does not maintain a home in Australia.
The law of the US provides for the imposition of income tax on employment income and does not generally exempt such income from income tax.
The salary and wages received by the taxpayer are not exempt in the US because of a law (or regulations) corresponding to the International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1963 or under an international agreement to which Australia is a party that deals with privileges and immunities of persons connected with international organisations or relating to diplomatic or consular matters.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all sources during the income year.
Salary and allowances are ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
Subsection 6-15(2) of the ITAA 1997 provides that if an amount is exempt income then it is not assessable income.
Section 11-15 of the ITAA 1997 lists those provisions dealing with income which may be exempt. Included in this list is section 23AG of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) which deals with overseas employment income.
Subsection 23AG(1) of the ITAA 1936 provides that where a resident taxpayer is engaged in foreign service for a continuous period of not less than 91 days, any foreign earnings derived will be exempt from tax in Australia. 'Foreign service' includes service in a foreign country in the capacity as an employee and 'foreign earnings' include income consisting of salary and wages (subsection 23AG(7) of the ITAA 1936).
However subsection 23AG(2) of the ITAA 1936 states that foreign earnings will not be exempt from tax under subsection 23AG(1) of the ITAA 1936 if the amount is exempt from income tax in the foreign country only because of any of the reasons listed.
Under paragraph 23AG(2)(b) of the ITAA 1936, where income is exempt in the foreign country as a result of the operation of a double tax agreement, that income is not exempt under subsection 23AG(1) of the ITAA 1936.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income received by an Australian resident, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. In the event of inconsistent provisions, the Agreements Act overrides the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 except in some limited situations.
Schedule 2 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax convention between Australia and the US (the US Convention). Schedule 2A to the Agreements Act contains the US Protocol amending the US Convention (US Protocol). The US Convention and the US Protocol operate to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and US residents.
As the taxpayer is a dual resident of Australia and of the US, it is necessary to consider the tie breaker rules in the US Convention.
Article 4(2) of the US Convention sets out the tiebreaker rules for residency for individuals. The tiebreaker rules ensure that the individual is only treated as a resident of one country for the purposes of working out liability to tax on their income under the US Convention. The tiebreaker rules do not change a taxpayer's residency status for domestic law purposes.
Article 4(2) of the US Convention provides that if an individual is a resident of both Australia and US, they shall be deemed to be a resident of the State: (a)in which they maintain a permanent home
(b)if the provisions of (a) do not apply, in which they have an habitual abode, or
(c)if the provisions of (a) and (b) do not apply, with which their personal and economic relations are closer. Article 4(2) of the US Convention further provides that in determining an individual's permanent home, regard shall be given to the place where the individual dwells with their family, and in determining the country with which an individual's personal and economic relations are closer, regard shall be given to their citizenship (if the individual is a citizen of one of the countries).
The terms 'permanent home', 'habitual abode' and 'personal and economic relations' are otherwise undefined in the US Convention. Article 3(2) of the US Convention provides that any term not defined shall, unless the context otherwise requires, have the meaning which it has under the law relating to taxes of the country applying the US Convention.
Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13 discusses the Commissioner's views about interpreting double tax agreements. Paragraph 104 of TR 2001/13 provides that the OECD Model Tax Convention and Commentary will often need to be considered in interpreting double tax agreements.
The OECD Commentary provides that in relation to a 'permanent home': (a)for a home to be permanent, an individual must have arranged and retained it for his or her permanent use as opposed to staying at a particular place under such conditions that it is evident that the stay is intended to be of short duration. The dwelling has to be available at all times continuously and not occasionally for the purposes of a stay, which owing to the reasons for it is necessarily of short duration (eg travel for pleasure, business travel, attending a course etc)
(b)any form of home may be taken into account, including a house or apartment belonging to or rented by the individual and a rented furnished room. The taxpayer maintains a residence in the US and does not maintain a residence in Australia. Accordingly, the taxpayer will be treated solely as a resident of the US for the purposes of applying the provisions of the US Convention.
Article 15(1) of the US Convention provides that salaries, wages and other similar remuneration derived by an individual who is a resident of the US in respect of an employment shall be taxable only in the US unless the employment is exercised in Australia.
The taxpayer is a resident of the US for taxation purposes and for the purposes of the US Convention and exercises the duties of their employment wholly in the US.
Accordingly Article 15(1) of the US Convention applies and the income is taxable only in the US.
Therefore, the employment income received by a taxpayer who is a resident of Australia and the US is not assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997. Note: in accordance with Taxation Determination TD 94/58, while the foreign employment income received by the taxpayer may also be exempt under section 23AG of the ITAA 1936, it is not an exempt amount for the purposes of the 'exemption with progression' calculation in subsection 23AG(3) as Australia is not permitted to tax the income under the US Convention. Subsection 23AG(3) refers to 'an amount that is exempt from tax under this section' and thus only applies in respect of income that qualifies for exemption from tax in Australia because of section 23AG, and not for any other reason. Date of decision: 15 September 2004 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2003 Year ended 30 June 2004 Year ended 30 June 2005 Year ended 30 June 2006 Year ended 30 June 2007 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 section 23AG subsection 23AG(1) subsection 23AG(2) paragraph 23AG(2)(b) subsection 23AG(3) subsection 23AG(7)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subsection 6-5(2) subsection 6-15(2) section 11-15
International Tax Agreements Act 1953 section 4 Schedule 2 Schedule 2, Article 15(1) Schedule 2, Article 19 Schedule 2A Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Determination TD 94/58
Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13 ATO Interpretative Decisions overturned by this decision ATO ID 2002/283 Other References: OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital Keywords Double tax agreement Income International tax Salary & wages income United States Business Line: Public Groups and International Date of publication: 24 September 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 15 September 2004
Original statement You are here
12 May 2006
Archived