ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2014/10
==================================================

Income Tax
 Entitlements to franking credits in an employee remuneration arrangement: Commissioner's discretion

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the conclusion that a beneficiary of a unit trust cannot satisfy the qualification period in the former section 160APHO of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) a relevant matter for the Commissioner to consider in exercising the discretion to treat the unit holder's interest as vested and indefeasible under former paragraph 160APHL(14)(c) of the ITAA 1936?
Decision
No. The conclusion that a beneficiary of a unit trust cannot satisfy the qualification period in former section 160APHO of the ITAA 1936 is not a relevant matter for the Commissioner to consider in exercising the discretion to treat the unit holder's interest as vested and indefeasible under former paragraph 160APHL(14)(c) of the ITAA 1936.
Facts
Contributions are made by an employer to an employee remuneration arrangement that operates through a unit trust.
The trustee of the unit trust provides a non-recourse interest free loan to the employee. The employee uses the loan to acquire units in the trust. No repayment of the loan is required until cancellation of the units.
The trustee uses the funds that have been contributed by the employee to acquire shares in the employer and these shares are held on trust for the unit holder. The issue price of each unit is the market value of the share allocated to that unit.
The unit holder is entitled to receive, in proportion to their unit holding, income distributions, including franked dividends received by the trustee on allocated shares.
The unit holder has a cancellation entitlement when the units are cancelled. The cancellation entitlement includes a choice of receiving an in specie distribution of shares or a payment of cash equal to the market value of the shares. However, any cancellation entitlement will be first offset against any amount outstanding on the interest free non-recourse loan.
Where the cancellation entitlement is insufficient to cover the amount that is outstanding on the loan, the trustee will accept the cancellation entitlement in full and final satisfaction of the amount outstanding on the loan.
The unit holder has received more than $5000 in imputation credits and the arrangement is not an employee share scheme under Division 83A of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997).
The employee does not hold any further interest with respect to the shares other than the interest held as beneficiary of the unit trust and does not have a vested and indefeasible interest in the corpus of the trust. As such, the unit holder will not be a qualified person for the purposes of Division 1A of former Part IIIAA of the ITAA 1936 unless the discretion in former subsection 160APHL(14) of the ITAA 1936 is exercised in the unit holder's favour.
Reasons for Decision
A beneficiary of a trust is only entitled to the tax offset under section 207-45 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) if that beneficiary is a qualified person for the purposes of Division 1A of former Part IIIAA of the ITAA 1936 (the Division) in relation to the distribution - paragraph 207-150(1)(a) of the ITAA 1997.
The intent of the Division is to ensure that the benefit of a franked distribution is only available to the true economic owner of a share, that is, the entity which is sufficiently exposed to the risks of loss and the opportunities for gain associated with share ownership. The Division seeks to prevent taxpayers who have limited exposure to those risks and opportunities from obtaining access to franking credits. In this regard paragraph 4.6 of the Explanatory Memorandum to the Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1999 (the EM) states:

One of the underlying principles of the imputation system is that the benefits of imputation should only be available to the true economic owners of shares, and only to the extent that those taxpayers are able to use the franking credits themselves: a degree of wastage of franking credits is an intended feature of the imputation system.

Where there is a trust that is not widely held, and a beneficiary does not have a vested and indefeasible interest in the corpus of the trust, the Commissioner of Taxation may exercise the discretion in former subsection 160APHL(14) of the ITAA 1936 to treat the interest as being vested and indefeasible. In exercising this discretion, former paragraph 160APHL(14)(c) of the ITAA 1936 sets out the matters to which the Commissioner of Taxation should have regard:

(i)the circumstances in which the interest is capable of not vesting or the defeasance can happen; and
(ii)the likelihood of the interest not vesting or the defeasance happening; and
(iii)the nature of the trust; and
(iv)any other matter the Commissioner thinks relevant.

When the Commissioner is exercising the discretion in former subsection 160APHL(14) of the ITAA 1936, the fact that a taxpayer will not otherwise be able to satisfy the qualification period in former section 160APHO of the ITAA 1936 is not a relevant matter under former paragraph 160APHL(14)(c) of the ITAA 1936. The Commissioner's discretion becomes relevant because the requirements of former section 160APHO of the ITAA 1936 have not been met but whether the discretion should be exercised depends on separate considerations.
Whether the discretion will be exercised in a taxpayer's favour is dependent on an examination of the circumstances so as to understand where the true economic ownership of the shares is held.
In considering the factors set out in former paragraph 160APHL(14)(c) of the ITAA 1936, the unit holder may not be sufficiently exposed to the risk of loss or opportunity for gain in respect of their shares due to:

•The limited recourse nature of the loan (so that the unit holder is wholly protected from a fall in the market value of the shares);
•The loan not being interest bearing;
•The requirement for the unit holder to repay the loan from their own funds before being eligible to an in specie distribution;
•The arrangement being generally promoted or operated on the basis that a unit holder will, upon cancellation of the units, receive cash rather than an in specie distribution; and
•The various discretions of the trustee affecting the vesting of the shares.

Consistent with the intent of the imputation system, the Commissioner will not exercise the discretion in former subsection 160APHL(14) of the ITAA 1936 to treat the interest as being vested and indefeasible where the employee is not sufficiently exposed to the risk of loss or opportunity for gain. The employee will consequently not have a vested and indefeasible interest, will not be a qualified person for the purposes of Division 1A of former Part IIIAA of the ITAA 1936 (the Division) in relation to the distribution, and will not be entitled to a tax offset under section 207-45 ITAA 1997.
Date of decision:
  27 February 2014

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2013

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   Division 1A   subsection 160APHL(14)   paragraph 160APHL(14)(c)   section 160APHO
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   Division 83A   section 207-45   paragraph 207-150(1)(a)

Other References:

 Explanatory memorandum to the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1999

Keywords

Company tax
 Imputation system
 Franking Accounts
 Franking Credits
 Employee Share Trusts

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  1-A9LNIEW

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  5 March 2014

Date reviewed:
  17 November 2016

ISSN:
 1445-2782