ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/960
==================================================

Excise
 Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme: hospitality - diesel fuel used at caravan park, tea rooms and a museum
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is a person who uses diesel fuel at particular premises to generate electricity for use in the course of carrying on a business comprising a caravan park, tea rooms and a museum eligible for diesel fuel rebate under the 'hospitality/retail' category in paragraph 78A(1)(ad) of the Excise Act 1901 and corresponding paragraph 164(1)(ad) of the Customs Act 1901?
Decision
Yes. A person who uses diesel fuel at particular premises to generate electricity for use in the course of carrying on a business comprising a caravan park, tea rooms and a museum is eligible for diesel fuel rebate under the 'hospitality/retail' category in paragraph 78A(1)(ad) of the Excise Act and corresponding paragraph 164(1)(ad) of the Customs Act.
Facts
The client carries on an enterprise in the form of a caravan park, tea rooms and an adjacent museum. The client purchases diesel fuel for use in generating electricity for the buildings.
The caravan park, tea rooms and museum do not have ready access to a commercial supply of electricity.
The museum is a relatively small building. In the museum, memorabilia and historic photographs are displayed. Visitors are charged a fee for entrance to the museum.
Reasons for Decision
Schedule 1 of the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme Amendment Act 2002 inserted paragraph 78A(1)(ad) into the Excise Act and made corresponding amendments to the Customs Act. This paragraph extends the off-road diesel fuel rebate scheme to provide for a payment of rebate to a person who purchases diesel fuel for use by them at particular premises to generate electricity for use in the course of carrying on, at those premises, an enterprise that

•has, as its principal purpose, the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality, and
•does not have, at those premises, ready access to a commercial supply of electricity.

This extension of the diesel fuel rebate scheme applies in respect of diesel fuel purchased on or after 1 July 2002.
It is accepted that:

(a)the caravan park, tearooms and museum are part of the same enterprise, and
(b)the client does not have, at the caravan park, tearooms and adjacent museum, ready access to a commercial supply of electricity

The test that applies in this instance is whether the enterprise has as its principal purpose the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality.
Example 1.3 of the Explanatory Memorandum to the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme Amendment Bill 2002 says:

South Seas Pty Ltd operates a tourist resort in a remote part of Western Australia that does not have ready access to a commercial supply of electricity. It uses diesel fuel to generate power for its own use in van sites, motel accommodation, a retail store and residential accommodation...

South Seas is eligible for a rebate for diesel fuel used to generate electricity for its own business including the residential accommodation, as the principal purpose of its enterprise is the provision of hospitality services...

This example clearly indicates that caravan parks would generally be expected to have as their primary purpose the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality.
Further, in carrying on the enterprise the client sells food, drink and souvenirs in the tearooms and provides displays for tourists at the museum. In the museum, memorabilia and historic photographs are displayed. A small charge is made for entry to the museum. The income generated from the museum is a minor part of the business. The tearooms and museum are used exclusively for these purposes.
Accordingly the principle purpose of the enterprise carried on at the caravan park, tearooms and museum is the retail sale of goods and services and the provision of hospitality and the client is eligible for diesel fuel rebate under paragraph 78A(1)(ad) of the Excise Act and corresponding paragraph 164(1)(ad) of the Customs Act.
Date of decision:
  2 October 2003

Legislative References:

Customs Act 1901   paragraph 164(1)(ad)
Excise Act 1901   paragraph 78A(1)(ad)

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2003/958
 ATO ID 2003/959

Other References:

 Explanatory Memorandum to the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme Amendment Bill 2002

Keywords

DFRS generation of electricity
 DFRS hospitality
 DFRS power generation
 Diesel fuel rebate scheme

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  31 October 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 2 October 2003
Original statement

You are here
 8 January 2010
Archived