ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2007/152
================================================== Excise Fuel Tax Act: fishing operations - where a deckhand provides their services to the owner of a fishing vessel FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as the issue is now covered by Fuel Tax Ruling FTR 2007/1, which issued on 12 September 2007. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Does a fisher acquire fuel for the purposes of subsection 41-5(1) of the Fuel Tax Act 2006 (FTA), where the fisher receives a share of the value of the catch less an amount to cover part of the costs of the fishing expedition?
Decision
No. A fisher does not acquire fuel for the purposes of subsection 41-5(1) of the FTA where the fisher receives a share of the value of the catch less an amount to cover part of the costs of the fishing expedition.
Facts
An entity (the fisher) has agreed to provide their services to the owner of a fishing vessel.
The owner conducts a fishing enterprise.
Under the terms of the agreement, the fisher will assist the owner of the vessel in undertaking the vessel's fishing operations.
In return for their services, the fisher will be paid a share of the value of the catch less an amount for a portion of the operating expenses of the vessel including the cost of fuel.
The owner pays for the fuel used in the fishing vessel.
The fisher does not have the ability to remove any of the fuel from the fishing vessel, or on-sell any of the fuel. The fuel is only available for use in propelling the vessel.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 41-5(1) of the FTA, an entity is entitled to a fuel tax credit for fuel that they acquire in, import into or manufacture in Australia for use in carrying on the entity's enterprise.
The term 'acquire' is not defined in the FTA. It therefore takes its ordinary meaning. In the context of the FTA, the Commissioner considers that the term 'acquire' does not mean merely 'to come into possession of'. To 'acquire' something means to 'obtain it as one's own' from someone else through one's actions or efforts.
To obtain something as one's own implies gaining ownership or proprietary rights in respect of the taxable fuel. This will mean either that property in the taxable fuel passes from one entity to another or that proprietary rights or ownership are conferred by the act of obtaining the taxable fuel by other means. Therefore, an entity typically 'acquires' taxable fuel upon a change in ownership of, or a transfer of proprietary rights in, the fuel from one entity to another. This would mean that an entity acquires taxable fuel if: •they purchase the fuel
•the fuel is gifted to them, or
•the entity obtains ownership of the fuel by any other means (other than manufacture or import). If an entity acquires a right or licence to use the taxable fuel of another entity in the absence of acquiring a proprietary interest in or ownership of the fuel, the entity will not be taken to have acquired the taxable fuel. The acquisition of a right or licence to use the fuel is not the same as the acquisition of the fuel. This is because the mere grant of a right or licence to use another entity's taxable fuel is not within the meaning of 'acquire' as that term is used in the FTA.
In this case, the owner of the fishing vessel, in the course of carrying on an enterprise, engages the services of a fisher. The owner provides taxable fuel for use by the fisher in carrying out that activity. However, ownership in the fuel does not transfer to the fisher. The fisher does not have the right to remove the fuel from the vessel or on-sell it. The fisher does not obtain the fuel as their own. Rather the fisher merely has the right to use the fuel in propelling the owner's vessel. Therefore the fisher has not acquired the fuel for the purposes of subsection 41-5(1) of the FTA.
Date of decision: 9 July 2007 Legislative References: Fuel Tax Act 2006 subsection 41-5(1) Keywords Fuel tax credits FTC purchase FTC Fuel FTC primary production FTC fishing operations Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 5539704 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 13 July 2007 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 9 July 2007
Original statement You are here
17 January 2019
Archived