ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/89
==================================================

Superannuation
 Reasonable benefit limits: Determination of an arm's length salary. Unique duties.
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of Division 14 of Part III of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 and Part 5A of the Income Tax Regulations 1936 (the RBL provisions). The RBL provisions do not apply for the 2007-08 income year and later income years. This ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for income years up to, and including, the 2006-07 income years.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Are the amounts requested for the relevant three consecutive years reasonable arm's length salaries for the taxpayer and can the taxpayer have arm's length salaries greater than the arm's length salaries previously allowed by the Commissioner?
Decision
The amounts requested for the relevant three consecutive years are reasonable arm's length salaries for the taxpayer and the taxpayer can have arm's length salaries greater than the arm's length salaries previously allowed by the Commissioner.
Facts
The taxpayer applied for the determination of an arm's length salary.
The taxpayer's remuneration package consisted of actual salaries and employer superannuation contributions for the requested three consecutive years. No fringe benefits were received by the taxpayer, in those years. The taxpayer sacrificed significant amounts of salary for superannuation.
The taxpayer is an associated employee and Administration Director of a company which had a low gross income. The taxpayer worked an average of more than 50 hours per week..
The Commissioner consulted the remuneration survey published by a widely recognised remuneration consultant.
The Commissioner considered that the nature of the taxpayer's employment was comparable to that of a Principal Administration Executive ("PAE") under the remuneration tables of the survey.
The upper quartile salary for PAEs who work more than 50 hours per week is established under the tables. This amount represents the total salary package paid to employees performing comparable duties.
There were a high level of risks and responsibilities associated with the position.
Arm's length salaries were determined by the Commissioner and informed to the taxpayer. A Highest Average Salary ("HAS") was calculated to reflect these arm's length salaries.
The taxpayer has now applied for a review of these arm's length salaries.
The taxpayer claims that the arm's length salaries should be valued at a rate higher than previously allowed.
The determination of the arm's length salaries were reviewed by the Commissioner and a new HAS was calculated to reflect these revised arm's length salaries.
Reasons for Decision
Subregulation 47(1) of the Income Tax Regulations 1936 ("ITR 1936") defines "salary" for reasonable benefit limits purposes to include salary, wages, commissions, bonuses, fees, allowances or gratuities paid to a person during a financial year.
Superannuation contributions and fringe benefits are not included in the definition of "salary". Under subparagraph 47(3)(c)(ii) of the ITR 1936 an arm's length salary is the salary that would have been paid to an employee if the employee had not been an associate of the employer.
In determining an appropriate arm's length salary for an individual, the Commissioner relies on the remuneration figures from a remuneration survey published by a widely recognised remuneration consultant.
A 15% bonus to cover the risks and responsibilities associated with the taxpayer's position with the company was allowed and was added to the remuneration survey salary figure.
The remuneration survey salary figure was reduced by the same proportion as the taxpayer had sacrificed actual salary to superannuation. These amounts were deducted from the total salary package in order to arrive at a "salary" as defined under subregulation 47(1) of the ITR 1936.
Given the individual merits of this case and the unique contribution made by the taxpayer in the performance of the taxpayer's duties within the company, as verified by the casing points detailed in the remuneration report, the Commissioner, having regard to subregulations 47(3) and 47(4), is now of the opinion that the amounts requested for the relevant three consecutive years are reasonable arm's length salaries for the taxpayer. Therefore the taxpayer can have arm's length salaries greater than the arm's length salaries previously allowed by the Commissioner.
Date of decision:
  5 July 2001

Legislative References:

Taxation Administration Act 1953   Section 14ZL   Section 14ZQ   Section 14ZU   Paragraph 14ZW(1)(c)   Section 14ZY   Section 14ZZ
Income Tax Regulations 1936   Subregulation 47(1).   Subparagraph 47(3)(c)(ii).   Subregulation 47(3).   Subregulation 47(4).   Subregulation 53FA(1).   Subregulation 53FA(2).

Keywords

Salary sacrifice
 Reasonable benefit limits
 Transitional RBLs
 Highest average salary

Business Line:
  Superannuation

Date of publication:
  30 January 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 5 July 2001
Original statement

You are here
23 November 2007
Archived