ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/14
================================================== Fringe Benefits Tax Exempt benefits: Personal Digital Assistants (PDA's) - handheld and palm sized organisers FOI status: may be released This ATO Interpretative Decision is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of a provision of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 that doesn't apply after 13 May 2008. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions with regards to the operation of this provision up to and including 13 May 2008. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is a PDA considered to be an electronic diary or similar item, and therefore an exempt benefit, under paragraph 58X(2)(g) of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act (1986) (FBTAA)?
Decision
Yes. A PDA is an item that is considered to be similar to an electronic diary and is exempt under paragraph 58X(2)(g) of the FBTAA.
Facts
An employer provides an employee with a PDA, as part of the employee's salary package.
The PDA provided to the employee: •is used to record appointments, 'to do' lists, and store contact information
•is able to be connected to the internet
•contains 'cut-down' versions of word processing and spreadsheet programs
•can operate games, and
•can play music The PDA is marketed to the public as a business tool that complements the user's laptop or notebook computer.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 58X(1) of the FBTAA exempts from FBT certain work related items. Subsection 58X(2) provides a list of 'eligible work related items', including at paragraph (g) 'an electronic diary or similar item'. There is no definition of 'electronic diary' in the FBTAA, therefore it takes on its ordinary meaning.
The Australian Concise Oxford Dictionary, (1997), 3rd edn, Oxford University Press, South Melbourne, defines 'diary' as: 1.a daily record of events or thoughts;
2.a book for this or for noting future engagements, usu. printed and with a calendar and other information. In producing an electronic version of a diary the terms 'personal organiser' or 'electronic organiser' have also been used. The term 'personal organiser' is also defined in the Australian Concise Oxford Dictionary as: 1.a looseleaf notebook with sections for various kinds of information, including a diary etc.
2.a handheld microcomputer serving the same purpose. [emphasis added] The PDA is also a handheld microcomputer that is considered to be a further development of electronic diaries and organisers.
It is considered that the best way of determining the classification of any particular item is to identify its primary function. The primary function of an electronic diary or similar item is that it can be used to record appointments, establish 'to do' lists, and store contact information. Whilst a PDA may have many other features, such as the ability to connect to the internet or a personal computer (PC), and be able to perform limited word processing and spreadsheet functions, or play music; these would be considered to be ancillary to the primary function as a diary/organiser.
By way of comparison, a notebook or laptop computer has far greater capacity than a PDA and is specifically designed to perform the functions of a PC whilst the user is away from the office environment. Although a PDA may be able to perform some of the functions of a notebook or laptop computer, they do so without the use of a hard drive and with restricted ability to type/input information. PDAs should not be seen as similar to notebook or laptop computer, but designed to complement these computers.
It is therefore considered that a PDA is exempt from FBT as 'an electronic diary or similar item' under paragraph 58X(2)(g) of the FBTAA. Note: From 1 April 2006 Personal Digital Assistants are made specifically exempt as an eligible work related item, under an amendment to subsection 58X(2) of the FBTAA. Date of decision: 22 December 2003 Year of income: Year ending 31 March 2004 Legislative References: Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 section 58X subsection 58X(1) subsection 58X(2) paragraph 58X(2)(g) Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2003/894 Other References: The Australian Concise Oxford Dictionary, (1997), 3rd edn, Oxford University Press, South Melbourne Keywords Exempt benefits Fringe benefits tax Business Line: Business and Personal Taxes Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 16 January 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 22 December 2003
Original statement You are here 3 October 2008
Archived