ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2010/13
==================================================

Excise
 Excise: home consumption - delivered - prepaid entry
 FOI status: may be released

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Are excisable goods subject to the Commissioner's control for the purposes of item 1, clause 1 of Schedule 1 of the Excise Regulation 2015 (Excise Regulation) if the goods are destroyed after they have been entered for home consumption and excise duty paid, but before they are removed from the licensed premises?

Decision
Yes. Excisable goods are subject to the Commissioner's control for the purposes of item 1, clause 1 of Schedule 1 of the Excise Regulation if the goods are destroyed after they have been entered for home consumption and excise duty paid, but before they are removed from the licensed premises.

Facts
Excisable goods were entered for home consumption under section 58 of the Excise Act 1901 (Excise Act) and the relevant excise duty paid.
Authority had been given under section 58 of the Excise Act to remove the goods from the licensed place for home consumption.
The goods were destroyed prior to being physically removed from the licensed place.

Reasons for Decision
Section 78 of the Excise Act provides for the granting of remissions, rebates and refunds in respect of excisable goods, subject to the Excise Regulation.
Schedule 1 of the Excise Regulation sets out a number of circumstances under which refunds, rebates and remissions are available. The availability of refunds, rebates and remissions is also subject to a number of other provisions under the Excise Regulation.
The Excise Regulation at item 1, clause 1 of Schedule 1 provides that one of the prescribed circumstances in which a refund, rebate or remission is available is where:

Excise duty has been paid or is payable on goods that have, while subject to the CEO's control:

(a) deteriorated; or
(b) been damaged, pillaged, lost or destroyed; or
(c) become unfit for human consumption.

Therefore, entitlement to a refund relies (in part) on whether the goods on which excise duty has been paid were subject to the CEO's (defined in section 4 of the Excise Act to mean the Commissioner of Taxation) control when they were destroyed.
Subsection 61(1) of the Excise Act specifies when excisable goods cease to be subject to the CEO's control. Subsection 61(1) states:

61(1) All excisable goods are subject to the CEO's control until delivered for home consumption or for exportation to a place outside Australia, whichever occurs first.

The concept of delivery for home consumption can be contrasted with the concept of 'entry' of goods. This is evident from section 61C of the Excise Act which enables the Commissioner to grant permission for goods to be delivered for home consumption without entry.
A similar distinction appears in section 58 of the Excise Act which provides for entries to be made by a manufacturer or owner of excisable goods, and passed by an officer, thus authorising the removal of the goods for home consumption or to an approved place.
In this instance, the goods that were destroyed had been entered by the manufacturer under section 58 of the Excise Act and duty paid.
The term 'home consumption' is not defined in the Excise Act. However, based on cases that have looked at this issue, it is evident that it is accepted as being a term of broad application, intended to capture all domestic use of excisable goods manufactured in Australia (see Caltex Australia Petroleum Pty Ltd v. Commissioner of Taxation [2008] FCA 1951 (Caltex Case) and Moama Refinery Pty Ltd v. Chief Executive Officer of Customs [2001] FCA 1287).
The Excise Act does not define 'delivered for home consumption'. However, this issue was considered in detail in the Caltex Case, where Sundberg J, in considering whether fuel consumed in the licensed premises in which it was manufactured had been delivered for home consumption, stated:

[140] I agree with the Commissioner that Caltex delivered the residual oils for home consumption for the purposes of the Excise Act. The Excise Act does not refer to delivery to a person but adopts the more ample language of delivery for or into home consumption. While I accept that the typical case of delivery will involve the movement of excisable goods from one person or place to another, the language of the Excise Act is sufficiently broad in my view to apply to the less typical case of consumption by a manufacturer at its own premises...

Sundberg J reiterates his view in paragraph 144 where he states:

... The section also accommodates and is consistent with a delivery for home consumption constituted by a use of the relevant goods at that place.

Whilst the Caltex Case discusses the concept of 'deliver for home consumption' in the context of section 61C of the Excise Act, the discussion is equally relevant to the concept of 'delivery for home consumption' generally in the Excise Act.
Based on the reasoning in the Caltex Case, the primary means by which excisable goods are delivered into home consumption is physical delivery from the licensed premises (although excisable goods consumed on the licensed premises are also considered to have been delivered for home consumption).
In this instance, the entity, although it had entered the goods, paid duty, and received permission to remove the goods from the licensed premises, had not yet removed the goods when they were destroyed. Nor did the entity consume the goods (in the sense of putting the goods to some purpose).
It follows that where the goods have been destroyed before physically leaving the licensed premises they are still subject to the CEO's control even though they have been entered and duty has been paid and authority to remove them for home consumption has been given.
Amendment History

Date of Amendment
Part
Comment

14 August 2015
Legislative References
Updated formatting.

3 July 2015
Reasons for Decision
Changes to citations due to Excise Regulation 2015 replacing Excise Regulations 1925

Date of decision:
  22 December 2009

Legislative References:

Excise Act 1901   section 4   section 58   subsection 61(1)   section 61C   section 78
Excise Regulation 2015   item 1, clause 1 of Schedule 1

Case References:

Caltex Australia Petroleum Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation   [2008] FCA 1951

Moama Refinery Pty Ltd v Chief Executive Officer of Customs   [2001] FCA 1287   49 ATR 114   48 ATR 145

Keywords

Delivered for home consumption
 Excise
 Excise collections
 Licensing

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  6310422; 1-6LEF960

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  15 January 2010

ISSN:
 1445 - 2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
22 December 2009
Original statement

 
 3 July 2015
Updated statement

You are here
14 August 2015
Updated statement