ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/712
================================================== Excise Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme: Wood chipping of environmentally destructive trees in a forest FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the processing of trees that are regarded as weeds, into woodchips in the forest where the trees are felled 'forestry' as defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act 1901 for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme?
Decision
Yes, the processing of trees that are regarded as weeds into woodchips in the forest where the trees are felled is 'forestry' as defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act.
Facts
Various government departments and agencies are attempting to commercialise the removal of large trees that are regarded as pests.
The trees have formed a large natural forest.
The trees are being harvested in a trial designed to test their potential commercial value. In the first phase of the trial, a forestry organisation has been managing the harvesting, chipping and transport of the trees from a number of properties. During the trial, suitable logs will be processed into sawn timber or veneer in local timber mills.
Chips will be used for generating electricity.
The client is contracted by the forestry organisation to undertake mobile chipping of logs and tree heads (fuel logs). The client does not fell the trees. Under the contract, a portion of the forests is made available to the client for infield (mobile) chipping operations. The client has access to fuel logs stockpiled after harvesting operations. The client is only allowed to chip fuel logs within such parts of the harvest area notified by the forestry organisation.
The client uses a rotary action chipping machine to chip the trees and feed the resulting woodchips directly into containers for transport.
Reasons for Decision
Paragraph 78A(1)(aa) of the Excise Act 1901 and corresponding paragraph 164(1)(aa) of the Customs Act provide that a rebate is payable for diesel or like fuel that is purchased for use by that person in 'primary production' (otherwise than for the purpose of propelling a road vehicle on a public road). 'Primary production' includes 'forestry'.
Subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act defines 'forestry' as: (a)the planting or tending, in a forest or plantation, of trees intended for felling; or
(b)the thinning or felling, in a forest or plantation, of standing timber.and includes
(c)the transporting, milling or processing, in a forest or plantation, of timber felled in the forest or plantation;... To fall within paragraph (c) of the definition of forestry:
1. the timber being must have been felled in a 'forest or plantation'; and
2. the transporting, milling or processing of that timber must occur in the 'forest or plantation' where it was felled.
Given: (a)the size of the area of land covered
(b)the density of trees within that area
(c)the size of the trees
(d)that the timber is harvested as part of a trial to determine the commercial value of the timber; and
(e)State Forests refer to the land in that area as a forest it is accepted that this area of land is a forest, and that the timber is being felled in a forest.
In T J Depiazzi & Sons &. Collector of Customs, Re (1993) 17 AAR 557, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal accepted that milling is the process of subjecting something to the operation of a mill and that a mill is a machine which does its work by rotary motion. Accordingly, the activity of the client constitutes milling.
Therefore it is considered that the client is milling, in a forest, timber which has been felled in the forest which is 'forestry' under paragraph (c) of the definition of forestry in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act.
Date of decision: 23 June 2003 Legislative References: Excise Act 1901 paragraph 78A(1)(aa)
Customs Act 1901 paragraph 164(1)(aa) subsection 164(7) Case References: T J Depiazzi & Sons & Collector of Customs, Re (1993) 17 AAR 557 Keywords DFRS forestry Diesel fuel rebate scheme Excise Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 15 August 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 23 June 2003
Original statement You are here 8 January 2010
Archived