ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/939
================================================== Excise Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: on-road - whether a property adjacent to a road reserve of a highway is, in or out of a 'metropolitan area'? FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is a property adjacent to the road reserve of the Pacific Highway between Brisbane and the Gold Coast, within the Sunshine Coast-Brisbane-Gold Coast 'metropolitan area', as defined in Schedule 3 to the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Regulations 2003 (the Regulations) for the purposes of the Energy Grants Credits Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
No. A property adjacent to the road reserve of the Pacific Highway between Brisbane and the Gold Coast is not within the Sunshine Coast-Brisbane-Gold Coast metropolitan area for the purposes of the Regulations.
Facts
A business is adjacent to the road reserve of the Pacific Highway between Brisbane and the Gold Coast.
The business property abuts the Pacific Highway road reserve. It shares a common boundary with the Pacific Highway road reserve, being the property line nearest to and parallel with the highway. The property extends back from the common boundary away from the highway.
The property is not within a statistical local area listed in Parts 1 and 2 of Schedule 3 to the Regulations.
Reasons for Decision
Section 6 of the EGCSA specifies areas that are metropolitan areas for the purposes of entitlement to an on-road credit. The metropolitan areas are: (a)Newcastle-Sydney-Wollongong metropolitan area
(b)Melbourne-Geelong metropolitan area
(c)Sunshine Coast-Brisbane-Gold Coast metropolitan area
(d)Perth metropolitan area
(e)Adelaide metropolitan area
(f)Canberra metropolitan area. Each area is fully specified in the Regulations.
Schedule 3 to the Regulations fully specifies the Sunshine Coast-Brisbane-Gold Coast metropolitan area. It refers to statistical local areas as described in the Australian Standard Geographical Classification published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics and current as at 12 April 2000.
For a property to be part of the Sunshine Coast-Brisbane-Gold Coast metropolitan area it must be: • one of the listed statistical local areas in Part 1 of Schedule 3
• within the part of a statistical local area described in Part 2 of Schedule 3, or
• within a road reserve between statistical local areas described in Part 3 of Schedule 3. The client's property is not within a statistical local area listed in Parts 1 and 2 of Schedule 3 to the Regulations. Part 3 of Schedule 3 to the Regulations states that the Sunshine Coast-Brisbane-Gold Coast metropolitan area includes the area contained within the road reserve of the Pacific Highway between Brisbane and the Gold Coast.
The highway road reserve includes the road itself and some metres of space either side of the road. The business property abuts the highway road reserve. It shares a common boundary with the highway road reserve, being the property line nearest to and parallel with the highway. The property extends back from the common boundary away from the highway and is therefore outside the road reserve area.
A property which is: (a) not within a listed statistical local area that forms part of a defined metropolitan area, and
(b) not located within a road reserve that defines a part of the defined metropolitan area is not located within that metropolitan area.
Therefore, as the property is outside the metropolitan area, deliveries to the property from a point inside the Sunshine Coast-Brisbane-Gold Coast metropolitan area may be entitled to an on-road credit under section 43 of the EGCSA, subject to other eligibility requirements of that section.
Date of decision: 1 October 2003 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 section 6 section 43
Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Regulations 2003 schedule 3 Keywords EGCS on-road EGCS metropolitan areas Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 17 October 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 1 October 2003
Original statement You are here 1 July 2012
Archived