ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/400
================================================== Excise Energy Grants Credits Scheme: off-road - agriculture - retrieval of metal by-products FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the retrieval of scrap metal from agricultural properties, an 'agricultural waste activity' as defined in section 26 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. The retrieval of scrap metal from agricultural properties is an 'agricultural waste activity' as defined in section 26 of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity collects scrap metal from various agricultural properties where the agricultural activity of rearing livestock is carried on. The scrap metal consists of items such as damaged and discarded farm equipment which was once used on the agricultural property.
The entity uses diesel-powered truck cranes and excavators equipped with a grapple, shear or a magnet to load the scrap metal onto trucks for removal from the agricultural properties. The entity then transports the scrap metal to a depot where it is sorted and then sent for export and recycling.
Reasons for Decision
Section 53 of the EGCSA provides that, subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in the Regulations, an entity is entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase or import into Australia off-road diesel fuel for a use by them that qualifies, including 'agriculture'.
'Agriculture' is defined in section 22 of the EGCSA to include an 'agricultural waste activity', which is defined in turn in section 26 of the EGCSA.
Section 26 of the EGCSA states:
The expression 'agricultural waste activity' means: (a) the removal of waste products of an agricultural activity from the agricultural property where the activity is carried on; or
(b) the disposal of waste products of an agricultural activity on the agricultural property where the activity is carried on. As the products are not being disposed of on the agricultural property, paragraph 26(a) of the EGCSA is the most pertinent part of this definition. In order to fall within this paragraph, the scrap metal must first constitute 'waste products of an agricultural activity.'
In Water Administration Ministerial Corporation v. CEO of Customs No.N96/1212 AAT No. 1211, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) stated that a waste product can be described as something that is an excess material, or is unproductive and superfluous. It also described waste product as material produced in a process, as manufacture, and discarded as useless when the process is completed.
The AAT went on to say that the concept of waste embraces all economically unusable or rejected by-products at any given place and time, and any other matter which may be discharged, accidentally or otherwise into the environment.
Scrap metal on a farm is clearly waste. The remaining issue is whether it is the product of an agricultural activity.
The term 'agricultural activity' is defined in section 28 of the EGCSA as meaning: An activity referred to in any one of the paragraphs of the definition of agriculture in subsection 22(1) (other than an activity referred to in paragraph (i) or (j) of the definition of sundry agricultural activity in section 27) if that activity is carried out for the purposes of, or purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale. The definition of 'agriculture' in subsection 22(1) of the EGCSA includes, among other things, the activities of 'cultivation of the soil', 'cultivation or gathering in of crops', 'rearing of livestock', 'viticulture', 'horticulture', 'pasturage' or 'apiculture'.
The term 'product' is not defined in the EGCSA and therefore takes on its ordinary meaning. The Macquarie Dictionary 2001, rev, 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd NSW defines the term 'product' as meaning: 1. a thing produced by any action or operation, or by labour; an effect or result. Clearly a piece of agricultural machinery such as a tractor is not produced by an agricultural activity. However, we accept that where machinery loses its economic usefulness as a result of its use in agricultural activities, the resultant scrap metal is in effect a 'product' of the agricultural activity.
As the scrap metal is the 'product' of an agricultural activity and is being removed from the property where the agricultural activity is carried on, the entity is conducting an 'agricultural waste activity' as defined in paragraph 26(a) of the EGCSA.
Date of decision: 13 March 2004 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 section 22 subsection 22(1) section 26 paragraph 26(a) section 27 section 28 section 53 Case References: Water Administration Ministerial Corporation v. CEO of Customs N96/1212 AAT No 12111 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2004/86 Other References: The Macquarie Dictionary 2001, rev, 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW Keywords EGCS agricultural waste activity EGCS agriculture EGCS off-road Energy grants (credits) scheme Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 7 May 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 13 March 2004
Original statement You are here 1 July 2012
Archived