ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/935
==================================================

Excise
 Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme: eligibility of person using one generator for both a farming business and a tourism/retail business at same location
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is a claimant who does not have ready access to a commercial supply of electricity, and purchases diesel fuel for use in generating electricity for activities that include a farming business and a tourism/retail business, entitled to a diesel fuel rebate under paragraph 78A(1)(ad) of the Excise Act 1901 or paragraph 164(1)(ad) of the Customs Act 1901 for the tourism/retail activities, conducted on the property where the farming business is carried on?
Decision
Yes. A claimant who does not have ready access to a commercial supply of electricity, and purchases diesel fuel for use in generating electricity for activities that include a farming business and a tourism/retail business, is entitled to a diesel fuel rebate under paragraph 78A(1)(ad) of the Excise Act or paragraph 164(1)(ad) of the Customs Act for the tourism/retail activities, conducted on the property where the farming business is carried on.
Facts
The claimant carries on a number of activities.
The claimant is the owner and proprietor of a pastoral property, run as a farming business and also operates a hospitality/retail business on the same property.
The claimant does not have ready access to a commercial supply of electricity.
The claimant purchases diesel fuel, which is used to power a generator which provides electricity for:

(a)farming purposes, and
(b)the various buildings used in the tourism and retail activities.

The claimant's generator is located within close proximity to a cluster of buildings that include the premises used in the tourism/retail activities and buildings used in relation to the farming business.
The claimant is already claiming a diesel fuel rebate for diesel fuel purchased for use in the farming business.
Reasons for Decision
Paragraph 78A(1)(ad) of the Excise Act and paragraph 164(1)(ad) of the Customs Act state that a rebate is payable to a person who purchases diesel fuel for use by them to generate electricity at particular premises for use in:
the course of carrying on, at those premises, an enterprise that:

(i)has, as its principal purpose, the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality; and
(ii)does not have, at those premises, ready access to a commercial supply of electricity

It is accepted that the claimant:

•purchases diesel fuel for use in generating electricity, and
•does not have, on the pastoral property, a ready access to a commercial supply of electricity.

The tests that apply in this instance are:

1. Is the diesel fuel used 'at' the particular premises where an enterprise is carried on? and
2. Does that enterprise have, as its principal purpose the retail sale of goods or services, or the provision of hospitality?

Is the diesel fuel used 'at' the particular premises where an enterprise is carried on?
In this context, the 'particular premises' are the premises where a particular enterprise is carried on. The 'particular premises' could comprise one building, or a number of buildings. Where particular premises comprises a number of buildings, the 'particular premises' would, for the most part, be the premises as a whole that are used in the course of the tourism/hospitality enterprise. This conclusion is supported by example 1.1 in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme Amendment Act 2002 which reads:

South Seas Pty Ltd operates a tourist resort in a remote part of Western Australia that does not have ready access to a commercial supply of electricity. It uses diesel fuel to generate power for its own use in van sites, motel accommodation, a retail store and residential accommodation. It also provides power to nearby private residences and businesses that have no other access to electricity.

South Seas Pty Ltd is eligible for a rebate for diesel fuel used to generate electricity for its own business including the residential accommodation, as the principal purpose of its enterprise is the provision of hospitality services...

However, on the property as a whole, the claimant carries on a range of activities. The definition of 'carrying on an enterprise' for diesel fuel rebate refers back to section 38 of the A New Tax System (Australian Business Number) Act 1999 (the ABN Act) which states that the term 'enterprise' includes 'an activity, or series of activities done in the form of a business ...'
Miscellaneous Taxation Ruling MT 2000/1 states that the ABN Act:

... does not define an 'activity, or series of activities'. In the absence of a statutory definition, an 'activity' is essentially an act or series of acts that an entity chooses to do. Entities can undertake a wide range of activities with varying degrees of interrelationship. The meaning of an 'activity, or series of activities' for an entity can range from a single transaction to groups of related activities or to the entire operations of the entity.

Where there are a number of separate activities, the entity may be carrying on more than one enterprise ...

The activities associated with operating the tourism/retail business are related to, but separate from, the activities of running a pastoral business. Accordingly, it is possible to consider the tourism activities the claimant carries on at these premises as a separate, but interrelated, enterprise to the pastoral business the claimant also carries on.
Consequently, the diesel fuel must be used 'at' the particular premises where the tourism activities are carried on.
The term 'at' in the context of 'at residential premises' was discussed by the Full Court of the Federal Court in Collector of Customs Tasmania v. Flinders Island Community Association (1985) 7 FCR 205 where it was held that the term should be taken to require a close connection between the generation of electricity and the residential premises. It was also held that what is a sufficiently close connection must depend upon the circumstances of each case.
The meaning of 'at' was also considered by the Federal Court in Collector of Customs v. Rottnest Island Authority (1994) 48 FCR 177 where the Court determined that the generator must be '...in sufficient proximity to the premises as to enable it reasonably to be identified with the premises. It must be appurtenant to the premises and coherent with them...'.
A person will be considered to have purchased diesel fuel, for use in generating electricity 'at' particular premises where:

(a)the generator is physically proximate to the premises, and
(b)belongs to the premises and forms a coherent part of them.

The generator is located within close proximity to the premises used in the tourism/retail business and forms part of an isolated cluster of buildings far removed from other buildings.
Therefore the requirement that the generator must be located 'at' the premises where the hospitality/retail business is conducted is satisfied, notwithstanding the fact the generator is also located within close proximity of the premises used in relation to the agricultural business.
Does that enterprise have, as its principal purpose, the retail sale of goods or services, or the provision of hospitality?
The claimant carries on a tourism/retail business at particular premises located within a cluster of buildings on the property. Hence, this requirement is satisfied.
Consequently, the claimant is entitled to a diesel fuel rebate as the diesel fuel is purchased for use at particular premises to generate electricity for use in carrying on at those premises, an enterprise that:

(i)has, as its principle purpose, the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality, and
(ii)does not have, at those premises, ready access to a commercial supply of electricity.

Date of decision:
  29 August 2003

Legislative References:

Customs Act 1901   paragraph 164(1)(ad)
Excise Act 1901   paragraph 78A(1)(ad)
A New Tax System (Australian Business Number) Act 1999   section 38

Case References:

Collector of Customs Tasmania v. Flinders Island Community Association    (1985) 7 FCR 205

Collector of Customs v. Rottnest Island Authority    (1994) 48 FCR 177

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Miscellaneous Tax Ruling MT 2000/1

Other References:

 Explanatory Memorandum to the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme Amendment Act 2002

Keywords

DFRS generation of electricity
 DFRS hospitality
 DFRS power generation
 Diesel fuel rebate scheme

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  17 October 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
29 August 2003
Original statement

You are here
 8 January 2010
Archived