ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/233
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and payment made in settlement of a general insurance claim when the insured does not inform the insurer of its input tax credit entitlement on the premiums
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as it is a simple restatement of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, an insured business operator, making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it:

•receives a payment from the insurer in settlement of a claim under a general insurance policy, and
•is entitled to an input tax credit on the insurance premiums but did not inform the insurer of this entitlement before making the claim?

Decision
Yes, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it receives a payment from the insurer in settlement of a claim under a general insurance policy and it is entitled to an input tax credit on the insurance premiums but did not inform the insurer of this entitlement before making the claim.
Facts
The entity is a business operator that is insured under a general insurance policy.
The supply of the insurance policy to the entity was a taxable supply. The entity is entitled to claim an input tax credit on the insurance premium.
The entity made a claim under the general insurance policy. The entity paid the premium relating to the period during which the event, giving rise to the insurance claim, happened. The entity did not inform the insurer of the extent to which it could claim an input tax credit on the insurance premium. The insurer made a payment of money in settlement of the claim.
The entity makes the insurance claim in the course of carrying on its enterprise in Australia and is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Under section 9-5 of the GST Act, an entity makes a taxable supply if:

•it makes the supply for consideration
•the supply is made in the course or furtherance of an enterprise that it carries on
•the supply is connected with Australia, and
•the entity is registered or required to be registered for GST.

However, the supply is not a taxable supply to the extent that it is GST-free or input taxed.
The entity makes the general insurance claim in the course of its enterprise that it carries on in Australia. In addition, the entity is registered for GST. Therefore, the remaining requirement of section 9-5 of the GST Act is that an entity makes a supply for consideration.
Subsection 78-45(1) of the GST Act provides that if, in settlement of a claim under an insurance policy, an insurer:

•makes a payment of money
•makes a supply, or
•makes both a payment of money and a supply

the payment or supply is not treated as consideration for a supply made by the entity insured, or by any entity (other than the entity insured) that was entitled to an input tax credit for the premium paid for the insurance policy.
However, subsection 78-50(1) of the GST Act provides that the payment or supply is treated as consideration for a supply made by an entity if:

(a)the entity paid all or a part of the premium, for the insurance policy, relating to the period during which the event giving rise to the claim happened; and
(b)the entity, or the representative member of the GST group of which the entity is a member, was entitled to an input tax credit for the premium it paid; and
(c)the entity:

•did not, at or before the time a claim was first made under the insurance policy since the last payment of a premium, inform the insurer of the entitlement to an input tax credit for the premium it paid, or
•in informing the insurer of the entitlement at or before that time, understated its extent, and

(d)the insurance policy was not issued under a compulsory third party scheme.

It does not matter whether that entity is the entity insured, or whether the payment or supply is made to that entity or any other entity.
The entity paid the premium relating to the period during which the event, giving rise to the insurance claim, happened. The entity is entitled to an input tax credit for the GST included in the general insurance premium. The entity
 did not
 inform the insurer of the extent to which it could claim an input tax credit on the general insurance premiums. Therefore, the requirements in subsection 78-50(1) of the GST Act are satisfied and the payment by the insurer, in settlement of the general insurance claim, is treated as consideration for a supply made by the entity. As such, the first requirement of section 9-5 of the GST Act is satisfied.
Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act.
Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it receives a payment in settlement of a general insurance claim and it does not inform the insurer of its input tax credit entitlement on the insurance premiums.

Note 1: The extent to which the payment or supply is treated as consideration is the extent of the insured's entitlement to input tax credits (subsection 78-50(2) of the GST Act).

Note 2: If the entity was entitled to claim an input tax credit for the insurance premium it paid, and subsection 78-50(1) of the GST Act applies so that the payment by the insurer is treated as consideration for a supply made by the entity, but at the time of settlement, the entity is no longer registered, or required to be registered for GST purposes, the entity's supply in return for the payment will still be taxable supply (subsection 78-50(3) of the GST Act). An unregistered entity that makes a taxable supply under section 78-50 of the GST Act will be required to give a GST return to the Commissioner and pay GST on the taxable supply in accordance with the provisions in Subdivision 78-D of the GST Act.

Date of decision:
  3 June 2002

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 9-5   Division 38   Division 40   subsection 78-45(1)   section 78-50   subsection 78-50(1)   subsection 78-50(2)   subsection 78-50(3)

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2005/234
 ATO ID 2005/235

Keywords

Goods and services tax
 GST insurance
 Insured
 GST insurance policy
 Insurance settlement under an insurance policy
 GST supplies & acquisitions
 GST consideration
 Taxable supply

Business Line:
  GST

Date of publication:
  12 August 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 3 June 2002
Original statement

You are here
20 March 2008
Archived