ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2009/113
==================================================

Income Tax
 Capital allowances: tax break - expenditure in respect of the construction
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012 as Division 41 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 ceases to apply to business investments made after 30 June 2012.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the income years in which the provision provides an entitlement to a deduction, 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the capital expenditure incurred by the taxpayer after it has committed to the construction of its assets 'expenditure in respect of the construction' of the assets for the purposes of subsection 41-25(3A) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. The capital expenditure incurred by the taxpayer after it has committed to the construction of its assets is 'expenditure in respect of the construction' of the assets for the purposes of subsection 41-25(3A) of the ITAA 1997 because the expenditure has the necessary material and relevant connection with the construction of the assets and the incurrence of the expenditure objectively verifies the making of the commitment.
Facts
The taxpayer applies certain management processes and procedures in order to decide whether it will commit to a proposed business project involving the construction of particular tangible depreciating assets. Once a project is approved, the taxpayer has made a definite commitment to proceed with the construction of the particular assets. At the same time as the approval decision, the taxpayer also first incurs capital expenditure on labour or materials that is included in the first element of the assets' cost.
Reasons for Decision
All legislative references are to the ITAA 1997 unless otherwise stated.
Division 41 allows an additional deduction for certain business investment in new, tangible depreciating assets and for new expenditure on existing assets - the 'tax break'.
To be eligible for the tax break, a taxpayer must evidence a commitment to invest in a qualifying asset within the legislated time frames. This requirement is an element of the definition of recognised new investment amount in paragraph 41-20(1)(b) which provides that the 'investment commitment time' for the amount must occur in the period starting on 13 December 2008 and ending on 31 December 2009.
The expression 'investment commitment time' is defined in section 41-25. For purchased assets, subparagraph 41-25(1)(a)(i) provides that the time of entering into the contract under which the asset is, or will be, held is the investment commitment time. In the case of self-constructed assets, the investment commitment time under subparagraph 41-25(1)(a)(ii) for an amount that is included in the first element of the asset's cost is the time at which you start to construct the asset.
For the purposes of subsection 41-25(3A), you are treated as having started to construct an asset at a time when you first incur expenditure in respect of the construction of the asset.
The use of the expression 'in respect of' indicates that the expenditure in question is not limited to expenditure incurred on the actual construction of the asset. The words expand or enlarge the range of expenditure that will be counted for the purposes of determining the investment commitment time for an amount.
This interpretation is consistent with the Tax Office interpretation of subsection 43-70(1) which uses the same expression to define 'construction expenditure' as 'capital expenditure incurred in respect of the construction of capital works'. Taxation Ruling TR 97/25 at paragraph 9 confirms that 'construction expenditure' includes not just the cost of the structure itself but preliminary expenses such as architect fees and engineering fees.
It is also consistent with the Tax Office interpretation of the former investment allowance rules. Under former subsection 82AB(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 a taxpayer could deduct capital expenditure incurred 'in respect of the construction' of a new unit of eligible property. In FC of T v. Tully Co-operative Sugar Milling Association Limited 83 ATC 4495; (1983)14 ATR 495 Fitzgerald J said at ATC 4506; ATR 506: 'Expenditure "in respect of" construction may in appropriate cases include costs of purchases...' In addressing his honour's comments, Taxation Ruling IT 2142, states at paragraph 13: 'Since his honour suggested that such expenditure "may in appropriate cases include costs of purchases", it would follow that "construction" may commence before the actual physical work of assembly or the like begins.'
Although the statutory phrase 'in respect of' uses wide words of connection, the closeness of the connection or relation that is required between expenditure incurred and construction turns on an examination of the legislative context. Case law considering the meaning of the same expression where it is used in other legislative enactments illustrates the importance of context as an aid to establishing what Parliament intended. In Workers Compensation Board (Q) v. Technical Products Pty. Ltd. (1988) 165 CLR 642; [1988] HCA 49 and Technical Products v. State Government Insurance Office (Qld) (1989) 167 CLR 45; [1989] HCA 24, the High Court considered the context of the particular legislative provisions as an indicator of whether the connection between two subjects was both material and relevant and so capable of being described as 'in respect of' each other. In these cases, the court found that the context constrained or narrowed the connection that was required between the two subject matters identified. The expression was not so wide as to include any distant relationship or remote nexus between the connected subjects.
The legislative context in which the expression 'in respect of' appears is therefore an important indicator of its intended scope. The purpose of the tax break is highlighted in paragraph 1.5 of the Revised Explanatory Memorandum to the Tax Laws Amendment (Small Business and General Business Tax Break) Bill 2009 (the EM) which states: 'The role of the Tax Break is to stimulate new investment by Australian businesses. The temporary nature of the measure provides an incentive for businesses to bring forward and sustain new capital investment in the current economic climate.'
To be eligible for the tax break a taxpayer must make a commitment to invest within the legislated time frames. For assets that are purchased, this commitment is evidenced at the time of entering into the relevant contract. For assets that are self-constructed, the analogous commitment occurs when expenditure in respect of the construction is first incurred.
Therefore, the context indicates that it is only expenditure that evidences a commitment to proceed with the construction which is covered by the expression expenditure 'in respect of' construction. Expenditure that falls short of evidencing this commitment because it is incurred before there is a definite decision to proceed with the construction, or expenditure that only has a remote or tenuous connection with the construction of an asset will not signify the investment commitment time. Having regard to the context of the investment commitment rules, expenditure of this type does not exhibit the material or relevant connection with the construction for it to qualify as being 'in respect of' the construction. Accordingly, it will not be expenditure that triggers the investment commitment time in relation to an asset.
This interpretation of the intended reach of the expression 'in respect of' is confirmed by examples 1.16 and 1.18 of the EM. In example 1.16 the company's directors sign off a decision to proceed with the construction of new transmission power lines and the company then incurs expenditure by ordering materials required for the construction. In example 1.18 the company starts to order some of the materials it needs to construct a new conveyor belt although work on the physical construction of the asset does not commence for a few weeks.
The examples show that 'expenditure in respect of construction' is intended to cover not just the expenditure incurred directly on the actual construction activities, but also expenditure incurred at an earlier time that evidences a commitment to future construction. They highlight that incurring expenditure on the materials has the necessary material and relevant connection with the construction of the asset. In both situations, it can be seen that there was a decision to construct the new asset and the incurrence of the expenditure on materials objectively verifies the making of the commitment. Accordingly, the expenditure signifies the investment commitment time in relation to the particular assets. As the EM notes at paragraph 1.108, the test for self-constructed assets in requiring the incurrence of expenditure in respect of the construction, is both 'objective and verifiable'. In this sense it is analogous to entering into a contract to purchase an asset.
In the present case, the taxpayer has made a decision to commit to the construction of particular assets. At the same time, the taxpayer incurs expenditure on labour or materials that is included in the first element of the assets' cost. The expenditure on labour or materials has the necessary material and relevant connection with the construction of the assets. The incurrence of the expenditure objectively verifies the making of the taxpayer's commitment to the construction. Therefore, the expenditure is 'expenditure in respect of the construction' of the assets for the purposes of subsection 41-25(3A).

Note: At the time the taxpayer first incurs expenditure in respect of the construction of the assets, the taxpayer is treated as having started to construct the particular assets under subsection 41-25(3A). It follows that this is the investment commitment time for the purposes of subparagraph 41-25(1)(a)(ii).

Date of decision:
  12 October 2009

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2009 Year ended 30 June 2010 Year ended 30 June 2011

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   Division 41   paragraph 41-20(1)(b)   paragraph 41-25(1)(a)   subparagraph 41-25(1)(a)(ii)   subsection 41-25(3A)   subsection 43-70(1)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   subsection 82AB(1)

Case References:

FC of T v Tully Co-operative Sugar Milling Association Limited   83 ATC 4495   (1983) 14 ATR 495

Workers Compensation Board (Q) v Technical Products Pty. Ltd.   (1988) 165 CLR 642   [1988] HCA 49

Technical Products v State Government Insurance Office (Qld)   (1989) 167 CLR 45   [1989] HCA 24

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling TR 97/25
Taxation Ruling IT 2142

Other References:

 Revised Explanatory Memorandum to the Tax Laws Amendment (Small Business and General Business Tax Break) Bill 2009

Keywords

Capital Allowances CoE
 Investment allowances

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  23 October 2009

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
12 October 2009
Original statement

You are here
24 October 2014
Archived