ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/689
================================================== Fringe Benefits Tax Exempt benefits: work related preventative health care - meaning of 'on behalf of a legally qualified medical practitioner' This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Where an employer engages a masseuse on the recommendation of a legally qualified medical practitioner, is the masseuse providing any form of care 'on behalf of a legally qualified medical practitioner' for the purposes of the definition of 'work related preventative health care' under subsection 136(1) of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 (FBTAA)?
Decision
No. The masseuse is not providing any form of care 'on behalf of a legally qualified medical practitioner' for the purposes of the definition of work related preventative health care.
Facts
The advice of a legally qualified medical practitioner was sought by the employer in order to determine what action should be taken in respect of employees whose health was suffering because of their work environment.
After examining the work environment and the nature of the illnesses and injuries being suffered by the employees, the legally qualified medical practitioner made a recommendation to the employer concerning the type of treatment that would reduce or prevent illness and injury of the employees.
Based on that recommendation, the employer engaged the services of a masseuse.
The masseuse does not report to the legally qualified medical practitioner.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 58M(1) of the FBTAA provides that benefits relating to the 'work-related preventative health care' of an employee are exempt benefits.
For health care to be 'work-related preventative health care' as defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA the care must be provided by, or on behalf of, a legally qualified medical practitioner, nurse, dentist or optometrist in order to prevent the employees from suffering injuries or illnesses relating to their employment. The form of care must be made available to all employees with similar work-related risks.
When health care is not provided directly by a legally qualified medical practitioner, nurse, dentist or optometrist, the care must be provided 'on behalf of' such a qualified person.
The phrase 'on behalf of' is not defined for the purposes of the FBTAA. The Australian Oxford Dictionary, 1999, Oxford University Press, Melbourne defines the term 'behalf' or 'on behalf of' as behalf n. on behalf of (or on a person's behalf ) 1 in the interests of (a person, principle, etc.). 2 as representative of (acting on behalf of my client). In Cuthbertson & Richards Sawmills v. Thomas (1999) 93 FCR 141 the meaning of the phrase 'on behalf of' was discussed. It was stated that the phrase does not have a strict legal meaning. The court referred to R v. Toohey; Ex parte Attorney General (N.T.) (1980) 145 CLR 374 at 386 where Stephen, Mason, Murphy and Aickin JJ referred to the phrase in these terms: ...it bears no single and constant significance. Instead it may be used in conjunction with a wide range of relationships, all however, in some way concerned with the standing of one person as auxiliary to or representative of another person or thing. ...Context will always determine to which of the many possible relationships the phrase "on behalf of" is in a particular case being applied; "the context and subject matter" (per Dixon J in R v. Portus; Ex parte Federated Clerks Union (1949) 79 CLR 428) will be determinative. In the present case, the phrase 'on behalf of' requires a relationship between the two parties such that one party is acting in place of or as representative of the other.
The masseuse is not acting in the place of or as a representative of the legally qualified medical practitioner. The health care provided by the masseuse is not provided by, or on behalf of, the legally qualified medical practitioner.
As a result, the health care services provided by the masseuse are not 'work related preventative health care' for the purposes of the definition in s 136(1) of the FBTAA and are not exempt benefits under section 58M (1). Amendment History Date of Amendment
Part
Comment 1 May 2026
Business line
Updated to correct business line 1 May 2026
Date reviewed
Updated review date 1 May 2026
Reasons for decision
Punctuation Date of decision: 19 March 2003 Year of income: Year ended 31 March 2001 Legislative References: Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 subsection 58M(1) subsection 136(1) Case References: Cuthbertson & Richards Sawmills v. Thomas (1999) 93 FCR 141 R v. Toohey; Ex parte Attorney General (N.T.) (1980) 145 CLR 374 R v. Portus; Ex Parte Federated Clerks Union (1949) 79 CLR 428 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2002/963 Other References: Australian Oxford Dictionary, 1999, Oxford University Press, Melbourne Keywords Fringe benefits Exempt benefits FBT work related preventative health care FBT health care Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 414641; 1-62U83T9; 1-CANCRGK Business Line: Superannuation and Employer Obligations Date of publication: 8 August 2003 Date reviewed: 16 April 2026 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 19 March 2003
Original statement You are here 1 May 2026
Updated statement