ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/896
================================================== Excise Excise - Payments - Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme - Travel in metropolitan area by buses on an advertised charter or scheduled service. FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 which was repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Does a charter bus itinerary constitute an eligible journey for the purposes of section 10 of the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 (DAFGS Act), where the bus: • starts outside the metropolitan area, moves into the metropolitan area, drops passengers off and travels to a depot for a short period of time; and then
• leaves the depot, picks up the passengers, continues its advertised charter through the metropolitan area, and returns to the start point outside the metropolitan area? Decision
The proposed charter bus itinerary constitutes two separate eligible journeys for the purposes of section 10 of the DAFGS Act.
Facts
The applicant operates a charter bus enterprise. The requirements of subsection 10(1) of the DAFGS Act are satisfied in respect of the relevant bus.
The bus is operated on an advertised day charter service. The charter starts outside the metropolitan area and travels into the metropolitan area. At the first stop of the charter the passengers temporarily leave the bus. As the bus cannot wait at the first drop-off point, it travels to a depot where it waits for a few hours. The bus then returns to the point at which the passengers left the bus, and they reboard the bus.
The bus then continues its advertised charter through the metropolitan area, and returns to the start point outside the metropolitan area.
Reasons For Decision
An entity is entitled to a fuel grant under section 10 of the DAFGS Act only to the extent that the entity uses the diesel fuel in carrying on an enterprise on a public road in Australia on a journey: • between a point outside the metropolitan area and another point outside the metropolitan area; or
• between a point outside the metropolitan area and a point inside a metropolitan area; or
• between a point inside a metropolitan area and a point outside the metropolitan area; or
• between different metropolitan areas. Section 10 of the DAFGS Act must be read in conjunction with the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme (Journeys) Determination 2000 (Journeys Determination) made under subsections 10A(1) and 10A(2) of the Act.
Part 5 of the Journeys Determination deals with buses on an advertised charter. It states: '1) The operation of a bus on an advertised charter or scheduled service, is not taken to be a journey if: a) the route start and route end are inside the same metropolitan area; and
b) the route of the service does not extend beyond that metropolitan area. 2) The operation of a bus, on an advertised charter or scheduled service, is taken to be a journey in its own right if it is not described in subsection (1).' Part 2 of the Journeys Determination explains the concept of a 'point'. Part 2.1 (3) relevantly identifies each of the following as a point: • A depot or garage from which the vehicle leaves, or at which the vehicle arrives;
• A place (a route start) that is the starting point of the route of an advertised charter or scheduled bus service; and
• A place (a route end) that is the end point of the route of an advertised charter or scheduled bus service. Part 2.1 (4) of the Journeys Determination identifies places that are not points. It states that a place at which a passenger boards or leaves a bus on an advertised charter or scheduled service is not a point.
In this case, the effect of Part 2 and Part 5 of the Journeys Determination is that the route start and route end are the country town where the day charter begins and ends. The bus has made two separate eligible journeys: • from a point outside the metropolitan area (the route start at a country town) to a point inside the metropolitan area (the depot); and
• from a point inside the metropolitan area (the depot) to a point outside the metropolitan area (the route end). Date of decision: 29 May 2002 Legislative References: Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 section 10 Other References: Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme (Journeys) Determination 2000 Part 2 Part 5 Keywords Excise Journeys - bus Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 29 May 2002 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 29 May 2002
Original statement You are here
16 April 2010
Archived