ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/173
==================================================

Income Tax
 Borrowing Expenses - Lenders Mortgage Insurance - Loan Refinanced
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn because the ATO view on this issue is included in Rental properties 2016 under the heading
 Expenses deductible over a number of income years
 .

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is a deduction allowable under section 25-25 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) for all of the undeducted premium paid for lenders mortgage insurance when the taxpayer has refinanced a loan on a rental property and the policy is no longer required?
Decision
Yes. A deduction is allowable under section 25-25 of the ITAA 1997 for all of the undeducted premium paid for lenders mortgage insurance when the taxpayer has refinanced a loan on a rental property and the policy is no longer required.
Facts
The taxpayer acquired a rental property and obtained a loan to finance the property at the time of purchase. The term of the loan was 17 years.
In order to secure the loan the taxpayer paid the lenders mortgage insurance which exceeded $100.
The taxpayer claimed a borrowing expense deduction for the lenders mortgage insurance in the first 2 years of the loan.
In the third year, the taxpayer refinanced the loan and did not pay for lenders mortgage insurance on the new loan.
Reasons for Decision
Lenders mortgage insurance protects the lender from loss in the event that the borrower defaults on the loan. In the situation where an insurance claim is made, the proceeds are applied to the loan. The insurance does not protect the taxpayer's capacity to earn income from the asset. The lenders mortgage insurance premium is a one off payment prior to the asset becoming income producing and is to protect the lender from loss.
Section 25-25 of the ITAA 1997 provides that a taxpayer can deduct expenditure incurred in borrowing money to the extent that those funds are used for the purpose of producing assessable income. Lenders mortgage insurance together with other borrowing expenses incurred (for example, loan establishment fees, stamp duty on the mortgage contract, broker's commission, underwriter's fees) are borrowing costs to which section 25-25 of the ITAA 1997 would apply.
Where the amount of the borrowing expenses exceeds $100 and the period of the loan is greater than 5 years, section 25-25 of the ITAA 1997 provides that the deduction for the borrowing expenses is apportioned over 5 years starting from the day the loan begins. When calculating the deductible amount in each of the income years, the remaining expenditure is the amount of the borrowing expense reduced by the maximum amount that was deductible in earlier income years.
In each year of income that a taxpayer claims a borrowing expense, the period of the loan needs to be ascertained. In the situation where a loan contract exceeds 5 years and the loan is repaid within the first 5 years, paragraph 25-25(5)(b) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the period of the loan starts on the first day that the money was borrowed and ends on the day that the loan was repaid. In applying the formula for calculating the maximum deduction available to a taxpayer under subsection 25-25(4) of the ITAA 1997, all of the remaining expenditure will be deductible in the year that the loan is repaid.
The taxpayer is therefore entitled to claim a deduction for borrowing expenses for all of the remaining expenditure of the lenders mortgage insurance on the loan under section 25-25 of the ITAA 1997 in the year that the loan was repaid.
Amendment History

Date of amendment
Part
Comment

6 June 2014
Related ATO Interpretative Decisions
Correcting an error in citing a related ATOID that has now been withdrawn.

Reasons for Decision
Correcting a minor grammatical error.

Date of decision:
  23 August 2001

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2001

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   section 25-25   subsection 25-25(4)   paragraph 25-25(5)(b)

Keywords

Rental expenses
 Expenses of borrowing
 Mortgages
 Mortgage expenses
 Insurance expenses

Business Line:
  Small Business/Individual Taxpayers

Date of publication:
  22 February 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
23 August 2001
Original statement

 
 6 June 2014
Updated statement

You are here
 8 July 2016
Archived