ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/577
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and supply of software by a non-resident to a Australian resident customer via e-mail FOI status: may be released With effect from 1 July 2015, the term 'Australia' is replaced in nearly all instances within the GST, Luxury Car Tax and Wine Equalisation Tax legislation with the term 'indirect tax zone' by the Treasury Legislation Amendment (Repeal Day) Act 2015. The scope of the new term, however, remains the same as the repealed definition of 'Australia' used in those Acts. For readability and other reasons, where the term 'Australia' is used in this document, it is referring to the 'indirect tax zone' as defined in subsection 195-1 of the GST Act. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a non-resident supplier of software, making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it supplies software to an Australian resident customer via e-mail?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it supplies software to an Australian resident customer via e-mail.
Facts
The entity is a non-resident supplier of software. The entity sells software to an Australian resident customer via e-mail from outside of Australia.
The entity has a permanent establishment with one employee in Australia. This employee has the responsibility to secure resellers of the software in Australia through promotional activities. After negotiation activities by the employee, the Australian resident customer places the purchase order directly with the entity and the entity makes the supplies to the Australian resident customer directly via e-mail. The employee in Australia does not handle any of the entity's products or invoicing activities. The entity receives payment directly from the Australian resident customer for the supply of the software.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Section 9-5 of the GST Act provides that a taxable supply is made where: • an entity makes the supply for consideration; and
• the supply is made in the course or furtherance of an enterprise that the entity carries on; and
• the supply is connected with Australia; and
• the entity is registered or required to be registered. However, the supply is not a taxable supply if it is GST-free or input taxed.
The entity sells software to the Australian resident customer in the course of an enterprise that it carries on. The entity receives payment directly from the Australian resident customer for the supply of the software. The entity is registered for GST. Therefore, the requirements in paragraphs 9-5(a), 9-5(b) and 9-5(d) of the GST Act are satisfied. Furthermore, the supply of software to the Australian resident customer is neither GST-free under Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. Accordingly, it needs to be determined whether the supply is connected with Australia (paragraph 9-5(c) of the GST Act).
Section 9-25 of the GST Act defines when a supply is connected with Australia. For the purposes of determining whether a supply is connected with Australia, section 9-25 of the GST Act makes a distinction between a supply of goods, a supply of real property and a supply of anything other than goods or real property.
As the supply of software via e-mail is not a supply of goods or real property, subsection 9-25(5) of the GST Act applies in determining whether the supply is connected with Australia.
Subsection 9-25(5) of the GST Act provides that a supply of anything other than goods or real property is connected with Australia if either: • the thing is done in Australia; or
• the supplier makes the supply through an enterprise that the supplier carries on in Australia. The entity supplies the software to the Australian customer via e-mail from outside of Australia. As such, the supply is not connected with Australia under paragraph 9-25(5)(a) of the GST Act. Therefore, it is necessary to determine whether the supply is connected with Australia under paragraph 9-25(5)(b) of the GST Act.
Under paragraph 9-25(5)(b) of the GST Act, a supply is connected with Australia if the supplier makes the supply through an enterprise that the supplier carries on in Australia.
Under subsection 9-25(6) of the GST Act, an entity carries on an enterprise in Australia if the enterprise is carried on through: • a permanent establishment (as defined in subsection 6(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936); or
• a place that would be such a permanent establishment if paragraphs (e), (f) or (g) of that definition did not apply. The entity has a permanent establishment in Australia. However, for a supply to be connected with Australia under paragraph 9-25(5)(b) of the GST Act, a connection must be established between the Australian permanent establishment and the supply (paragraph 84 of Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2000/31).
The permanent establishment has an employee in Australia. This employee has the responsibility to secure resellers of the software in Australia through promotional activities. Discussing the product and the addressing of potential buyers' concerns and needs constitute a substantial part of the supply of the software.
The fact that the orders are not specifically made and delivered through this employee does not necessarily mean that the supply does not satisfy paragraph 9-25(5)(b) of the GST Act. It is considered that the activities of the employee in Australia established a connection between the Australian permanent establishment and the supply.
Therefore, the entity is making the supply through an enterprise that it carries on in Australia and the supply is connected with Australia under paragraph 9-25(5)(b) of the GST Act.
As all the requirements in section 9-5 of the GST are satisfied, the entity is making a taxable supply when it supplies software to an Australian resident customer via e-mail.
Date of decision: 28 February 2001 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 9-5 paragraph 9-5(a) paragraph 9-5(b) paragraph 9-5(c) paragraph 9-5(d) subsection 9-25(5) paragraph 9-25(5)(a) paragraph 9-25(5)(b) subsection 9-25(6) Division 38 Division 40
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 subsection 6(1) Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) GSTR 2000/31 Keywords Goods & services tax Connected with Australia Taxable supply Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: CRS50121 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 15 November 2001 ISSN: 1445-2782