ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/10
================================================== Income Tax Australian source income: commodity purchase and sale FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn because, following legislative changes which became effective on 14 September 2006, it is no longer current for years of income happening on or after 30 June 2006. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions dealing with the application of section 42 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) occurring before that date. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is any profit derived by a non-resident company from commodity purchases from Australian resident companies, and from entering into commodity hedges with Australian counterparties, assessable in Australia, pursuant to section 42 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936)?
Decision
No. Any profit derived by the non-resident company from commodity purchases from Australian companies, and from entering into commodity hedges with Australian entities, is not assessable in Australia pursuant to section 42 of the ITAA 1936.
Facts
Company C is a subsidiary of a public company listed on the stock exchange of a foreign country. The group's main activity is the mining of a commodity. Company C is tax resident and incorporated outside of Australia, and is in the business of providing treasury activities for the group. It has a history of hedging the group members' production through the use of hedge contracts. In accordance with Company C's business practices, it can either buy the underlying commodity at the market price from its group member and deliver the commodity into the hedge contracts, or cash settle the commodity hedging contracts
The Australian entities sell their production of the commodity to Company C at the US dollar spot price determined by the London PM fix spot price for the commodity (this is the spot price as at 3:00pm London time). The commodity is processed in Australia. The commodity is the subject of a 'loco swap' whereby it will be credited to Company C's commodity account in London. Title to the commodity sold to Company C will pass in Australia. The Australian entities may transport raw material to overseas countries where it will be sold to Company C with title passing in that country. Company C will then have the raw material refined to commercial specifications. Company C will pay the Australian entities the spot price for the commodity, less refining costs.
Company C most commonly employs a type of forward contract known as a 'spot deferred contract' which permits Company C to 'roll' the contract forward to a subsequent delivery date. Only Company C has the right to 'roll' the contract forward and reset the delivery date. If Company C chooses to close out the contract, the counterparty must satisfy the contract and pay the contract price at the time.
Company C has two options to close out forward sale contracts. It can buy from Australian entities the necessary commodity and deliver that to the counterparty ('physical closeout') or it can purchase in the market an equivalent amount of the commodity at the spot price ('financial closeout').
For physical closeouts, the company will purchase the commodity from Australian entities at the spot price.
The gain or loss from the closeout of the contract will be the difference between the contract price received by the company, and the spot price paid by the company multiplied by the number of units of the commodity involved.
Company C does not have any presence in Australia. It does not: • render any services for or on behalf of Australian entities
• receive any fee income from Australian entities
• engage any dependant or independent agents in Australia; nor
• maintain a fixed office or place of business in Australia. Company C enters into forward sale contracts with four unrelated parties, all merchant banks.
Typically, the forward sales are made under the framework of a Master Trading Agreement between the merchant bank and Company C. The Master trading Agreement sets out the basic terms and conditions that will govern the forward contracts (each a 'transaction'). The process of entering into a transaction is generally completed on the telephone in a single call.
The Master Trading Agreement generally requires the merchant bank to provide to Company C a 'confirmation' confirming the terms of the transaction promptly following acceptance of the terms on the telephone. The confirmation constitutes a form of evidence of the terms of the transaction.
No part of the process involved in making forward sale contracts with any of the four merchant banks takes place in Australia. No personnel from Company C, or the merchant bank, who are involved in the transaction or confirmation, are located in Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) provides that the assessable income of a taxpayer who is not an Australian resident includes the ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all Australian sources during the income year.
Subdivision C of Division 2 of Part III of ITAA 1936 is concerned with business carried on partly in and partly out of Australia. The Subdivision taxes manufacturers and merchants on the deemed Australian profit from sales of goods imported into, or exported out of Australia, if they were instrumental in selling those goods. Section 38 of the ITAA 1936 deals with sales by manufacturers and section 39 of the ITAA 1936 deals with merchants.
Section 42 of the ITAA 1936 gives the Commissioner discretion to apportion profit derived from sales not covered by sections 38 and 39 of the ITAA 1936, if the Commissioner believes that the whole or any part of the profit has been derived by a person from sources in Australia. Section 42 reads as follows: Section 42 42 In any case, not specified in the preceding sections of this subdivision, where- (a) by reason of the manufacture, production, or purchase of goods in one country and their sale in another
(b) by reason of successive steps of production or manufacture in different countries; or
(c) by reason of the making of contracts in one country and their performance in another, or for any other reason whatever, a question arises whether the whole or any part (and, if a part, what part) of any profit is derived by a person from sources in Australia, the question shall be determined in accordance with the regulations, or if there is no regulation applying to the case, shall be determined by the Commissioner. [emphasis added] Paragraphs (a) and (b) of the section do not apply to the present case. It could be argued that paragraph (c) could apply. However, the latter wording of the section is the part of the section which is most likely to have application to this case. Section 42 of the ITAA 1936 is worded widely enough to apply to the commodity transactions entered into by Company C. As no regulations currently exist which relate to the latter part of the section, the Commissioner must determine how much of the profits under consideration have an Australian source.
There are no statutory source rules which can apply to the income derived by Company C from entering into commodity forward contracts. Source is a 'practical hard matter of fact' - Nathan v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1918) 25 CLR 183 - and can only be determined by considering all the facts surrounding the derivation of the income.
The case law on the allocation of source has considered the following kinds of transactions • the buying and selling of goods
• the manufacture and sale of goods
• the buying and selling of land
• the buying and selling of shares, and
• the provision of services. In order to determine how to allocate profit to a particular source, it is first necessary to determine all the processes which contribute to the earning of the profit and determine the relative importance of each factor in earning the profit - Commissioner of Taxation (NSW) v. Kirk [1900] AC 588, Thorpe Nominees Pty Limited v. FC of T 88 ATC 4886; (1988) 19 ATR 1834.
Where, as in this case, the business is one of buying and selling goods, the relevant processes which contribute to the earning of the profit are the making of contracts for the purchase and sale of the goods - Michell v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1927) 46 CLR 413.
In such cases, it may be that more weight should be put on the contract for sale than the contract for purchase if the purchase does not give any added value to the goods which were purchased. Although the skill and judgement exercised in the purchase (and presumably sale) of the goods contributes to the profits, they are immaterial in determining the source, since the question is not why but where the profits were made - D & W Murray Limited v. Commissioner of Taxation (WA) (1929) 42 CLR 332.
In Company C's case there is no value added to the commodity in the purchase process. Company C purchases the commodity from Australian companies at prevailing spot prices. It is difficult to see how this purchase can give any added value. The commodity purchased is fully priced and could not be sold in the spot market for any more than the purchase price. This was enough for the judges in to Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. W Angliss & Co Pty Limited (1931) 46 CLR 417 to hold that all the profit came from the sale element of the whole transaction.
When the contract for sale process is examined, the transaction can be seen to occur in a number of steps, in different locations: 1.Company C enters into a forward sale agreement with a counterparty (an arms length merchant bank).All negotiations and decisions to enter into forward sales agreements are taken outside Australia. The forward sales agreements are made outside Australia.
2.Company C acquires the commodity from companies resident in Australia.The contract for acquisition of the commodity by Company C from the resident companies is made in Australia. Title to the commodity passes in Australia. In the case of sales of the raw material, title passes outside Australia.
3.Company C pays the resident companies for the commodity it buys.The resident companies are paid for the commodity into their Australian bank accounts.
4.Company C delivers the commodity to the counterparty.The commodity is delivered to the counterparty outside of Australia. Title passes outside Australia.
5.Company C is paid for the commodity it delivers.Company C is paid outside Australia. Of all of these, the only factors that could give rise to an Australian source are those related to the purchase of the commodity by Company C (steps 2 and 3).
However, the skill or 'value added' that Company C brings is in using their trading expertise in obtaining the best sale price for the commodity they purchase. They also use their capital and assume the risks of the transaction. Therefore, it is logical that the profit from the transaction should be wholly sourced to the factors that relate to the sale rather than the purchase.
As all the factors relating to the sale of the commodity take place outside Australia, it follows that the source of the profit from the sale of the commodity is not Australia. Therefore any profit derived is not assessable in Australia pursuant to section 42 of the ITAA 1936.
Date of decision: 8 October 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2003 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subsection 6-5(3)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 section 38 section 39 section 42 Case References: Nathan v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1918) 25 CLR 183 Thorpe Nominees Pty Ltd v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation 88 ATC 4886 (1988) 19 ATR 1834 Commissioner of Taxation (NSW) v. Kirk [1900] AC 588 Michell v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1927) 46 CLR 413 D & W Murray Limited v. Commissioner of Taxation (WA) (1929) 42 CLR 332 Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. W Angliss & Co Pty Limited (1931) 46 CLR 417 Keywords Foreign sourced income International tax Hedging Commodity transactions Forward contracts Business Line: Public Groups and International Date of publication: 9 January 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 8 October 2003
Original statement You are here
20 March 2008
Archived