ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/684
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and interest received on extended credit FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn, as it is no longer necessary. The ATO view expressed in this ATO ID is a straight application of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. Guidance on the view contained in this ATO ID can be found in GSTR 2002/2 GST treatment of financial supplies and related supplies and acquisitions. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a supplier of goods, making a financial supply that is input taxed under subsection 40-5(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it extends a customer's credit and receives interest?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a financial supply that is input taxed under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it extends a customer's credit and receives interest.
Facts
The entity is a supplier of goods in Australia and is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
When a customer is unable to obtain finance to purchase goods, the entity, as part of its enterprise, will provide credit beyond its usual 30 day trading terms. The customer pays an agreed amount of interest in addition to the monthly repayments for this period of extended credit. This interest component is not penalty interest for late payment.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act, a financial supply is input taxed. Subsection 40-5(2) of the GST Act provides that a financial supply has the meaning given by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations).
Subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations provides that the provision, acquisition or disposal of an interest mentioned in subregulation (3) or (4) is a financial supply if: •the provision, acquisition or disposal is: - for consideration; and
- in the course or furtherance of an enterprise; and
- connected with Australia; and •the supplier is: - registered or required to be registered for GST; and
- a financial supply provider in relation to the supply of the interest. Firstly, it is necessary to determine whether the entity is providing, acquiring or disposing of an interest in or under an item mentioned in subregulation 40-5.09(3) or (4) of the GST Regulations.
Item 2 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations (Item 2) lists 'a debt, credit arrangement or right to credit, including a letter of credit'. Under Part 2 of Schedule 7 of the GST Regulations, borrowing and lending, including establishing, maintaining and discharging loans are examples of financial supplies that are relevant to Item 2.
The entity is providing credit to a customer. This provision of an interest in a credit arrangement is covered by Item 2. The interest received from the customer represents consideration for the provision of this interest in the credit arrangement.
In addition, the provision of this interest is made in the course or furtherance of an enterprise, it is connected with Australia and the supplier, the entity, is registered for GST. Therefore, it is only necessary to determine if the supplier is a 'financial supply provider' in relation to the supply of the interest.
A financial supply provider is defined under subregulation 40-5.06(1) of the GST Regulations as an entity in relation to the supply of an interest that was: •immediately before the supply, the property of the entity; or
•created by the entity in making the supply. As the interest in the credit arrangement was created by the entity in making the supply, the entity is a financial supply provider in relation to that interest.
Therefore, as all of the requirements of subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations are satisfied, the provision of an interest in the credit arrangement by the entity is a financial supply.
As such, the entity is making a financial supply that is input taxed under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it extends a customer's credit and receives interest.
Date of decision: 9 October 2001 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 subsection 40-5(1) subsection 40-5(2)
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 subregulation 40-5.06(1) subregulation 40-5.09(1) subregulation 40-5.09(3) subregulation 40-5.09(3) table item 2 subregulation 40-5.09(4) Keywords Goods & services tax Input taxed supplies GST financial supplies Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: CW239695 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 30 November 2001 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 9 October 2001
Original statement You are here 5 May 2022
Archived