ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/442
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and wash basin accessories
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as it is a simple restatement of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a supplier of bathroom accessories, making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-45(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it supplies wash basin accessories that are specifically designed for people with a physical disability?
Decision
No, the entity is not making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-45(1) of the GST Act when it supplies wash basin accessories that are specifically designed for people with a physical disability. The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a supplier of bathroom accessories. The entity is supplying a range of bathroom accessories to accompany a wash basin that is specifically designed for people with a physical disability. The accessories include a magnetic soap holder, a tumbler holder and a soap dispenser frame. All of these accessories are also specifically designed for people with a physical disability.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision:
Under subsection 38-45(1) of the GST Act, the supply of a medical aid and appliance is GST-free where the medical aid or appliance:

•is covered by Schedule 3 to the GST Act or in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations);
•is specifically designed for people with an illness or disability; and
•is not widely used by people without an illness or disability.

Item 18 in the table in Schedule 3 to the GST Regulations (Item 18) lists 'customised modifications and accessories for the aids and appliances mentioned in items 111 to 121 of Schedule 3 to the GST Act'.
The entity is supplying accessories (a magnetic soap holder, a tumbler holder and a soap dispenser frame) for a wash basin. The wash basin, although specifically designed for people with a physical disability, is not covered by anything listed in items 111 to 121 in the table in Schedule 3 to the GST Act.
As such, the accessories for this wash basin, namely the magnetic soap holder, the tumbler holder and the soap dispenser frame, are not customised modifications and accessories covered by Item 18 despite the fact that these accessories are also specifically designed for people with a physical disability and are not widely used by people without a physical disability.
The first requirement of subsection 38-45(1) of the GST is not satisfied. Therefore, the entity is not making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-45(1) of the GST Act when it supplies wash basin accessories that are specifically designed for people with a physical disability.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under any of the other provisions in Division 38 of the GST Act not input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it supplies wash basin accessories that are specifically designed for people with a physical disability.
Date of decision:
  18 December 2001

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 9-5   Division 38   subsection 38-45(1)   Division 40   Schedule 3   Schedule 3 table item 111   Schedule 3 table item 112   Schedule 3 table item 113   Schedule 3 table item 114   Schedule 3 table item 115   Schedule 3 table item 116   Schedule 3 table item 117   Schedule 3 table item 118   Schedule 3 table item 119   Schedule 3 table item 120   Schedule 3 table item 121
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999   Schedule 3 table item 18

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 GST free
 GST health
 Section 38-45 - medical aids & appliances
 GST supplies & acquisitions
 Taxable supply

Business Line:
  GST

Date of publication:
  17 April 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
18 December 2001
Original statement

You are here
24 November 2006
Archived