ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/315
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and sale of land by the sheriff of a court FOI status: may be released With effect from 1 July 2015, the term 'Australia' is replaced in nearly all instances within the GST, Luxury Car Tax and Wine Equalisation Tax legislation with the term 'indirect tax zone' by the Treasury Legislation Amendment (Repeal Day) Act 2015. The scope of the new term, however, remains the same as the repealed definition of 'Australia' used in those Acts. For readability and other reasons, where the term 'Australia' is used in this document, it is referring to the 'indirect tax zone' as defined in subsection 195-1 of the GST Act. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a government department that employs the Sheriff of a court, making a taxable supply under either section 105-5 or section 9-5 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when, under an enforcement warrant, the Sheriff is required to sell the property of a debtor?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when, under an enforcement warrant, the Sheriff is required to sell the property of a debtor.
Facts
The entity is a government department. The entity is the employer of the Sheriff of a court.
A creditor has obtained a court judgment against a debtor. The debtor has failed to pay the judgment debt and the creditor has filed an enforcement warrant for the seizure and sale of property owned by the debtor. The court issued an enforcement warrant for the seizure of a vacant lot of land owned by the debtor. The vacant lot is in Australia.
The Sheriff of the court is now required to sell the debtor's property for consideration. The Sheriff is not acting as an agent of either the creditor or the debtor. The Sheriff is also not a representative as defined in section 195-1 of the GST Act as the Sheriff is not appointed or authorised to manage the affairs of the debtor because the debtor is unable to pay all debts as and when they become due and payable.
The sale of the debtor's property is made for consideration.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Section 105-5 of the GST Act provides that a supply made by a creditor in satisfaction of a debt is a taxable supply if: • an entity supplies the property of the debtor to a third party in satisfaction of a debt that the debtor owes to the entity, and
• the supply, to the third party, would be a taxable supply if the debtor had made the supply. The first requirement of section 105-5 of the GST Act is that an entity supplies the property of the debtor, to a third party, in satisfaction of a debt that the debtor owes to the entity.
A creditor has obtained a court judgment against a debtor. The debtor has failed to pay the judgment debt and the creditor has filed an enforcement warrant for the seizure and sale of property owned by the debtor resulting in the court issuing an enforcement warrant for the seizure of a vacant lot of land owned by the debtor.
In selling the debtor's property, the Sheriff is not acting as an agent of either the creditor or the debtor.
While the Sheriff is selling the debtor's property, to a third party, the judgment debt is not a debt owed to the Sheriff. The Sheriff's role is to enforce payment of the amount, which is due to the creditor under the judgment, by selling the land. The Sheriff is an employee of the entity. Therefore, the sale of the land is not in satisfaction of a debt that the debtor owes to the entity and as such, section 105-5 of the GST Act does not apply to the sale and the rules in Division 9 of the GST Act must be considered.
Under section 9-5 of the GST Act, an entity makes a taxable supply if: • it makes a supply for consideration
• the supply is made in the course or furtherance of an enterprise that it carries on
• the supply is connected with Australia, and
• the entity is registered or required to be registered for GST. The sale of the debtor's property is for consideration. The Sheriff is an employee of the government department and organising the sale of property in their capacity as Sheriff. The Sheriff is also not a representative under Division 147 of the GST Act. It follows that the entity, the government department, is supplying the land.
Section 9-20 of the GST Act defines enterprise to include an activity or series of activities done by the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory. Therefore, the entity is supplying the land in the course of an enterprise that it carries on.
The debtor's property is in Australia and the entity is registered for GST. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when, under an enforcement warrant, the Sheriff of a court is required to sell the property of a debtor. Note: The entity employs the Sheriff and as such, the actions of the Sheriff, as an employee, are performed on behalf of the entity. Date of decision: 18 June 2003 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 Division 9 section 9-5 section 9-20 Division 38 Division 40 section 105-5 Division 147 section 195-1 Keywords Goods and services tax GST supplies in satisfaction of debt GST supplies & acquisitions Taxable supply Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 3640791 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 8 April 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782