ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/290
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and a representative's liability for a supply made under a contingent agreement
 FOI status: may be released

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a representative of an incapacitated entity, liable for goods and services tax (GST) under section 9-40 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it completes the final condition of a contingent agreement that was made by the incapacitated entity?
Decision
No, the entity is not liable for GST under section 9-40 of the GST Act when it completes the final condition of a contingent agreement that was made by the incapacitated entity, as it is the incapacitated entity that makes the supply and is liable for GST.
Facts
The entity is a representative of an incapacitated entity.
The incapacitated entity owns several assets. Before the entity's appointment, the incapacitated entity entered into a contingent agreement with a purchaser to sell these assets. Under the terms of this agreement, the purchaser has had possession and use of the assets since the day the agreement was signed.
The terms of the agreement provide that title to the assets does not pass to the purchaser until two conditions are met, resulting in the agreement being completed. The first condition for the completion of the agreement is the sale of specified premises. This sale was completed before the entity was appointed. The second condition for the completion of the agreement is the release of the assets from a registered charge.
After the entity's appointment, the entity paid monies owed to the relevant finance companies. Following these payments, the charges were released. As the second condition under the terms of the agreement was met, the title to the assets was transferred to the purchaser, free of encumbrances. The purchaser paid the consideration due and a tax invoice was issued.
At the time of the entity's appointment, the incapacitated entity was registered for GST. The entity registered for GST, in its capacity as representative of the incapacitated entity, in accordance with the provisions of subsection 58-20(1) of the GST Act.
The supply of the assets satisfies the requirements of section 9-5 of the GST Act and is a taxable supply.
Reasons for Decision
Section 9-40 of the GST Act provides that an entity is liable for the GST payable on any taxable supply that it makes. Therefore, the entity is only liable to pay the GST if it is the entity that has made the supply.
The incapacitated entity entered into the contingent agreement to sell the assets before the entity's appointment. The incapacitated entity signed the agreement and made the assets available to the purchaser for possession and use on the same day. In addition, the incapacitated entity met the first condition of the agreement when it sold the premises prior to the appointment of the entity.
After the entity's appointment and as part of its professional duties, the entity engaged in actions on behalf of the incapacitated entity to ensure that the second condition (releasing the charge over the assets) was met and the original agreement was completed.
Under the terms of the agreement, the completion of the related transaction and the release of the charge, are prerequisites to title passing to the purchaser. The entity does not make the supply merely by ensuring that those prerequisites are satisfied. It was the incapacitated entity who did everything to effect the actual supply of the goods and as such, it is the incapacitated entity that makes the supply.
Therefore, the entity is not liable for GST under section 9-40 of the GST Act when it completes the final condition of a contingent agreement made by the incapacitated entity.

Note: The GST liability on a taxable supply that an incapacitated entity makes is still attributable to the incapacitated entity after the appointment of the representative. Where the representative is aware that a supply has not been accounted for by the incapacitated entity, the representative has a professional and legal responsibility to notify the Tax Office of an understatement in its proof of debt.

Amendment History

Date of amendment
Part
Comment

2 May 2014
Facts
Update reference to subsection 58-20(1), which replaced subsection 147-5(1).

Legislative References
Update reference to subsection 58-20(1), which replaced subsection 147-5(1).

Date of decision:
  29 July 2003

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 9-5   section 9-40   subsection 58-20(1)

Keywords

Goods and services tax
 GST special rules
 Representative of incapacitated entities
 GST supplies & acquisitions
 Taxable supply

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3663728

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  26 March 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
29 July 2003
Original statement

You are here
 2 May 2014
Updated statement