ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/587
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of honorarium received by a Canadian student visiting Australia
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the honorarium paid in Australia by an Australian University to the taxpayer, a resident of Canada, assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. The honorarium payment received by the taxpayer, a resident of Canada, from an Australian University is assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is a resident of Canada for income tax purposes and is not a resident of Australia for income tax purposes.
The taxpayer is a full time student undertaking a course of study in Canada.
As part of the course of study, the taxpayer accepted an invitation from the Australian University to fulfil a position as an occupational trainee in Australia.
The Australian University pays the taxpayer an honorarium to cover their living expenses.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a non-resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all Australian sources during the income year.
The honorarium received is ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining liability to Australian tax on income received by a non-resident, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1997 so that both Acts are read as one.
Schedule 3 to the Agreements Act contains the convention between Australia and Canada (the Canadian Convention). Schedule 3A of the Agreements Act contains the protocol amending the Canadian Convention (the Canadian Protocol). The Canadian Convention and Canadian Protocol operate to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and Canadian residents.
Article 15(1) of the Canadian Convention provides that remuneration derived by an individual who is a resident of Canada in respect of an employment shall be taxable only in Canada unless the employment is exercised in Australia. If the employment is exercised in Australia, any remuneration received may be taxable in Australia.
Article 15(1) of the Canadian Convention does not apply as there is no employer-employee relationship between the taxpayer and the Australian University with any entitlement for remuneration.
Article 20 of the Canadian Convention provides that payments received from sources outside Australia by a Canadian resident for the purposes of maintenance or education, while temporarily present in Australia solely for the purpose of education, are not taxable in Australia.
Even though the taxpayer is a full time student, Article 20 of the Canadian Convention will not apply as the payment is from an Australian University.
Article 21(2) of the Canadian Convention provides that items of income which are not specifically mentioned in the Canadian Convention that are received by a Canadian resident derived from sources in Australia, may be taxed in Australia and Canada.
The taxpayer receives an honorarium from an Australian source. There are no specific Articles in the Canadian Convention that deal with the honorarium payment. Therefore Article 21(2) of the Canadian Convention will apply. Accordingly, the honorarium payment may be taxed in Australia and Canada.
The honorarium payment received by the taxpayer, a resident of Canada, from an Australian University is assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision:
  16 June 2004

Year of income:
  30 June 2004

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 3, Article 15, paragraph (1)   Schedule 3, Article 20   Schedule 3, Article 21, paragraph (2)

Keywords

Canada
 Double tax agreements
 International tax
 Honoraria

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3941679

Business Line:
  Small Business/Individual Taxpayers

Date of publication:
  16 July 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782