ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/470
================================================== Income Tax Visiting academic from the United States - 3 month contract FOI status: may be released This document has been withdrawn as it was incorrectly published. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the remuneration you received from an Australian employer for services rendered in Australia exempt from income tax in Australia?
Decision
Is the remuneration you received from an Australian employer for services rendered in Australia exempt from income tax in Australia?
No.
Facts
You are a citizen of the United States of America.
You came to Australia to provide teaching and administrative services to an Australian employer at an Australian University.
You commenced your three-month teaching position in September.
You were present in Australia from August until December.
Reasons for Decision
A non-resident of Australia is liable to pay tax on income derived directly or indirectly from all Australian sources during the income year - subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (the ITAA 1997).
However, when determining liability to tax on Australian sourced income received by a non-resident, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Under domestic tax laws visiting employee remuneration is generally taxable in the country where the services are performed. However, teaching and research remuneration of visiting professors and teachers is usually exempt from tax in the country being visited provided the visit does not exceed two years.
Therefore, to establish whether the income you derived from a three-month teaching engagement undertaken in Australia is exempt from tax in Australia we must look at the double tax agreement between Australia and the United States of America (United States).
Schedule 2 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and the United States, (the United States Convention). The United States Convention operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and United States residents.
There is no specific article dealing with professors and teachers in the US Convention. Therefore, your liability to tax on your Australian sourced income is considered under the general provisions for dependant personal services in the double tax agreement.
Article 15 of the United States Convention provides that salary, wages and other similar remuneration derived by a United States resident shall be taxable only in the United States unless the employment is exercised in Australia. Where the employment is exercised in Australia then the income may be taxed in Australia.
This means that as a resident of the United States the income you derive from employment in Australia, may be taxed by both the United States and Australia.
The conditions under which the income in question will be exempt from tax in Australia are set out in article 15(2). There are three conditions, all of which must be satisfied for the exemption to apply. Those conditions are: 1.the recipient is present in Australia for a period or periods not exceeding in the aggregate 183 days in the income year ending 30 June;
2.the remuneration is paid by or on behalf of an employer or company who is not a resident of Australia; and
3.the remuneration is not deductible in determining the profits of an enterprise or permanent establishment that the employer has in Australia. In your case, your circumstances satisfy point 1 above, as you were not in Australia for more than 183 days. However, your circumstances do not satisfy point 2, as your employer is a resident of Australia. Therefore, the remuneration you received for performing teaching and administrative duties for an Australian resident employer in Australia is not exempt from Australian income tax. PAYG Withholding Employers are required to withhold an amount from payments of salary or wages made to non-resident employees for work undertaken in Australia. The amount to be withheld is worked out under the withholding schedules. These schedules can be obtained from the ATO by phoning 13 2866. Relief from double taxation Subparagraph (1)(a) of Article 22 deals with the relief of double taxation and provides that a credit for any tax paid in Australia will be allowed against United States tax payable on income from Australian sources.
In summary, the income you derived from your employment activities in Australia will be subject to tax in Australia under section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997. The Australian tax paid can be claimed as a credit against any United States tax payable.
Date of decision: 12 April 2002 Year of income: Year ending 30 June 2002 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 6-5 subsection 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953 section 15 section 22 Keywords Double tax agreements Non resident individuals United States Academic staff Individuals non business case reports Business Line: Small Business/Individual Taxpayers Date of publication: 17 April 2002 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 12 April 2002
Original statement You are here
24 June 2002
Archived