ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/643
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and supply of substantially renovated residential premises
 FOI status: may be released

Withdrawn. Information on this issue is found on the Property & Construction Issues Partnership - 15.5 - new residential premises - substantial renovations.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a property developer, making an input taxed supply under section 40-65 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it sells residential premises that have been substantially renovated?
Decision
No, the entity is not making an input taxed supply under section 40-65 of the GST Act when it sells residential premises that have been substantially renovated. The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a property developer. The entity purchased residential premises and substantially renovated it after 2 December 1998. The renovations are 'substantial renovations' as defined in section 195-1 of the GST Act.
The entity is now selling the substantially renovated residential premises. Since the substantial renovations were carried out, the premise has not been used to make any input taxed supplies.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply satisfies the positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act and is not a GST-free supply under Division 38 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 40-65(1) of the GST Act states that a sale of real property is input taxed to the extent that it is residential premises to be used predominantly for residential accommodation. However, subsection 40-65(2) of the GST Act provides that the sale of such premises are not input taxed to the extent that they are:

•commercial residential premises; or
•new residential premises not used for residential accommodation before 2 December 1998.

The premises in question are not commercial residential premises. However, as it has not been used for residential accommodation in its current form before 2 December 1998, it may come within the definition of new residential premises, the supply of which is taxable where the requirements of section 9-5 of the GST Act are satisfied.
Subsection 40-75(1) of the GST Act provides that residential premises are new residential premises if they:

•have not previously been sold as residential premises and have not previously been the subject of a long-term lease;
•have been created through substantial renovations of a building; or
•have been built, or contain a building that has been built, to replace demolished premises on the same land.

The entity is selling residential premises that have been created through substantial renovations of a building. Accordingly, the residential premises in question satisfies the positive limb of the definition of new residential premises in subsection 40-75(1) of the GST Act.
However, the negative limb of the definition contained in subsection 40-75(2) of the GST Act, provides that premises are not new residential premises if, for the period of at least five years since the premises were last substantially renovated, the premises have only been used for making supplies that are input taxed because of paragraph 40-35(1)(a) of the GST Act.
The premises have not been used to make any input taxed supplies. Therefore, subsection 40-75(2) of the GST Act does not prevent the premises from being new residential premises. Accordingly, the entity is making a supply of new residential premises as defined in section 40-75 of the GST Act.
As the entity is supplying new residential premises that have not been used for residential accommodation in its current form prior to 2 December 1998, it is not making an input taxed supply under section 40-65 of the GST Act.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply meets all of the positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under any of the other provisions in Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply of new residential premises under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Date of decision:
  27 September 2001

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 9-5   Division 38   Division 40   paragraph 40-35(1)(a)   subsection 40-65(1)   subsection 40-65(2)   subsection 40-75(1)   subsection 40-75(2)

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2001/642

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 GST property & construction
 GST new residential premises
 GST residential premises
 GST sale of real property
 GST substantial renovations
 GST supplies & acquisitions
 Taxable supply
 Input taxed supplies

Business Line:
  Goods & Services Tax

Date of publication:
  29 November 2001

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
27 September 2001
Original statement

You are here
 9 December 2005
Archived