ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/132
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and assessment of prior learning by a registered training organisation FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn on the basis that it is a straight application of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a registered training organisation, making a GST-free supply under section 38-110 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it assesses the qualifications of a person for the purpose of that person gaining access to an education course?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply under section 38-110 of GST Act when it assesses the qualifications of a person for the purpose of that person gaining access to an education course.
Facts
The entity is a registered training organisation. The entity supplies a service of assessing the qualifications held by a person or conducting a test to assess a person's knowledge and skills.
The purpose of the assessment is for the person to gain access to an education course.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
A supply is GST-free under subsection 38-110(1) of the GST Act when the supply is the assessment or issue of qualifications for the purpose of: • access to education
• membership of a professional or trade association
• registration or licensing for a particular occupation, or
• employment. The entity supplies a service of assessing the qualifications held by a person or conducting a test to assess a person's knowledge and skills. The entity's assessment is for the purpose of the person gaining access to an education course. As such, the supply satisfies the requirements in subsection 38-110(1) of the GST Act.
However, subsection 38-110(2) of the GST Act provides that a supply is not GST-free under subsection 38-110(1) of the GST Act unless the supply is carried out by: • a professional or trade association
• an education institution
• an entity that is registered by a training recognition authority of a State or Territory in accordance with the Australian Recognition Framework to provide skill recognition (assessment only) services
• an authority of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory, or
• a local government body. The entity is a registered training organisation. The term 'education institution' is defined by section 195-1 of the GST Act to have the meaning given by subsection 3(1) of the Student Assistance Act 1973.
Subsection 3(1) of the Student Assistance Act provides that an education institution means: (a) a higher education institution
(b) a technical and further education institution
(c) a secondary school or
(d) any other institution (including an educational institution), authority or body, that is in Australia and that, in accordance with a determination by the Minister, is to be regarded as an education institution for the purposes of this Act. Subsection 5(2) of the Determination No. 2002/1 - Determination of Education Institutions and Courses under subsections 3(1) and 5D(1) of the Student Assistance Act 1973 (Education Minister's Determination) lists the institutions, authorities or bodies that are to be regarded as education institutions. Registered training organisations are listed and therefore regarded as education institutions.
The entity is a registered training organisation and as such, is an education institution for the purposes of subsection 38-110(2) of the GST Act. The entity's supply is not excluded from being GST-free by subsection 38-110(2) of the GST Act.
Accordingly, the entity is making a GST-free supply under section 38-110 of the GST Act when it assesses the qualifications of a person for the purpose of that person gaining access to an education course. Note: A registered training organisation is an organisation that is registered by the relevant State or Territory training recognition authority in accordance with the Australian Quality Training Framework to provide one or more vocational education and training programmes. Date of decision: 1 January 2003 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 38-110 subsection 38-110(1) subsection 38-110(2)
Student Assistance Act 1973 subsection 3(1) Other References: Determination No. 2002/1 - Determination of Education Institutions and Courses under subsections 3(1) and 5D(1) of the Student Assistance Act 1973 Keywords Goods and services tax GST free GST education Recognition of prior learning Business Line: GST Date of publication: 13 February 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 1 January 2003
Original statement You are here
10 February 2006
Archived