ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2007/102
================================================== Income Tax Assessability of income derived by a resident of Finland from providing services in Australia as a contractor FOI status: may be released This ATO Interpretative Decision has been withdrawn from the database as the position stated in this ATO ID does not apply from 10 November 2007, because a new treaty with Finland has entered into force. This ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions up to and including 9 November 2007. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is income derived by a resident of Finland from providing services in Australia in the fishing industry, assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. Income derived by a resident of Finland from providing services in Australia in the fishing industry is not assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997).
Facts
The taxpayer is an individual who is a resident of Finland and is not an Australian resident for income tax purposes.
The taxpayer provides service as a contractor to an Australian company in respect of fish handling. The income is sourced from Australia.
The taxpayer is in Australia for four months and does not have a fixed base or permanent establishment in Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a non-resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly and indirectly from all Australian sources during the income year. The taxpayer derived personal exertion income that is sourced from Australia. Accordingly subsection 6-5(3) applies.
In determining liability to Australian tax it is necessary to consider any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (Agreements Act). Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. Schedule 25 of the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and Finland and the Protocol to that Agreement (Finnish Agreement).
Article 14(1) of the Finnish Agreement gives the country of residence the right to tax income from professional services or other independent activities of a similar character unless the income is attributable to a fixed base in the other country.
Article 14(2) of the Finnish Agreement defines the term 'professional services' as including independent scientific, literary, artistic, educational or teaching activities, as well as the independent activities of physicians, lawyers, engineers, architects, dentists and accountants.
This is an inclusive definition and is not limited to the specific examples provided. Moreover, as the Article also applies to 'other independent activities of a similar character', its scope extends to activities that are of an 'independent' nature and which are similar in character to the professional services listed in Article 14(2) of the Finnish Agreement.
Activities are considered 'independent' for the purpose of Article 14 of the Finnish Agreement where they are provided outside a formal employment arrangement. This interpretation is consistent with the OECD Commentary (1997 Version) on Article 14 of the OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital which explained, at paragraph 1, that the Article did not apply to professional services performed in employment.
In the present case, the taxpayer provides the service as a contractor and is 'independent' for the purpose of Article 14 of the Finnish Agreement. However, the service must also be 'professional' or be an activity of a similar character. Fish handling services are not professional services nor are they similar in character to the professional services listed in Article 14(2) of the Finnish Agreement because they do not require specific qualifications or a high level of skill and experience to perform the relevant functions. Accordingly Article 14 does not apply to the taxpayer.
Article 7 of the Finnish Agreement deals with the allocation of taxing rights of the profits of an enterprise. In Thiel v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1990) 171 CLR 338; 90 ATC 4717; (1990) 21 ATR 531 the High Court held that an enterprise may consist of an activity or activities and be comprised of one or more transactions provided they were entered into for business or commercial purposes. The taxpayer's contract for services is a commercial arrangement and so is considered to be enterprise within the meaning of Article 7.
Article 7 of the Finnish Agreement gives the country of residence the right to tax the profits of an enterprise unless the profits are attributable to a permanent establishment in the country of source. In the present case, the taxpayer is a Finnish resident and does not have a permanent establishment in Australia.
Accordingly, Australia does not have the right to tax the income connected to the taxpayer's enterprise and the income will not be assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision: 9 March 2007 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2007 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subsection 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953 section 4 Schedule 25 Schedule 25, Article 7 Schedule 25, Article 14 Case References: Thiel v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1990) 171 CLR 338 90 ATC 4714 (1990) 21 ATR 531 Other References: OECD Commentary (1997 Version) on OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital Keywords Double tax agreements International tax Non resident individuals Permanent establishment Finland Business Line: International Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 18 May 2007 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 9 March 2007
Original statement You are here 3 October 2008
Archived