ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/538
================================================== Superannuation Superannuation contributions surcharge - surchargeable contributions for the member of constitutionally protected superannuation fund FOI status: may be released CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Was the superannuation contributions surcharge assessment for the member for the financial year correctly based on the surchargeable contributions reported by the superannuation provider, in accordance with the Superannuation Contributions Tax (Members of Constitutionally Protected Superannuation Funds) Assessment and Collection Act 1997 (SCT (CP) Act).
Decision
Yes. The superannuation contributions tax assessment for the member for the financial year was correctly based on the surchargeable contributions reported by the superannuation provider, in accordance with the Superannuation Contributions Tax (Members of Constitutionally Protected Superannuation Funds) Assessment and Collection Act 1997 (SCT(CP)A)?
Facts
The superannuation provider is a superannuation (unfunded defined benefits) provider and a constitutionally protected superannuation fund as defined by section 38 of the SCT(CP)A.
The superannuation provider reported to the Commissioner an amount of surchargeable contributions for the member for the financial year.
The Commissioner issued a superannuation contributions surcharge assessment to the member for the financial year.
The Commissioner calculated the member's adjusted taxable income for the financial year to include the total surchargeable contributions reported by the superannuation provider for the year.
Reasons for Decision
Under the provisions of the SCT(CP)A, constitutionally protected superannuation funds are certain superannuation providers which are listed in regulation 177 and schedule 14 to the Income Tax Regulations.
Section 12 of the SCT(CP)A and the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 requires constitutionally protected funds which are superannuation providers to report to the Commissioner after the end of the financial year statements in respect of each person who was a member of the fund including the member's surchargeable contributions.
Under subsection 9(4) of the SCT(CP)A the surchargeable contributions for a financial year for a member of defined benefits superannuation scheme are the amounts that constitute the actuarial value of the benefits that accrued to, and the value of the administration expenses and risk benefits provided in respect of, the member of the financial year. These amounts are calculated by using the formula provided in subsection 9(6) of the SCT(CP)A.
For each financial year in which a member has surchargeable contributions, section 14 of the SCT(CP)A requires the Commissioner to calculate the member's adjusted taxable income. Section 38 of the SCT(CP)A states that 'adjusted taxable income' has the same meaning as in the Superannuation Contributions Tax (Assessment And Collection) Act 1997. The adjusted taxable income includes the member's taxable income plus their surchargeable contributions for the financial year.
If the adjusted taxable income exceeds the surcharge threshold, the Commissioner must make an assessment of surcharge.
In the case of a constitutionally protected fund, the surcharge liability rests with the member (section 11 of the SCT(CP)A).
Under section 15 of the SCT(CP)A, the surcharge is payable at the time when the benefits become payable. Until such time, the Commissioner must keep a surcharge debt account to record any surcharge that is assessed for the member for each financial year. The Commissioner must also calculate interest on the balance of the member's surcharge debt account on 30 June each year. Interest is calculated at the 10 year Treasury bond rate.
The member may arrange for early payments on a voluntary basis towards their surcharge debt account at any time. The Commissioner is then required to credit the payment to the member's surcharge debt account.
The Commissioner received a statement from the provider in respect of the member for the financial year. The provider reported surchargeable contributions in respect of the member.
The surcharge assessment issued to the member was based on the surchargeable contributions as reported to the Commissioner.
If the provider reports a change to the surchargeable contributions previously reported, the Commissioner will re-calculate the member's adjusted taxable income. Under section 17 of the SCT(CP)A , the Commissioner may amend the assessments to take into account the change to the surchargeable contributions that were used to calculate the member's adjusted taxable income.
Date of decision: 1 August 2001 Legislative References: Superannuation Contributions Tax (Members Of Constitutionally Protected Superannuation Funds) Assessment And Collection Act 1997 subsection 9(4) subsection 9(6) section 12 section 14 section 15 section 38
Superannuation Contributions Tax (Assessment And Collection) Act 1997 section 19 section 43
Income Tax Regulations schedule 14 regulation 177
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 ITAA 1936 Keywords Defined benefit superannuation funds Adjusted taxable income Superannuation contributions surcharge Constitutionally protected superannuation funds Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: DW257586; 1-7R2YDDK; 1-FZRSRJG Business Line: Superannuation Date of publication: 26 October 2001 Date reviewed: 7 August 2018 ISSN: 1445-2782