ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/775
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of consultancy income received by a dual resident of Australia and the United States
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is consultancy income received by a taxpayer who is a dual resident of Australia and the United States (US) from independent personal services performed in Australia for a US organisation included in the taxpayer's assessable income under subsection 6-5(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. Consultancy income received by a taxpayer who is a dual resident of Australia and the US from independent personal services performed in Australia for a US organisation are included in the taxpayer's assessable income under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is a citizen of the US.
The taxpayer is a resident of Australia for taxation purposes.
The taxpayer is a resident of the US for taxation purposes.
The taxpayer is present in Australia for more than 183 days in the relevant Australian year of income.
The taxpayer maintains residences in Australia and the US which are available to the taxpayer at all times continuously.
The taxpayer spends time in Australia and the US during the year.
The taxpayer's personal and economic ties are predominantly in the US.
The taxpayer receives consultancy income from independent personal services performed for a US organisation.
The taxpayer is not an employee of the US organisation.
The taxpayer performs their services in Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of an Australian resident includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all sources, whether in or out of Australia, during the income year.
Consultancy fees are ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws, but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) and ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one.
Schedule 2 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax convention between Australia and the US (the US Convention). Schedule 2A to the Agreements Act contains the United States Protocol (the US Protocol). The US Convention and the US Protocol operate to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and US residents.
The US Protocol entered into force in Australia on 13 May 2003 and has effect in respect of income tax other than withholding taxes for any year of income beginning on or after 1 July 2004. For withholding taxes on dividends, interest and royalties, it has effect from 1 July 2003.
As the taxpayer is a dual resident of Australia and of the US, it is necessary to consider the tie breaker rules in the US Convention.
Article 4(2) of the US Convention sets out the tiebreaker rules for residency for individuals. The tiebreaker rules ensure that the individual is only treated as a resident of one country for the purposes of working out liability to tax on their income under the US Convention. The tiebreaker rules do not change a taxpayer's residency status for domestic law purposes.
Article 4(2) of the US Convention provides that if an individual is a resident of both Australia and US, they shall be deemed to be a resident of the State:

(a)in which they maintain a permanent home
(b)if the provisions of (a) do not apply, in which they have an habitual abode, or
(c)if the provisions of (a) and (b) do not apply, with which their personal and economic relations are closer.

Article 4(2) of the US Convention further provides that in determining an individual's permanent home, regard shall be given to the place where the individual dwells with their family, and in determining the country with which an individual's personal and economic relations are closer, regard shall be given to their citizenship (if the individual is a citizen of one of the countries).
The terms 'permanent home', 'habitual abode' and 'personal and economic relations' are otherwise undefined in the US Convention. Article 3(2) of the US Convention provides that any term not defined shall, unless the context otherwise requires, have the meaning which it has under the law relating to taxes of the country applying the US Convention.
Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13 discusses the Commissioner's views about interpreting double tax agreements. Paragraph 104 of TR 2001/13 provides that the OECD Model Tax Convention and Commentary will often need to be considered in interpreting double tax agreements.
The OECD Commentary provides that in relation to a 'permanent home':

(a)for a home to be permanent, an individual must have arranged and retained it for his or her permanent use as opposed to staying at a particular place under such conditions that it is evident that the stay is intended to be of short duration. The dwelling has to be available at all times continuously and not occasionally for the purposes of a stay, which owing to the reasons for it is necessarily of short duration (eg travel for pleasure, business travel, attending a course etc)
(b)any form of home may be taken into account, including a house or apartment belonging to or rented by the individual and a rented furnished room.

As the taxpayer maintains residences in both countries which are available at all times continuously for the taxpayer's permanent use, the taxpayer has a permanent home in Australia and in the US.
In relation to a habitual abode, the OECD Commentary provides that all stays in each country, regardless of the purpose for the stays, must be considered in order to assign a preference to a particular country. Further, the comparison must be made over a sufficient length of time for it to be possible to determine whether the residence in each country is habitual and to also determine the intervals at which the stays take place.
This is not simply a test of where a person stays more frequently but also looks to whether living in a particular country is normal or customary having regard to the taxpayer's circumstances.
As the taxpayer and the taxpayer's family spend time at their homes in Australia and the US as part of their usual pattern of activity, the taxpayer has a habitual abode in both countries.
In relation to a taxpayer's personal and economic relations, the OECD Commentary provides that regard should be had to factors such as family and social relations, occupation, political, cultural or other activities and place of business.
The taxpayer has personal and economic ties with Australia and the US. Coupled with the fact that the taxpayer is a US citizen, it is considered that the taxpayer's personal and economic ties are closer with the US than with Australia.
Accordingly, the taxpayer will be treated as a resident of the US for the purposes of applying the provisions of the US Convention.
Article 14(1) of the US Convention provides that income derived by an individual who is a resident of the US from the performance of personal services in an independent capacity shall be taxable only in the US unless such services are performed in Australia and:

(a)the individual is present in Australia for a period or periods aggregating more than 183 days in the Australian year of income, or
(b)the individual has a fixed base regularly available in Australia for the purpose of performing the activities, in which case so much of the income as is attributable to that fixed base may be taxed in Australia.

As the taxpayer performs the services in Australia and is present in Australia for more than 183 days in the Australian year of income, the income may be taxed in the US and in Australia.
Therefore, the consultancy income received by the taxpayer who is a resident of Australia and the US is assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.

Note: Article 27(1)(a) of the US Convention provides that the income has an Australian source. Article 22(1)(a) of the US Convention provides that the US shall allow a resident or citizen of the US as a credit against US tax the appropriate amount of income tax paid to Australia.

Date of decision:
  8 September 2004

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2005

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(2)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 2   Schedule 2, Article 3(2)   Schedule 2, Article 4(2)   Schedule 2, Article 14   Schedule 2, Article 22(1)(a)   Schedule 2, Article 27(1)(a)   Schedule 2A

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13

Other References:

OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital

Keywords

Consultancy fee income
 Double tax agreements
 International law
 Resident/residency
 Treaties
 United States

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3957292

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  24 September 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782