ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/676
================================================== Superannuation Trust - members fixed entitlement to all the income and capital of a superannuation fund. FOI status: may be released This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Do the members of the superannuation fund have fixed entitlements to all the income and capital of the fund under subsection 272-5(1) of Schedule 2F to the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936)?
Decision
No. The members of the superannuation do not have fixed entitlements to all the income and capital of the fund under subsection 272-5(1) of Schedule 2F to the ITAA 1936.
Facts
The superannuation fund is a complying superannuation fund with only two members, a husband and wife.
The directors of the trustee company of the superannuation fund are the husband and wife.
Under a clause of the superannuation fund trust deed there are conditions under which a member shall forfeit entitlement to any benefit entitlement and the trustee has discretion to pay or apply any amounts that have been forfeited and held in the forfeiture account.
When winding up the fund under a clause of the superannuation fund trust deed, the trustee may pay the following benefits in the following order to the extent that the assets of the fund permit: (i)Benefits to which members, former members or their dependants who have not been paid a benefit immediately prior to the termination date are entitled at the termination date;
(ii)the provision of additional benefits to members, former members and their dependants as the trustee in its absolute discretion considers appropriate;
(iii)payment to such of the employers of members or former members (if any) as have made contributions to the fund as the trustee in its absolute discretion considers appropriate PROVIDED THAT all procedures required by the relevant requirements have been complied with prior to any such payment being made. Reasons for Decision
Fixed entitlement to a share of income or capital is defined in subdivision 272-A of Schedule 2F to the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936). If, under a trust instrument, a beneficiary has a vested and indefeasible interest in a share of income of the trust that the trust derives from time to time, or of the capital of the trust, the beneficiary has a 'fixed entitlement' to that share of the income or capital.
The explanatory memorandum to the Taxation Laws Amendment (Trust Loss and Other Deductions) Bill 1997 in relation to the fixed entitlement to income or capital of a trust explains that: A person has a vested interest in something if the person has a present right relating to the thing. Stated simply, a vested interest is one that is bound to take effect in possession at some point in time. A vested interest is to be contrasted with a 'contingent' interest, which may never fall into possession. If an interest of a beneficiary in income or capital is the subject of a condition precedent, so that an event must occur before the interest becomes vested, the beneficiary does not have a vested interest to the income or capital since such an interest is instead 'contingent' upon the event occurring. Because vested interests include future interests, a person can have a vested interest in a thing even though the person's actual possession and enjoyment of the thing is delayed until some time in the future. A vested interest is indefeasible where, in effect, it is not able to be lost. A vested interest is defeasible where it is subject to a condition subsequent that may lead to the entitlement being divested. A condition subsequent is an event that could occur after the interest is vested that would result in the entitlement being defeated, for example, on the occurrence of an event or the exercise of a power. For example, where a beneficiary's vested interest is able to be taken away by the exercise of a power by the trustee or any other person, the interest will not be a fixed entitlement. Where the trustee exercises a power to accumulate income or capital of the trust in accordance with the trust deed, the accumulation does not result in a beneficiary's interest being taken away or defeased as long as the beneficiary nevertheless remains entitled at some future time to enjoy his or her share of the income or capital which has been accumulated. The members of the superannuation fund are not considered to have a vested and indefeasible interest in all of the income and capital of the fund as the trust deed provides for the following: • A member may forfeit entitlement to benefits under the fund in certain conditions.
• The trustee has a discretion with regard to the payment of forfeited entitlements.
• The trustee has discretion in applying excess funds after entitlements to members, former members or their dependants. Therefore, as the members of the superannuation fund do not have a vested and indefeasible interest in all the capital of the fund, they do not have a fixed entitlement to all the income and capital of the fund.
Amendment History Date of amendment
Part
Comment 20 June 2014
Issue and Decisions
Included legislative reference to subsection 272-5(1) of Schedule 2F to the ITAA 1936
Removed legislative reference to subsection 272-90(5) of Schedule 2F to the ITAA 1936 Reasons for Decision
Included reference to the explanatory memorandum to the Taxation Laws Amendment (Trust Loss and Other Deductions) Bill 1997 Legislative References
Included reference to subsection 272-5(1) of Schedule 2F to the ITAA 1936
Removed reference to subsection 272-90(5) of Schedule 2F to the ITAA 1936 Related ATO IDs
Removed reference to withdrawn ATO ID Other References
Included reference to the explanatory memorandum to the Taxation Laws Amendment (Trust Loss and Other Deductions) Bill 1997 Keywords
Removed and added keywords Date of decision: 1 May 2002 Year of income: Year ending 30 June 2002 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 Subdivision 272-A of Schedule 2F subsection 272-5(1) of Schedule 2F Other References: Explanatory memorandum to the Taxation Laws Amendment (Trust Loss and Other Deductions) Bill 1997 Keywords Trusts Superannuation funds Fixed entitlements Vested and indefeasible interest Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: DW355307; 1-5BRRTQW Business Line: Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals Date of publication: 3 July 2002 Date reviewed: 16 June 2017 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 1 May 2002
Original statement You are here
20 June 2014
Original statement