ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/724
================================================== Income Tax Section 160ZZOA exit provisions: eligible sub-group break up - later change to sub-group FOI status: may be released This ATO Interpretative Decision is a simple restatement of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is there a deemed disposal and reacquisition of an asset for market value under section 160ZZOA of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) if, subsequent to an eligible sub-group break-up as defined in paragraph 160ZZOA(2)(f) of the ITAA 1936, the company that transferred the asset, for which rollover was elected under section 160ZZO of the ITAA 1936, and the company that received the asset prior to the break-up cease to be members of the same wholly-owned group?
Decision
No. A deemed disposal and reacquisition of the asset for market value will not occur under section 160ZZOA of the ITAA 1936, as the company that received the asset under the rollover did not cease to be a wholly-owned subsidiary of the ultimate holding company of the group, at the time it ceased to be a member of the same wholly-owned group as the company that transferred the asset under the rollover.
Facts
On 29 and 30 June 1995, the Transferor Company sold assets to the Transferee Company. Rollover elections were made under section 160ZZO of the ITAA 1936 in relation to the disposals. The group structure was represented as: On 30 June 1995, the Ultimate Holding Company sold its shares in the Transferee Company to the Unit Trust. The group structure was then represented as: On 18 October 1995, the Transferee Company sold its shares in the Interposed Company to the Ultimate Holding Company. The group structure was then represented as: Reasons for Decision
Section 160ZZOA of the ITAA 1936 provides, in certain circumstances, for the deemed disposal and reacquisition for market value, of an asset for which rollover relief under section 160ZZO of the ITAA 1936 has been claimed in relation to an earlier disposal of the asset. The deemed disposal and reacquisition will occur if the company that received the asset under the rollover subsequently ceases to be a wholly-owned subsidiary of the company that was the ultimate holding company of the group at the time of the rollover.
An exception to the deemed disposal and reacquisition for market value rule applies if an 'eligible sub-group break-up', as defined in paragraph 160ZZOA(2)(f) of the ITAA 1936, occurs at the time the company that received the asset under the rollover ceases to be a wholly-owned subsidiary of the ultimate holding company.
The Transferee Company, being the company which received the assets under the rollover, ceased to be a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Ultimate Holding Company, being the ultimate holding company of the group at the time of the rollover, at the time its shares were acquired by the Unit Trust. However, a deemed disposal and reacquisition does not occur under section 160ZZOA of the ITAA 1936 at that time as the disposal of the shares constitutes 'an eligible sub-group break-up' in accordance with paragraph 160ZZOA(2)(f) of the ITAA 1936.
On disposal by the Transferee Company of shares in the Interposed Company back to the Ultimate Holding Company, the company that transferred the assets and the company that received the assets under the rollovers cease to be members of the same wholly-owned group. However, as the Transferee Company has already ceased to be a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Ultimate Holding Company, no deemed disposal and reacquisition for market value under section 160ZZOA can occur at that time.
Therefore, the break-up of the same wholly-owned group relationship between the Transferor Company and the Transferee Company subsequent to the eligible sub-group break-up will not result in the application of section 160ZZOA in relation to the rollover assets held by the Transferee Company.
Date of decision: 5 June 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 1996 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 section 160ZZOA paragraph 160ZZOA(2)(f) section 160ZZO Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2003/722 ATO ID 2003/723 Keywords Capital gains tax CGT companies in the same wholly-owned group CGT roll-over relief CGT same asset roll-over Group company transfers Business Line: Losses and CGT Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 15 August 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 5 June 2003
Original statement You are here
19 March 2010
Archived