ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/685
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and interest paid to a financial institution
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is a straight application of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a business operator, making a financial supply that is input taxed under subsection 40-5(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it acquires an overdraft facility from a financial institution and pays interest on that overdraft?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a financial supply that is input taxed under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it acquires an overdraft facility from a financial institution and pays interest on that overdraft.
Facts
The entity is a business operator in Australia. The entity has an overdraft facility with a financial institution. The entity pays interest to the financial institution for this overdraft facility.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
The financial institution is an Australian ADI (authorised deposit-taking institution). The financial institution is carrying on an enterprise of providing banking services in Australia and is registered for GST.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act, a financial supply is input taxed. Subsection 40-5(2) of the GST Act provides that a financial supply has the meaning given by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations).
Subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations provides that the provision, acquisition or disposal of an interest mentioned in subregulation (3) or (4) is a financial supply if:

•the provision, acquisition or disposal is:

- for consideration;
- in the course or furtherance of an enterprise;
- connected with Australia; and

•the supplier is:

- registered or required to be registered for GST; and
- a financial supply provider in relation to the supply of the interest.

Firstly, it is necessary to determine whether the entity is providing, acquiring or disposing of an interest in or under an item mentioned in subregulation 40-5.09(3) or (4) of the GST Regulations.
Item 1 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations (Item 1) lists:

'An account made available by an Australian ADI (authorised deposit taking institution) in the course of:
(a)its banking business within the meaning of the Banking Act 1959; or
(b)its State banking business'

Item 2 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations (Item 2) lists 'a debt, credit arrangement or right to credit, including a letter of credit'.
Schedule 7 of the GST Regulations provides examples of financial supplies for the purposes of Item 1 and Item 2. Under Part 1 of Schedule 7 to the GST Regulations, the operation of authorised overdraft facilities is an example of a financial supply for the purpose of Item 1.
Under Part 2 of Schedule 7 to the GST Regulations, borrowing and lending, including establishing, maintaining and discharging loans are examples of financial supplies for the purpose of Item 2.
The entity has an overdraft facility with a financial institution who is an Australian ADI (authorised deposit-taking institution). When the entity is provided with credit through an overdraft facility, there is the creation of an interest in a credit arrangement. This acquisition of an interest in a credit arrangement would be covered by Items 1 and 2. The interest paid by the entity would be consideration for the acquisition of an interest in the credit arrangement.
In addition, the acquisition of this interest is made in the course or furtherance of an enterprise, it is connected with Australia and the supplier is registered for GST. Therefore, it is only necessary to determine if the supplier is a 'financial supply provider' in relation to the supply of the interest.
A financial supply provider is defined under subregulation 40-5.06(1) of the GST Regulations as an entity in relation to the supply of an interest that was:

•immediately before the supply, the property of the entity; or
•created by the entity in making the supply.

As the interest in the credit arrangement was the property of the financial institution immediately before the supply, the financial institution is a financial supply provider in relation to that interest.
Therefore, as all of the requirements of subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations are satisfied, the acquisition of an interest in the credit arrangement by the entity is a financial supply.
As such, the entity is making a financial supply that is input taxed under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it acquires an overdraft facility from a financial institution and pays interest on the overdraft.
Date of decision:
  9 October 2001

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   subsection 40-5(1)   subsection 40-5(2)
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999   subregulation 40-5.06(1)   subregulation 40-5.09(1)   subregulation 40-5.09(3)   subregulation 40-5.09(3) table item 1   subregulation 40-5.09(3) table item 2   subregulation 40-5.09(4)

Other References:

Banking & Finance, Questions and Answers, FAQs on Bank Accounts, Number 24

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 Input taxed supplies
 GST financial supplies
 Accounts

Business Line:
  GST

Date of publication:
  30 November 2001

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 9 October 2001
Original statement

You are here
23 September 2005
Archived