ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/663
==================================================

Income Tax
 Income Tax: trading stock - surrender of land to State for boundary redescription
 FOI status: may be released

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Does a taxpayer who owns land held as trading stock dispose of trading stock outside the ordinary course of business for the purposes of section 70-90 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) when the taxpayer surrenders title to the land under State legislation, in order for the State to issue the taxpayer with a new title that redescribes the boundary of the land?
Decision
No. A taxpayer who owns land held as trading stock does not dispose of trading stock outside the ordinary course of business for the purposes of section 70-90 of the ITAA 1997, when the taxpayer surrenders the title to the land under State legislation, in order for the State to issue the taxpayer with a new title that redescribes the boundary of the land.
Facts
The taxpayer is a landowner that holds land as trading stock. The taxpayer's land boundaries comprise a combination of fixed line boundaries and a geographical feature. Works on the land were carried out. The boundary of the part of the land where the works were carried out is defined by the geographical feature. The works on the land disrupted the natural tidal flow and caused sand to build up over time resulting in accretions (an area of land growth) to the land.
The relevant State legislation provides that land that becomes raised above the boundary defined by the geographical feature because of the carrying out of works belongs to the State. In the absence of this provision, the accretions would fall within the boundaries of the taxpayer's land because the boundary of the land is defined by the high water mark.
In accordance with development requirements, the taxpayer was required to redefine the boundaries of the property to effectively exclude physical accretions to the land that had occurred over time.
The only method provided for the correction of boundaries under the relevant State legislation is for the taxpayer to surrender the title of the land to the State, to enable the State to cancel the existing title and to issue a new title to the taxpayer showing the correct boundaries.
Reasons for Decision
Section 70-90 of the ITAA 1997 provides that a taxpayer's assessable income includes the market value of an item of trading stock if the taxpayer disposes of the item outside the ordinary course of the taxpayer's business.
The taxpayer holds land as trading stock. Therefore, it is necessary to determine whether the taxpayer has made a disposal of an item of trading stock when the taxpayer surrenders the title deed to the land under State legislation, in order for the State to issue the taxpayer with a new title that redescribes the boundary of the land to exclude certain accretions to the land.
Accreted land
The relevant State legislation provides that any land that has accreted to land owned by the taxpayer due to the carrying out of works belongs to the State. In this case, the accretions were due to the carrying out of works. Therefore there was no issue of the taxpayer disposing the accreted land since it did not lawfully belong to the taxpayer.
Original land
The taxpayer was indisputably the owner of the original land which did not arise from accretion. Although the State law requires that the title be 'surrendered' (to correct the boundaries), the surrender is only the first step in the process stipulated for boundary correction, with the State being obligated to issue a replacement title setting out the exact area of land already owned by the taxpayer.
In the process of surrendering and reissue of the title, it is clear that any land surrendered because its boundaries have significantly changed by gradual and imperceptible degrees will be held on trust for the registered owner.
It has long been established at common law that a disposal of property will only occur where a proprietary right or interest passes at law or equity to another person or entity. (Glennon v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation; Carrigan v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1972) 127 CLR 503; 72 ATC 4181; (1972) 3 ATR 263 per Walsh J). As the State holds the land on trust for the registered owner, the registered owner still has the beneficial interest in the land.
The surrender of the title to the State does not have the effect that the taxpayer is no longer the owner of the land and the issue of a new title does not give, devolve or confer any interest in the land upon the taxpayer. At all times the taxpayer retains beneficial ownership of the land.
In these circumstances, it is considered that no disposal of the land has occurred. Therefore, the taxpayer does not dispose of trading stock outside the ordinary course of business, for the purposes of section 70-90 of the ITAA 1997, when the taxpayer surrenders the title to the land under State legislation, in order for the State to issue the taxpayer with a new title that redescribes the boundary of the land.

Amendment History

Date of Amendment
Part
Comment

11 August 2017
Reasons for decision
Add a , after "does not give" in paragraph seven.

Date reviewed
Change from 15 September 2014 to 4 August 2017.

Date of decision:
  26 June 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2001 Year ended 30 June 2002 Year ended 30 June 2003 Year ended 30 June 2004 Year ended 30 June 2005

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 70-90(1)

Case References:

Glennon v Federal Commissioner of Taxation   

Carrigan v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation   (1972) 127 CLR 503   (1972) 3 ATR 263   72 ATC 4181

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2003/518

Keywords

Disposal of assets
 Disposal of trading stock
 Disposals not in the ordinary course of business
 Equitable interests
 Land tenure & title
 Legal title
 Trading stock

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3112759

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  1 August 2003

Date reviewed:
  4 August 2017

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
26 June 2003
Original statement

You are here
11 August 2017
Updated statement