ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/429
================================================== Excise Diesel and Alternative Fuel Grants Scheme: primary production business activities FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 which was repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is an entity entitled to a fuel grant under section 10AA of the Diesel and Alternative Fuel Grants Scheme Act 1999 (DAFGSA) when it delivers meat products (made from livestock the entity has raised) from its livestock processing factory to customers?
Decision
No. An entity is not entitled to a fuel grant under section 10AA of the DAFGSA when it delivers meat products (made from livestock the entity has raised) from its livestock processing factory to customers.
Facts
An entity operates an enterprise that undertakes production of meat products in a factory and the delivery of these products from the factory.
The enterprise also undertakes the rearing of livestock which are then transported to the factory for processing.
Reasons for Decision
An entity's entitlement to a fuel grant where that entity carries on a primary production business, is discussed in section 10AA of the DAFGSA, which states; (1)If you carry on a primary production business, you are entitled to a fuel grant for the use of diesel fuel or alternative fuel in a vehicle that has a gross vehicle mass of 4.5 tonnes or more, but less than 20 tonnes, if: (a)the vehicle is a vehicle for transporting passengers or goods; and
(b)you purchased the diesel fuel or alternative fuel, or imported it into Australia. (2)However, you are only entitled to the grant to the extent that you use the diesel fuel or alternative fuel, in carrying on your primary production business, in operating the vehicle on a public road in Australia. Under the above definition, not only must the entity be carrying on a business of primary production, but (per subsection (2)) it must use the relevant fuel in carrying on its primary production business.
Section 5 of the DAFGSA defines the term 'primary production business' as having the same meaning as in the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997. Section 995-1 of the Income Tax Assessment Act states;
you carry on a primary production business if you carry on a business of: (a)cultivating or propagating plants, fungi or their products or parts (including seeds, spores, bulbs and similar things), in any physical environment; or
(b)maintaining animals for the purpose of selling them or their bodily produce (including natural increase); ... The rearing of livestock falls within the definition of a primary production business under paragraph (b) of the above definition. However, the processing of livestock to produce meat products, although carried out by the same entity that rears the livestock, is a business activity distinct from the entity's primary production activities. The processing of livestock is more properly regarded as a manufacturing business rather than being an extension of the entity's primary production business. The delivery of meat products to retail outlets is connected to the manufacturing business rather than the primary production business.
As stated above, subsection 10AA(2) of the DAFGSA provides that an entity will only be eligible for a fuel grant under that provision to the extent that the entity uses the diesel fuel or alternative fuel, in carrying on its primary production business. As the diesel fuel used in delivering meat products is not used in the entity's primary production business, no entitlement to a fuel grant exists under section 10AA of the DAFGSA.
Date of decision: 29 April 2004 Legislative References: Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 section 10AA
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 995-1 Keywords Diesel & alternative fuels grants scheme Excise Excise payments Journeys - truck Metropolitan areas Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 21 May 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 29 April 2004
Original statement You are here
16 April 2010
Archived