ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/483
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and the sale of a strata titled residential apartment FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as it is superseded by GSTR 2003/3. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a property developer, making an input taxed supply under section 40-65 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it sells a strata titled residential apartment that was constructed after 2 December 1998?
Decision
No, the entity is not making an input taxed supply under section 40-65 of the GST Act when it sells a strata titled apartment that was constructed after 2 December 1998. The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it sells the residential apartment.
Facts
The entity is a property developer. The entity has constructed a residential complex that was completed after 2 December 1998. Once completed, the entity retained ownership of several of the residential apartments located within the complex. The residential apartments are strata titled. The entity is now selling one of these residential apartments that has been used solely for making input taxed supplies (ie rental purposes) for less than five years.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply meets the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
Section 40-65 of the GST Act provides that a sale of residential premises may be an input taxed supply.
Under subsection 40-65(1) of the GST Act, a sale of real property is input taxed but only to the extent that the property is residential premises to be used predominantly for residential accommodation.
Real property is defined in section 195-1 of the GST Act to include any interest in or right over land. The sale of the strata titled residential apartment is the sale of real property.
Residential premises are defined in section 195-1 of the GST Act to mean land or a building that is occupied or is intended to be occupied as a residence and which is capable of being occupied as a residence. The residential apartment is capable of being occupied as a residence and is therefore, a residential premise.
Under paragraph 40-65(2)(b) of the GST Act, the sale of residential premises is not input taxed if the residential premises are new residential premises, other than those used for residential accommodation before 2 December 1998.
Section 40-75 of the GST Act defines the meaning of new residential premises.
Under paragraph 40-75(1)(a) of the GST Act, new residential premises are defined to include residential premises that have not previously been sold as residential premises and have not previously been the subject of a long-term lease.
However, under paragraph 40-75(2)(a) of the GST Act, residential premises are not new residential premises if the premises have been used solely for making input taxed supplies for a period of at least five years since the premises were built.
Construction of the residential complex, containing strata titled residential apartments, has created a new title of real property that has not previously been sold as residential premises. The residential apartment has been used solely for making input taxed supplies for less than five years. Therefore, the residential apartment is a new residential premise under section 40-75 of the GST Act.
In addition, the residential apartment was not used for residential accommodation before 2 December 1998 and as such, the sale of the strata titled residential apartment is not input taxed under section 40-65 of the GST Act.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under any other section of Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it sells the residential apartment. [NOTE: Where an entity is making a taxable supply of real property, it is liable for one-eleventh of the GST-inclusive sale price. However, the entity may be able to apply the margin scheme where the requirements of Division 75 are met.] Date of decision: 13 September 2001 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 9-5 Division 38 Division 40 section 40-65 subsection 40-65(1) paragraph 40-65(2)(b) section 40-75 paragraph 40-75(1)(a) paragraph 40-75(2)(a) Division 75 Section 195-1 Keywords Goods & services tax GST property & construction GST new residential premises GST residential premises GST supplies & acquisitions Input taxed supplies Business Line: GST Date of publication: 19 October 2001 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 13 September 2001
Original statement You are here
25 January 2008
Archived