ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/26
================================================== Capital Gains tax CGT: Small business concessions - Extension of time for active asset test FOI status: may be released This ATOID is withdrawn as it is a simple restatement of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Will the Commissioner allow under subparagraph 152-35(a)(ii) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) a period longer than 12 months after the cessation of a business within which the taxpayer can dispose of an asset and still satisfy the active asset test in section 152-35 of the ITAA 1997?
Decision
No. The Commissioner will not exercise the discretion under subparagraph 152-35(a)(ii) of the ITAA 1997 to allow a period longer than 12 months within which the taxpayer can dispose of the asset and still satisfy the active asset test in section 152-35 of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer operated a business on land which the taxpayer owned. The taxpayer sold the business in August 2000 but retained the land. The purchaser of the business verbally expressed an interest in purchasing the land if funds became available. The taxpayer did not enter into any written contract or agreement with the purchaser of the business for the sale of the land. Instead, the taxpayer entered into a 3 year lease of the land with the purchaser of the business with an option for another 3 years. The land was also not listed for sale with any real estate agent nor was it advertised for sale.
In June 2002, 22 months after the cessation of the business, the taxpayer lodged an application requesting the Commissioner to allow a period longer than 12 months from the cessation of the business in which to sell the land, and still satisfy the active asset test under subparagraph 152-35(a)(ii) of the ITAA 1997.
The financial capacity of the purchaser of the business later improved and a sale agreement for the land was entered into in September 2002.
Reasons for Decision
A requirement of the active asset test in paragraph 152-35(a) of the ITAA 1997 is that the CGT asset was an active asset just before the earlier of the CGT event and the cessation of the business, if the business ceased and the CGT event happens within 12 months (or any longer period that the Commissioner allows) of the business ceasing.
As a sale of the land has not occurred within 12 months of the cessation of the business the active asset test will only be satisfied if the Commissioner allows a longer period under subparagraph 152-35(a)(ii) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining if the discretion to allow a period longer than 12 months would be exercised, the Commissioner has considered the following factors: • whether there is evidence of an acceptable explanation for the period of extension requested and whether it would be fair and equitable in the circumstances to provide such an extension;
• whether there is any prejudice to the Commissioner if the additional time is allowed, however the mere absence of prejudice is not enough to justify the granting of an extension;
• whether there is any unsettling of people, other than the Commissioner, or of established practices;
• fairness to people in like positions and the wider public interest;
• whether there is any mischief involved; and
• the consequences of the decision. No real attempts were made by the taxpayer to sell the land. The land was not advertised for sale or listed with any real estate agent. Instead, the taxpayer entered into a 3 years lease with the purchaser of the business with an option for another 3 years. Although the purchaser of the business verbally expressed an interest in purchasing the land at some point there was no obligation on either party to proceed. The taxpayer retained absolute control as to the manner in which the land could be disposed.
After considering the relevant factors against the taxpayer's circumstances, in particular, the lack of attempts to sell the land and the fact that the delay in selling the land was not caused by factors beyond the control of the taxpayer, the Commissioner will not exercise the discretion under subparagraph 152-35(a)(ii) of the ITAA 1997 to extend the period within which the taxpayer can dispose of the land and still satisfy the active asset test in section 152-35 of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision: 4 October 2002 Year of income: Year ending 30 June 2003 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 paragraph 152-35(a). subparagraph 152-35(a)(ii). Keywords Capital gains tax Cessation Active asset test Commissioner's discretion Business Line: Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals Date of publication: 14 February 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 4 October 2002
Original statement You are here
12 March 2010
Archived