ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/154
================================================== Income Tax Assessability of Veterans' Affairs pension paid to a Thai resident FOI status: may be released This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is a war veteran's pension paid by the Commonwealth Department of Veterans' Affairs to a resident of Thailand assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. Even though the war veteran's pension paid to a resident of Thailand is assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997, Article 18 of Schedule 30 to the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act) applies and the pension income is not taxable in Australia.
Facts
The taxpayer is a resident of Thailand for tax purposes.
The taxpayer receives war veteran's pension payments from the Commonwealth Department of Veterans' Affairs in Australia.
The taxpayer is a citizen of Australia and not of Thailand.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a non resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all Australian sources during the income year.
Pension income is ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining liability to tax on Australian sourced income received by a non resident, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the Agreements Act.
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited provisions).
Schedule 30 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and Thailand (the Thai Agreement). The Thai Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and Thailand residents.
Article 18 of the Thai Agreement provides that, subject to Article 19, a pension paid to a resident of Thailand is only taxable in Thailand.
Paragraph (2) of Article 19 of the Thai Agreement provides that a pension paid by Australia in respect of services rendered in the discharge of governmental functions shall only be taxable in Australia. However, a pension is taxable only in Thailand if the person is a resident of, and a citizen or national of Thailand.
'Services rendered in the discharge of governmental functions' are principally of an employment nature and the pension must relate to that employment. This includes, for example, ComSuper pension payments to a person who was employed in the Australian Public Service.
The taxpayer is a resident of Thailand receiving a war veteran's pension from the Australian Commonwealth Department of Veterans' Affairs. The pension does not relate to services rendered in the discharge of governmental functions. Therefore paragraph (2) of Article 19 of the Thai Agreement does not apply.
Consequently, as the taxpayer is a resident of Thailand, Article 18 of the Thai Agreement applies and the pension income is not taxable in Australia. The pension income is therefore not assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision: 12 February 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2003 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subsection 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953 section 4 Schedule 30 Schedule 30, Article 18 Schedule 30, Article 19 Schedule 30, paragraph (2) of Article 19 Keywords Double tax agreements International tax Thailand Veterans' payments War pensions Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 3176509 Business Line: Public Groups and International Date of publication: 28 March 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782