ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/159
================================================== Fringe Benefits Tax Residual fringe benefit: funeral expenses of deceased employee FOI status: may be released This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Where an employer has organised and paid for the funeral expenses of a deceased employee, has a 'residual fringe benefit' been provided as defined in subsection 136(1) of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 (FBTAA)?
Decision
No. A benefit provided in respect of a deceased employee does not give rise to a 'residual fringe benefit' as defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA.
Facts
An employee died leaving a dependant spouse with a young family.
To assist the deceased's family, the employer decided to organise and pay for the funeral expenses of the deceased employee.
By making this payment, a 'residual benefit' has been provided under section 45 of the FBTAA.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA, a 'residual fringe benefit' is defined as being a 'fringe benefit that is a residual benefit'.
With regard to the definition of 'fringe benefit' at subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA, a benefit may be provided to an employee or an associate of an employee. An 'employee', through the definitions of both a 'current employee' and a 'former employee', is defined in terms of 'a person' who receives, or has received, or is entitled or has been entitled to receive, salary or wages.
Central to these concepts of an 'employee' is the continuing existence of an individual. Where the individual dies, they are no longer 'a person' for the purposes of the FBTAA. This would be distinct from a benefit being provided to a former employee who has merely retired or changed employers.
Taxation Ruling TR 1999/10A addendum states that 'The fringe benefits tax system does not apply to benefits provided to relatives of deceased employees.' Such a decision is consistent with the long-held views of the Commissioner and expressed by the then Treasurer, recorded as follows in the Historic House Hansard Database of 27 May 1987 at page 3458 question No 4745: Fringe Benefits Tax (Question No. 4745) Mr Hodgman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 October 1986: (1) Do the provisions of the fringe benefits tax legislation require an employer to pay tax on (a) employer contributions to the cost of funerals of employees, including employees killed on the job (b) employer payments for incidental funeral expenses, including hire of hearse and mourning cars, insertion of death notices on behalf of management and staff and the provision of wreaths and (c) employer provision of "free funerals" to employees of undertakers and funeral directors.
(2) Will payments under State Workers' compensation legislation for funerals of deceased employees attract fringe benefits taxes.
(3) Is it a fact that the fringe benefits tax will apply to certain employer expenses incurred in respect of deceased employees. Mr Keating -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows: (1), (2) and (3)No. The fringe benefits tax legislation has no application to benefits provided in respect of a deceased employee. These responses are consistent with the views of the Commissioner that FBT does not apply to benefits provided in respect of a deceased employee, thus the provision of a funeral for a deceased employee will not give rise to a fringe benefit. Amendment History Date of Amendment
Part
Comment 1 May 2026
Business Line
Updated to reflect change of ownership 6 August 2018
Reasons for Decision
Minor amendment to fourth paragraph to remove duplication. 6 August 2018
Keywords
Updated. 6 August 2018
All
Other minor grammatical amendments. Date of decision: 22 June 2006 Year of income: Year ended 31 March 2007 Legislative References: Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 subsection 136(1) Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Ruling TR 1999/10A Other References: Historic House Hansard Database 27 May 1987 Keywords Deceased employee FBT employees Funeral expenses Fringe benefits Fringe benefits Tax Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 5281759; 1-3XST2IS, 1-6CUQ6W0, 1-ED21NS0 Business Line: Superannuation and Employer Obligations Date of publication: 30 June 2006 Date reviewed: 17 April 2026 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 22 June 2006
Original statement 7 August 2018
Updated statement You are here 1 May 2026
Updated statement