ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2013/44
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessable income: interest income of money lender

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Has a taxpayer who carries on a business of money lending derived, under section 6-5 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997), interest from a loan calculated on a daily accrual basis that was returned as assessable income in an earlier income year if the taxpayer subsequently recognises that at a point in time in the earlier income year it should have stopped accruing interest on that particular loan?
Decision
No. The taxpayer did not derive interest from that particular loan under section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997 from the time in that earlier income year that it made a bona fide assessment based on sound commercial considerations that there was little or no likelihood that the accrued interest would be received. The taxpayer should have stopped accounting for interest on a daily accruals basis in respect of that particular loan.
Facts
The taxpayer carries on a business of money lending. The taxpayer routinely takes registered mortgages over real property as security.
The taxpayer is a 'financial institution' within the meaning of that term as used in Taxation Ruling TR 93/27 Income tax: basis of assessment of interest derived and incurred by financial institutions.
The taxpayer uses the straight-line daily accruals method to include interest income derived on money lent in its assessable income.
The taxpayer is not required to, and does not report impaired assets to the Reserve Bank of Australia.
In accordance with the relevant State legislation, on 1 August 2006 the taxpayer issued a formal written notice of default of mortgage demanding payment of the outstanding principal and interest by the loan debtor in respect of a particular loan (the loan). The notice allowed the taxpayer to take possession of the real property mortgaged (the security) and exercise its power of sale in default of these payments. Subsequently the taxpayer took possession and obtained judgment in the State's Supreme Court for the outstanding debt.
At the time the formal written notice of default was issued in respect of the loan the market value of the security was insufficient to cover the outstanding debt including accrued interest.
The taxpayer's commercial books of account for the 2007 income year showed that the taxpayer recorded accrued interest in respect of the loan for the entire income year and also recorded impairment expenses, with the loan having a negative net effect on the taxpayer's profit and loss for the year.
In its income tax return for the 2007 income year the taxpayer included the interest accrued in the entire year in respect of the loan in their assessable income and a notice of assessment issued on this basis.
In fact no principal or interest was received by the taxpayer in respect of the loan in the 2007 income year.
At a subsequent date within the amendment period for the taxpayer, it recognised that it should not have included the interest accrued in the entire year in respect of the loan in their assessable income for the 2007 income year and that instead it should have accounted for interest income on a cash receipts basis from the time it issued the formal written notice of default.

Reasons for Decision
Under section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997, taxpayers must include in assessable income their ordinary income as it is derived.
According to paragraph 47 of Taxation Ruling TR 98/1 Income tax: determination of income; receipts versus earnings, the general principle is that interest is only derived, or arises, when it is received or credited. Exceptions to this general rule include:

• interest from a business of money lending carried on by a taxpayer, and
• interest derived by a financial institution, unless from a 'non-accrual loan'.

According to paragraph 8 of TR 93/27, the adoption of straight-line daily accruals as the basis of tax accounting for interest derived and incurred results in 'a substantially correct reflex' of the taxable income of a financial institution.
In this case, the taxpayer uses the straight-line daily accruals method to include interest income on money lent in its assessable income.
When a financial institution makes a bona fide assessment based on sound commercial considerations that there is little or no likelihood that the accrued interest will be received, the Commissioner accepts that for income tax purposes a loan can be classified as a 'non-accrual loan'. Any interest accruing thereafter will not be derived for income tax purposes until it is actually received (see paragraph 5 of Taxation Ruling TR 94/32 Income tax: non-accrual loans).
When, at a later point in time, there is an examination of whether such an assessment based on sound commercial considerations was made, only the facts and evidence in existence at the time of the assessment can be taken into account.
In this case there are a number of indicators that support that such an assessment was made in respect of the loan, including:

• a formal written notice of default in respect of the loan was issued on 1 August 2006,
• at the time of issue of the formal written notice the market value of the security was insufficient to cover the outstanding debt including accrued interest, and
• the taxpayer's books of account show the loan had a net negative effect on the profit and loss of the taxpayer for the 2007 income year as evidenced by impairment expenses recorded in respect of the loan being greater than the accrued interest recorded in respect of the loan.

It is considered that the above indicators are sufficient evidence that when the taxpayer issued a formal written notice of default on 1 August 2006, the taxpayer had made a bona fide assessment in respect of the loan based on sound commercial considerations that there was little or no likelihood that the accrued interest would be received.
Notwithstanding the evidence that the taxpayer had made such a bona fide assessment, the taxpayer included in its 2007 income tax return as assessable income interest accrued from 1 August 2006 to 30 June 2007 in respect of the loan. It is considered that the taxpayer erred in this regard.
In this case the taxpayer did not receive any interest in respect of the loan in the period 1 August 2006 to 30 June 2007. It is considered that the amount of the interest accrued during this period included in the taxpayer's assessable income was not derived in that year.
Accordingly, provided an amendment is made within the relevant period of review, the taxpayer's assessable income can be reduced by the amount of the interest accrued in respect of the loan that the taxpayer had not derived in that year of income.

Note:
 From 1 July 2010 (or from 1 July 2009 if the taxpayer so elects) the provisions in Division 230 of the ITAA 1997 may apply instead of the principles set out in this interpretative decision.

Amendment History

Date of Amendment
Part
Comment

24 November 2015
Decision
Minor wording change from 'will' to 'would'

Reasons for Decision
Minor wording change from 'will' to 'would'

Reasons for Decision
Dates changed in Note from '2008' to '2009' and from '2009' to '2010'

Date of decision:
  26 April 2013

Year of income:
  Year ending 30 June 2008

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   section 6-5

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

TR 93/27
TR 98/1
TR 94/32

Keywords

accrued interest
 interest income
 financial institutions
 money lending by financial institutions

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  1-4UBUDUS, 1-DHSOZ8W

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  9 August 2013

Date reviewed:
  28 March 2018

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
26 April 2013
Original statement

You are here
24 November 2015
Updated statement