ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/593
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of remuneration from employment aboard a ship or aircraft operated in international traffic - non resident employee
 FOI status: may be released

ATO ID 2002/593 has been withdrawn from the database because it contains references to the tax treaty between Australia and New Zealand that was replaced with a new tax treaty which entered into force on 19 March 2010. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions up to, and including, 30 June 2010..

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the non resident taxpayer's income from employment aboard a ship or aircraft, operated in international traffic by an Australian resident, assessable in Australia under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. The non resident taxpayer's income from employment aboard a ship or aircraft, operated in international traffic by an Australian resident, is assessable in Australia under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is a non-resident of Australia and is a resident of New Zealand for tax purposes.
The taxpayer derives employment income from duties aboard a ship or aircraft operated in international traffic by their employer.
The taxpayer's employer is an Australian resident.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that ordinary income derived by a non resident directly or indirectly from Australian sources, as well as other ordinary income included by a provision on a basis other than having an Australian source, is assessable.
The salary and wages received by the taxpayer are ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining liability to tax on Australian sourced income received by a non resident, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited provisions).
Schedule 4 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and New Zealand (the NZ Agreement). The NZ Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and New Zealand residents.
Article 15 of the NZ Agreement deals with dependant personal services. Paragraph (1) of Article 15 of the NZ Agreement provides that salary and wages derived by a resident of New Zealand shall be taxable only in New Zealand unless the employment is exercised in Australia. If the employment is exercised in Australia then the income may also be taxed in Australia.
However, if an Australian resident taxpayer operates a ship or aircraft in international traffic, paragraph (3) of Article 15 of the NZ Agreement provides that remuneration derived in respect of employment exercised aboard that ship or aircraft may be taxed in Australia.
Article 23 of the NZ Agreement provides that income derived by a resident of New Zealand and which may be taxed in Australia (under Article 15), shall be deemed to have a source in Australia for Australian and New Zealand tax purposes.
The taxpayer's income is derived in respect of employment exercised aboard a ship or aircraft operated in international traffic by their employer who is a resident of Australia. The income received by the taxpayer is deemed to have an Australian source and may be taxed in Australia. Accordingly, the income is included in the taxpayer's assessable income under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.

Note: A foreign tax credit may be allowed in New Zealand for Australian tax paid (Article 24 of the NZ Agreement).

Date of decision:
  27 March 2002

Year of income:
  Year ending 30 June 2002

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 4   Schedule 4, Article 15   Schedule 4, Article 15(1)   Schedule 4, Article 15(3)   Schedule 4, Article 23   Schedule 4, Article 24

Keywords

Exempt income
 Double tax agreements
 Non resident individuals
 New Zealand
 Salary and wages income

Business Line:
  Small Business/Individual Taxpayers

Date of publication:
  31 May 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
27 March 2002
Original statement

You are here
22 October 2010
Archived