ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/450
==================================================

Income Tax
 CGT small business concessions - small business CGT affiliate
 FOI status: may be released

This ATOID is withdrawn because the ATO is reconsidering the position stated in the ATOID.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
If a taxpayer owns land on which their brother operates a farming business, is the taxpayer's brother a small business CGT affiliate of the taxpayer under paragraph 152-25(1)(b) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. In the circumstances described, the brother is the taxpayer's small business CGT affiliate under paragraph 152-25(1)(b) of the ITAA 1997. As the brother's business is carried on with a substantial degree of dependence on the taxpayer's agreement to allow him to use the land, the brother could reasonably be expected to act in concert with the taxpayer in accordance with paragraph 152-25(1)(b) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer owns a 25% interest in land acquired after 19 September 1985. The taxpayer's brother owns the other 75% interest. They acquired their interests under their father's will and own the land as tenants in common. The land has been owned by family members for over 50 years and has been actively farmed during that time.
With the taxpayer's consent, all of the property is used to conduct a farming business by a partnership (the taxpayer's brother and his spouse). This arrangement has been in place since the property was acquired from their father's estate and is based on family considerations. The taxpayer is not involved in the operation of the farming business and derives no income from the land. The taxpayer's brother makes all the decisions regarding the use and maintenance of the land.
Reasons for Decision
One of the basic conditions of the small business CGT concessions in Division 152 of the ITAA 1997 is that the active asset test must be satisfied (paragraph 152-10(1)(d) of the ITAA 1997). A CGT asset is an active asset if, among other things, it is owned by the taxpayer and used or held ready for use in the course of carrying on a business by a small business CGT affiliate (subparagraph 152-40(1)(c)(i) of the ITAA 1997).
The term 'small business CGT affiliate' is defined in section 152-25 of the ITAA 1997. A spouse or child of the taxpayer under 18 years is a small business CGT affiliate. A person is also a small business CGT affiliate of a taxpayer if the person acts, or could reasonably be expected to act, in accordance with the taxpayer's directions or wishes, or in concert with the taxpayer.
Whether a person acts, or could reasonably be expected to act, in accordance with the taxpayer's directions or wishes, or in concert with the taxpayer is a question of fact dependent on all the circumstances of the particular case. No one factor will necessarily be determinative.
Relevant factors that may support a finding that a person acts, or could reasonably be expected to act, in accordance with the taxpayer's directions or wishes, or in concert with the taxpayer include:

•the existence of a close family relationship between the parties,
•the lack of any formal agreement between the parties prescribing how the parties are to act in relation to each other,
•the likelihood that the way the parties act, or could reasonably be expected to act, in relation to each other would be based on the relationship between the parties rather than on formal agreements and
•the actions of the parties.

In this case, a very close family relationship exists between the parties. The taxpayer owns an interest in the land which, with their consent, is used by their brother (in partnership with his spouse) to carry on the farming business. Farming operations were previously conducted on the land for many years by the taxpayer's father. The arrangement in respect of the use of the land is based on family considerations.
Although the taxpayer is not involved in the operation of the farming business the brother's business is carried on with a substantial degree of dependence on the taxpayer's agreement to allow him to use the taxpayer's share of the land. There is clearly an understanding between them about the use of the land.
In these circumstances, it is accepted that the brother acts or could reasonably be expected to act in concert with the taxpayer. Therefore, the brother is the taxpayer's small business CGT affiliate under paragraph 152-25(1)(b) of the ITAA 1997 and the taxpayer's interest in the land is an active asset.
Date of decision:
  19 May 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2003

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   Division 152   paragraph 152-10(1)(d)   section 152-25   paragraph 152-25(1)(b)   subparagraph 152-40(1)(c)(i)

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2001/712

Keywords

Active asset test
 Capital gains tax
 CGT small business relief
 Small Business CGT affiliate

Business Line:
  Losses & CGT Centre of Expertise

Date of publication:
  20 June 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
19 May 2003
Original statement

You are here
16 June 2006
Archived