ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/249
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road - a fishing vessel's voyage to a temporary port
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the movement of a fishing vessel from its home port to a temporary berth (and return), to enable the vessel to access new fishing grounds, 'fishing operations' as defined in subsection 34(1) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. The movement of a fishing vessel from its home port to a temporary berth (and return) to enable the vessel to access new fishing grounds is 'fishing operations' as defined in subsection 34(1) of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity that conducts a fishing business moves a fishing vessel from its home port to a temporary berth at a new port from which it can readily access new fishing grounds.
A temporary base is set up on arrival at the port. The vessel sails from the temporary berth to the new fishing grounds where fish are caught. The vessel ultimately returns to its home port.
Reasons for Decision
The expression 'fishing operations' is defined in subsection 34(1) of the ECGSA as meaning:

(a)the taking, catching or capturing of fish; or...
(g)the undertaking:

(i)of voyages to or from a port by a vessel for the purposes of refitting or repairing the vessel, or its equipment, for purposes that are integral to the performance of an activity referred to in any of the preceding paragraphs; or...

but does not include any activity referred to in any of the preceding paragraphs that is conducted, in whole or in part:

(h)otherwise than for the purposes of a business; or
(i)for business purposes connected with recreation, sport or tourism.

The Product Grant and Benefit Ruling PGBR 2004/1 at paragraph 67 states that:
We consider that the following three criteria are relevant in determining if an activity takes place 'in the course of' a fishing operation. These are:

•a causal link exists - in other words, a certain activity is functionally integrated with a fishing operation, thereby forming an essential part of it; and
•a spatial link exists - meaning that an activity takes place in an area set aside or utilised for a fishing operation; and
•a temporal link exists - the activity takes place in a timely fashion, not prior to, or after the completion of, the fishing operation.

In Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Payne (2001) 202 CLR 93; 2001 ATC 4027; (2001) 46 ATR 228; CEO of Customs v. WMC Resources Ltd (as agent for East Spar Alliance) (1998) 87 FCR 482 [WMC] and Re Wandoo Alliance Pty Ltd and Chief Executive Officer of Customs (2001) 34 AAR 98; [2001] AATA 801, amongst other cases, it was deemed pertinent to consider one or all of these factors when determining whether an activity or activities were undertaken 'in the course of' something.
In Re Tas Island Shipping Pty Ltd and Collector of Customs (1989) 11 AAR 121 the Tribunal said at paragraph 10:

We do not think that the 'taking or capturing of fish' should be construed as being confined to the physical acts of taking or capturing. The legislative provisions in question were intended to benefit commercial fishing operations. Where there is doubt as to the meaning and application of those provisions, they should, in our opinion, be given a wide, rather than a narrow construction.

If the definition of fishing operations were read narrowly, voyages undertaken between a port and fishing grounds would not qualify as fishing operations, as the voyage arguably occurs before 'the taking, catching or capturing of fish' or any of the other specific activities listed in subsection 34(1) of the EGCSA.
Applying a broad construction, it is clear that voyages undertaken from a port to fishing grounds form part of 'fishing operations'. As voyages of this nature are not specifically referred to in subsection 34(1) of the EGCSA, the voyages must form part of 'the taking, catching or capturing of fish'.
In the course of commercial fishing operations, it can be reasonably expected that a vessel will have to relocate on occasion to access more viable fishing grounds. It can also be reasonably expected that on occasion the distance between the vessel's home port and the alternative fishing grounds may require the vessel to berth temporarily in a new port. Therefore the voyage between the home port and the temporary berth at the new port can also be accepted as forming part of 'the taking, catching or capturing of fish'.
The voyage from the vessel's home port to a temporary berth (and return), to enable the vessel to access new fishing grounds is 'fishing operations' as defined in subsection 34(1) of the EGCSA.
Date of decision:
  29 August 2006

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   subsection 53(1)   subsection 53(2)   paragraph 34(1)(a)   paragraph 34(1)(h)   paragraph 34(1)(i)   paragraph 34(1)(g)

Case References:

Chief Executive Officer of Customs v. WMC Resources Ltd    (1998) 87 FCR 482

Wandoo Alliance Pty Ltd and Chief Executive Officer of Customs, Re   (2001) 34 AAR 98   [2001] AATA 801

Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Payne   (2001) 202 CLR 93   2001 ATC 4027   (2001) 46 ATR 827

Tas Island Shipping Pty Ltd & Collector of Customs, Re   (1989) 11 AAR 121

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Product Grant and Benefit Ruling PGBR 2004/1

Keywords

EGCS fishing operations
 EGCS fishing operations business
 EGCS off-road
 Energy grants (credits) scheme

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  8 September 2006

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
29 August 2006
Original statement

You are here
 1 July 2012
Archived