ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2012/66
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 Goods and Services Tax and redemption of redeemable preference shares
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID contains references to provisions of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999, which have been replaced by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019. This ATO ID continues to apply in relation to the remade Regulations.

 A comparison table which provides the replacement provisions in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019 for regulations which are referenced in this ATO ID is available.
With effect from 1 July 2015, the term 'Australia' is replaced in nearly all instances within the GST, Luxury Car Tax and Wine Equalisation Tax legislation with the term 'indirect tax zone' by the Treasury Legislation Amendment (Repeal Day) Act 2015. The scope of the new term, however, remains the same as the repealed definition of 'Australia' used in those Acts. For readability and other reasons, where the term 'Australia' is used in this document, it is referring to the 'indirect tax zone' as defined in subsection 195-1 of the GST Act.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Does an entity make a financial supply under subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations) when it redeems redeemable preference shares from its shareholders?
Decision
Yes, the entity makes a financial supply under subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations when it redeems redeemable preference shares from its shareholders.
Facts
The entity is a company that is registered for GST. The entity has several classes of shares on issue to its shareholders, including redeemable preference shares, which are all fully paid up. All the entity's redeemable preference shareholders are in Australia.
The entity issues a redemption notice to holders of its redeemable preference shares. The notice requires each holder of the redeemable preference shares to deliver to the entity the certificates for all such shares held, by the redemption date.
On the redemption date:

•certificates for all such shares must be delivered as required;
•the certificates must be cancelled; and
•the entity must pay the amount required under the redemption notice.

Each shareholder delivers their redeemable preference share certificates, as required under the notice. The company pays each shareholder for their redeemable preference shares.
The company cancels the redeemable preference shares.
The redemption process complies with all requirements of the Corporations Act 2001.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 40-5(2) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act) provides that a financial supply has the meaning given by the GST Regulations.
Regulation 40-5.02 of the GST Regulations gives the meaning of 'interest' as anything that is recognised at law or in equity as property in any form. The GST Regulations relevantly provides that the provision, acquisition or disposal of an interest listed in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations is a financial supply if the requirements of subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations are satisfied.
Securities are listed at item 10 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations. Redeemable preference shares are securities for the purposes of the GST Regulations.
It follows that an acquisition of an interest in redeemable preference shares (an acquisition-supply) is a financial supply if the requirements of subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations are satisfied in relation to the acquisition.
'Acquisition', in relation to the provision and disposal of an interest, includes acceptance and receipt of the interest.
Through the redemption process, the shareholders deliver their share certificates, thereby disposing of their interests in the redeemable preference shares. By taking delivery of the share certificates, the entity accepts and receives the interests. Accordingly, the entity acquires an interest in (makes an acquisition-supply of) the redeemable preference shares.
The GST Regulations do not require that, following acquisition, the interest must be enduring. It is not relevant that the entity cancels the shares after it acquires them.
For the acquisition-supply to be a financial supply, subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations requires that the acquisition must be for consideration, in the course or furtherance of an enterprise, and connected with Australia; and that the supplier is registered or required to be registered for GST, and is a financial supply provider in relation to the supply of the interest.
A payment that is consideration for the supply of an interest acquired, may also be treated for GST purposes as consideration for the acquisition-supply of that interest (Authority for this view is found in AXA Asia Pacific Holdings Limited v. Commissioner of Taxation [2008] FCA 1834). Thus, the payment made to each shareholder for redemption of the redeemable preference shares is consideration for the entity's acquisition-supply of that interest.
The entity acquires the interest in the course or furtherance of its enterprise and the acquisition was in connection with Australia. The company is registered for GST.
Subregulation 40-5.06 of the GST Regulations provides that, in relation to the supply of an interest, the entity that acquires the interest is also the financial supply provider of the interest. Accordingly, the entity is also a financial supply provider in relation to supply of the interest.
It follows that the entity meets the requirements of subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations in relation to the acquisition of the interest in redeemable preference shares and therefore makes a financial supply of the interest when it redeems the shares from its shareholders.
Date of decision:
  9 July 2012

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   subsection 40-5(2)
Corporations Act 2001   The Act
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999   regulation 40-5.02   regulation 40-5.06   subregulation 40-5.09(1)   subregulation 40-5.09(3)

Case References:

AXA Asia Pacific Holdings Limited v Commissioner of Taxation   [2008] FCA 1834   (2008) 2008 ATC 20-074   (2008) 71 ATR 1

Keywords

Goods and services tax
 GST financial supply
 Redeemable preference share

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  1-40O409Q

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  20 July 2012

ISSN:
 1445-2782