ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/138
==================================================

International tax
 Assessability of dividend income from a private company in Germany received by an Australian resident
 FOI status: may be released

Note: This ATO ID has been amended to remove references to repealed legislation dealing with foreign tax credit rules. With effect from 1 July 2008 the foreign tax credit system is replaced by the foreign income tax offset system
This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Are the dividends paid from a private company resident in the Federal Republic of Germany (Germany) received by an Australian resident taxpayer, assessable under subsection 6-10(4) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. The dividends paid from a private company resident in Germany received by an Australian resident taxpayer are assessable under subsection 6-10(4) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is an Australian resident for income tax purposes.
The taxpayer owns shares in a family trading company which is incorporated and managed in Germany.
The company declares a dividend to its shareholders.
The taxpayer receives the dividend from the company after paying a 15 per cent withholding tax in Germany.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-10(4) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of an Australian resident taxpayer includes statutory income from all sources, whether in or out of Australia.
Section 10-5 of the ITAA 1997 lists those provisions about assessable income. Included in this list is subsection 44(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) which deals with dividends.
Subsection 44(1) of the ITAA 1936 provides that the assessable income of a resident shareholder of a company (whether the company is a resident or a non resident) shall include dividends paid by the company out of profits derived by it from any source.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one.
Schedule 9 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement and the protocol between Australia and the Federal Republic of Germany (the German Agreement). The German Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and German residents.
Article 10(2) of the German Agreement provides that dividends paid by a company which is subject to unlimited tax liability in Germany, to a resident of Australia, may be taxed in Germany but the tax so charged shall not exceed 15 per cent of the gross amount of the dividends.
Article 10(3) of the German Agreement defines the term 'dividends' to mean income from shares, and other income assimilated to income from shares, by the taxation law of the country of which the company making the distribution is a resident.
Article 22(1) of the German Agreement provides that, subject to the provisions of the law of Australia, a credit for German tax paid will be allowed against Australian tax payable on income from German sources.
Accordingly, as the dividend income received by the Australian resident taxpayer from a company resident in Germany is assessable under subsection 6-10(4) of the ITAA 1997, the taxpayer will be entitled to a foreign tax credit for the German tax paid.
Date of decision:
  15 March 2005

Year of income:
  Year ending 30 June 2005

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   subsection 44(1)   subsection 160AF(1)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-10(4)   section 10-5
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 9   Schedule 9, Article 10(2)   Schedule 9, Article 10(3)   Schedule 9, Article 22(1)

Keywords

Dividends
 Foreign income
 Foreign tax credits
 Germany
 International tax

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  4273727

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  13 May 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782