ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2007/15
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and right to a share of net profit in return for a contribution of money - not a credit arrangement FOI status: may be released This ATO ID contains references to provisions of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999, which have been replaced by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019. This ATO ID continues to apply in relation to the remade Regulations. A comparison table which provides the replacement provisions in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019 for regulations which are referenced in this ATO ID is available.
With effect from 1 July 2015, the term 'Australia' is replaced in nearly all instances within the GST, Luxury Car Tax and Wine Equalisation Tax legislation with the term 'indirect tax zone' by the Treasury Legislation Amendment (Repeal Day) Act 2015. The scope of the new term, however, remains the same as the repealed definition of 'Australia' used in those Acts. For readability and other reasons, where the term 'Australia' is used in this document, it is referring to the 'indirect tax zone' as defined in subsection 195-1 of the GST Act. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is an entity making an input taxed supply of an interest in a credit arrangement under subsection 40-5(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act) when it contributes an amount to another entity's business in return for a right to a share of the net profit from the other entity's business?
Decision
No. The entity is not making an input taxed supply of an interest in a credit arrangement under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it contributes an amount to another entity's business in return for a right to a share of the net profit from the other entity's business.
Facts
The entity enters into an arrangement with another entity (the enterprise operator). Under the terms of the arrangement, the entity agrees to contribute an amount of money as consideration for the right to receive a share of the net revenue of the enterprise operator's business at a certain rate up to the extent of the contribution amount, and thereafter, at a lesser rate. In the event that the enterprise operator makes a loss, the entity will receive nothing.
There is no separate obligation of the enterprise operator to repay any of the contribution amount to the entity.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST) and the arrangement entered into is connected with Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act, a financial supply is input taxed. Subsection 40-5(2) of the GST Act provides that a financial supply has the meaning given in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations).
Subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations provides that the provision, acquisition, or disposal of an interest mentioned under subregulation 40-5.09(3) or 40-5.09(4) of the GST Regulations is a financial supply if: (a)the provision, acquisition or disposal of that interest is: •for consideration; and
•in the course or furtherance of an enterprise; and
•connected with Australia, and (b)the supplier is: •registered or required to be registered for GST, and
•a financial supply provider in relation to the supply of the interest. Item 2 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations (Item 2) lists an interest in or under a debt, credit arrangement or right to credit, including a letter of credit.
Paragraphs 37 to 41, of Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2002/2 Goods and Services Tax: GST treatment of financial supplies and related supplies and acquisitions, state that a loan involves the supply of an interest in or under a credit arrangement by the lender to the borrower and the supply of an interest in or under a debt (that includes any interest payable) by the borrower to the lender.
The term 'credit arrangement' is defined in the Glossary of Terms in GSTR 2002/2 as: an arrangement under which an entity lends money on terms that include deferred repayment, or under which payment of a debt owed by one entity to another is deferred or time is allowed to pay. The term 'debt' is defined in GSTR 2002/2 as: an amount due from one entity to another or a presently existing obligation to pay an ascertainable amount at a future time. For common law purposes, the essence of a loan is that it involves the obligation to repay the amount borrowed (Commissioner of Taxation v. Radilo Enterprises Pty Ltd (1997) 72 FCR 300; 97 ATC 4151; (1997) 34 ATR 635) and it requires the existence of a debtor-creditor relationship.
The enterprise operator has no obligation under the arrangement to repay the amount contributed, either in circumstances where its business generates a profit, or where no profit is made. Where the business does generate a profit, the share of the net profit which the entity is entitled to receive may be much greater than the amount that it originally contributes.
An interest in a debt includes an interest in a contingent debt, which is a debt, based on an existing obligation, that will or might arise at a future time or if a future event occurs. However, the enterprise operator does not provide an interest in either a debt or a contingent debt to the entity. Although contingent in nature, the amount that the entity may receive under the arrangement is just an entitlement to a percentage share of the actual net revenue from the enterprise operator's business.
The arrangement entered into by the entity therefore does not have the characteristics of a loan, because there is no presently existing obligation for the enterprise operator to repay the amount contributed, now or in the future, and there is no debtor-creditor relationship.
For GST purposes, the arrangement does not involve either the making of a loan or the supply of an interest in a credit arrangement under item 2 by the entity to the enterprise operator. The arrangement is not an arrangement under which the entity lends money on terms that include deferred repayment, or under which payment of a debt is owed by the enterprise operator.
As the requirements of subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations are not satisfied, the entity does not make an input taxed financial supply of an interest in a credit arrangement under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act.
Date of decision: 21 December 2006 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 subsection 40-5(1) subsection 40-5(2)
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 subregulation 40-5.09(1) subregulation 40-5.09(3) subregulation 40-5.09(3) table item 2 subregulation 40-5.09(4) Case References: Commissioner of Taxation v. Radilo Enterprises Pty Ltd (1997) 72 FCR 300 97 ATC 4151 (1997) 34 ATR 635 Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2002/2 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2007/16 ATO ID 2007/17 ATO ID 2007/18 Keywords Goods and services tax GST regulations GST supplies & acquisitions GST supply Input taxed supplies GST financial supplies GST debt, loan and credit Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 5135312 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 25 January 2007 ISSN: 1445-2782