ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/502
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and speech therapy in a group environment without a detailed one on one assessment prior to therapy FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as the interpretative issue is covered in the GST Fact Sheet - GST and other health services This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a speech pathologist, making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-10(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it supplies speech therapy to a child in a group environment and the entity has, prior to the therapy, conducted an initial assessment of the child over the phone with the child's parent but has not carried out a detailed one on one assessment of the child?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act when it supplies speech therapy to a child in a group environment and the entity has, prior to the therapy, conducted an initial assessment of the child over the phone with the child's parent but has not carried out a detailed one on one assessment of the child.
Facts
The entity is a speech pathologist. The entity supplies speech therapy to children in a group environment. The entity plans the content of the speech therapy sessions in advance to target the specific needs of the children attending.
The entity does not undertake a detailed one on one assessment of a child's language skills prior to that child attending therapy. The entity conducts an initial assessment of the child's language skills during a phone conversation with the child's parent. This assessment is to determine whether speech therapy in a group environment would be beneficial for the child.
The entity continues to monitor and assess the child during the course of the speech therapy and tailors the therapy to meet the needs of the child.
Speech therapy conducted in a group environment, under these circumstances, is accepted within the speech pathology profession as an appropriate method of treating a child with speech difficulties.
The entity is a member of the relevant national professional association and is a recognised professional as defined in section 195-1 of the GST Act. The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act, an entity makes a GST-free supply of other health services if: •the entity provides a service of a kind specified in the table in subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act, or of a kind specified in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations)
•the entity is a recognised professional in relation to the supply of services of that kind, and
•the supply would generally be accepted, in the profession associated with supplying services of that kind, as being necessary for the appropriate treatment of the recipient of the supply. Speech pathology services are listed at item 19 in the table in subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act and the entity is a recognised professional in relation to the supply of speech pathology. As such, the first two requirements under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act are satisfied.
The third requirement is that the treatment must be generally accepted in the relevant health profession as being necessary for the appropriate treatment of the recipient.
'Appropriate treatment' will be established where a recognised professional, assesses the recipient's state of health and determines a process to pursue in an attempt to preserve, restore or improve the physical or psychological wellbeing of that recipient, insofar as that professional area of training allows. It will include subsequent supplies for the determined process.
Appropriate treatment includes the principles of preventative medicine. Such treatment must be generally accepted in the profession associated with supplying services of that kind, as being necessary.
While a detailed, one on one, assessment of the child's language skills has not been undertaken prior to the child attending therapy, the entity did conduct an initial assessment of the child's language skills during a phone conversation with the child's parent. This assessment was to determine whether speech therapy in a group environment would be beneficial for the child. The entity continues to monitor and assess the child during the course of the speech therapy and tailors the therapy to meet the needs of the child. Therefore, the entity has assessed the child's health to determine the appropriate treatment for the child.
Speech therapy conducted in a group environment, under these circumstances, is accepted within the speech pathology profession as an appropriate method of treating a child with speech difficulties. As such, the third requirement of subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act is satisfied.
The entity's supply of the speech therapy satisfies all of the requirements under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act when it supplies speech therapy to a child in a group environment where the entity has conducted an initial assessment to determine if speech therapy in a group environment will be beneficial, however the entity has not carried out a detailed one on one assessment of the child prior to therapy.
Date of decision: 22 July 2002 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 subsection 38-10(1) subsection 38-10(1) table item 19 section 195-1
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 Table of Content Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2004/501 ATO ID 2004/503 ATO ID 2004/504 Keywords Goods and service tax GST free GST health Section 38-10 - other health services Business Line: GST Date of publication: 25 June 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 22 July 2002
Original statement You are here
22 June 2007
Archived