ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/904
================================================== Income Tax Capital gains tax: 'GP Links' Amalgamation Incentive Payments FOI status: may be released The program to which the ATOID related has ended. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Did any CGT events happen under Part 3-1 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) when a taxpayer, a medical practitioner, received Stage One and Stage Two 'GP Links' Amalgamation Incentive payments?
Decision
Yes. CGT events C2 (about cancellation, surrender and similar endings) under section 104-25 of the ITAA 1997 happened when the taxpayer, a medical practitioner, received Stage One and Stage Two 'GP Links' Amalgamation Incentive payments. A separate CGT event C2 happened on each payment.
Facts
The taxpayer, a medical practitioner, received two payments from the Commonwealth Department of Health and Aged Care (DHAC) under the 'GP Links' Amalgamation Incentive Program ('GP Links' program).
The 'GP Links' program was established to provide general medical practitioners with incentives to increase the range and quality of services offered to the public. The program encourages small general practitioners to amalgamate their existing medical practices to create larger general practices. Under this program the taxpayer received two incentive payments as detailed below: 1. The Stage One incentive payment is to assist a practice to investigate the costs, benefits and feasibility of amalgamation. The practice must certify that the payment will be spent only on the investigation of amalgamation options. The recipient must provide to the DHAC a report listing the benefits of amalgamation.
2. The Stage Two incentive payment is to assist the practice with costs associated with the actual amalgamation. The payment is made in advance of the actual amalgamation of the practice (that is, physical collocation of the amalgamating practices). The 'GP Links' program stipulates that the Stage Two payment constitutes a contract between the practice and the Commonwealth, and that all or some of the incentive payment a practice receives will be recoverable if the practices fails to meet certain conditions within specified time-frames. These conditions are briefly: (a)evidence that a new amalgamated practice is actually operating
(b)evidence of the closure of all small practices participating in the amalgamation, and
(c)evidence of progress towards accreditation by the new practice. Reasons for Decision
Under the 'GP Links' program DHAC created two rights in the medical practitioner. With the establishment of the 'GP Links' program, DHAC created a right in the medical practitioner to receive a Stage One payment from DHAC. When the DHAC processed the medical practitioner's application for a Stage Two payment, it created a right in the medical practitioner to receive a Stage Two payment from DHAC. The taxpayer acquired the rights to receive the payments under CGT events D1 (section 104-35 of the ITAA 1997) that happened to DHAC. These rights were satisfied under CGT events C2 (section 104-25 of the ITAA 1997) when DHAC made the payments to the taxpayer.
The taxpayer made either capital gains or capital losses from the CGT events C2 (section 104-25 of the ITAA 1997). The capital gains or capital losses made are the difference between the capital proceeds (the amounts received by the taxpayer from DHAC) and the cost base or reduced cost base of the rights. The first element (acquisition cost) of the cost base or reduced cost base is the taxpayer's expenditure associated with investigating the feasibility of amalgamation (Stage One) and establishing the new amalgamated practice (Stage Two). However, if the taxpayer claimed a deduction for the expenditure, such expenditure is not included in the cost base or reduced cost base.
Broadly, the 'GP Links' program is about compensating medical practitioners for the costs associated with moving to a new structure. The compensation flavour of the program allows the principles in Taxation Ruling TR 95/35 (about the treatment of compensation receipts) to be applied. In particular, paragraphs 99 to 104, which explore the meaning of the cost of acquiring an asset, are relevant. These paragraphs allow for expenditure incurred by the medical practitioners in investigating the feasibility of amalgamation and in amalgamating their practices to be included in the cost base or reduced cost base of their rights to which CGT event C2 (section 104-25 of the ITAA 1997) happened.
Date of decision: 25 February 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 1999 Year ended 30 June 2000 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 104-25 section 104-35 Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Ruling TR 95/35 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2003/902 ATO ID 2003/903 Keywords Capital gains Capital gains tax CGT asset construction & creation CGT assets CGT capital proceeds CGT cost base CGT events CGT events C1-C3 - end of a CGT asset CGT events D1-D3 - bringing into existence a CGT asset CGT reduced cost base Business Line: Losses and Capital Gains Tax Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 3 October 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 25 February 2003
Original statement You are here 2 March 2012
Archived