ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/781
================================================== Excise Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road - agriculture - core agricultural activity - change in agricultural activity FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as it has been superseded by Product Grants and Benefits Ruling PGBR 2005/3 This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Are earthworks carried out shortly after an entity has ceased cultivating crops, in order to prepare the property for a new agricultural activity, an 'agricultural construction activity' as defined in section 25 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. Earthworks carried out shortly after an entity has ceased cultivating crops, in order to prepare the property for a new agricultural activity, are an 'agricultural construction activity' as defined in section 25 of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity has been carrying out the activity of growing crops.
The entity ceases growing crops, and shortly thereafter undertakes earthworks to transform the property so that the rearing of live-stock can commence on the property. It is necessary that the growing of crops ceases, in order for the earthworks to commence. Both the former activity (crop growing), and the new activity (live-stock rearing) are carried on in the form of a business with a view to obtaining produce for sale.
As part of the transformation of the property, the entity engages an earthmoving contractor to undertake earthworks to enable the new activity to commence.
Reasons for Decision
Section 53 of the EGCSA provides that, subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Regulations 2003, an entity is entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase or import into Australia off-road diesel fuel for a use by them that qualifies, including 'primary production'.
'Primary production' is defined in section 21 of the EGCSA to mean a number of activities including agriculture. 'Agriculture' is defined in section 22 of the EGCSA to include an 'agricultural construction activity', which is defined in turn in section 25 of the EGCSA.
In this situation, the most pertinent activity is in paragraph 25(e) of the EGCSA, which states that the expression 'agricultural construction activity' means: the carrying out of earthworks for use in a core agricultural activity if the earthworks: (i)are carried out on the agricultural property where the core agricultural activity is carried on; and
(ii)are carried out by the person who carries on the core agricultural activity or by a person contracted by that person to carry out the earthworks. Therefore, the activities will be an agricultural construction activity if the earthworks: •are for use in a core agricultural activity
•are carried out on the agricultural property where that core agricultural activity is carried on, and
•are carried out by the person who carries on the core agricultural activity or a person contracted by that person. Each test will be considered in turn. 1. Are the earthworks for use in a 'core agricultural activity'? 'Core agricultural activity' is defined in section 31 of the EGCSA, and means any of the following activities: (a)the cultivation of the soil
(b)the cultivation or gathering in of crops
(c)the rearing of live-stock, or
(d)viticulture, horticulture, pasturage or apiculture provided that they are undertaken for the purpose of or for purposes that will directly benefit a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
In this case the earthworks are clearly for use in the new core agricultural activity, and the new core agricultural activity will be undertaken for the purpose of a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale. Therefore the first test is met. 2. Are the earthworks being carried out on the agricultural property where that core agricultural activity is carried on? The EGCSA specifically requires that the earthworks be carried out on the agricultural property where the core agricultural activity that the earthworks will be used in, is carried on.
The cessation of all growing activities while the property is being prepared to grow a new crop could be taken as indicating that the new core agricultural activity is not yet being carried on.
The case of Australian National Railways Commission v. Collector of Customs, SA (1985) 8 FCR 264 (ANR Case) provides some guidance on this matter. In this case, Davies J stated: Although the diesel fuel rebate provisions use simple language, they are intended to be applied in a practical, commonsense manner to commercial operations. The case of Re Central Norseman Gold Corporation Limited and Collector of Customs, Western Australia AAT No W84/118; (1985) 8 ALN N 288 is further authority for this practical, commonsense approach.
Both cases apply to the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme as it is the successor to the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme and its provisions are very similar to those of the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme.
Therefore, the practical, commonsense approach put forward by Davies J, in the ANR Case, should be adopted in this present case.
In this instance: •The farmer has been carrying on a core agricultural activity for the purpose of obtaining produce for sale.
•As part of that business, the farmer has decided to change the nature of the activity carried out on the property.
•It is accepted that changing the nature of one's farming activities is a common practice in the course of a continuing farming business. Such a change may be triggered by a variety of factors, including relative commodity prices, climate fluctuations, or the need to allow land to recover from a particular activity. Therefore, although there has been a change in the nature of the core agricultural activity being carried on, it is considered sufficient that core agricultural activities continue to be carried on by the farmer on the property. It is not necessary that the core agricultural activity for which the earthworks are undertaken is carried on at the time of the earthworks, provided a core agricultural activity is carried on. Even a temporary cessation of all farming activities would not be considered to amount to a cessation of the farmer's business, provided the farmer fully intends to recommence a farming activity.
However, it remains to be determined if the property is an 'agricultural property'.
The term 'agricultural property' is not defined in the EGCSA. The issue of what constitutes an agricultural property for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme was considered in Raymond Cedric and Brian Richard Wallace v. CEO of Customs [1998] AATA 633 (25 June 1998); (1998) 27 AAR 430 (Wallace).
Wallace is authority for the view that an agricultural property is a property on which the activities of cultivation of the soil, the growing and gathering in of crops or the rearing of livestock or a mixture of more than one of these activities are carried out for the purpose of, or for purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
Clearly, in this case, the property is indeed an 'agricultural property' as it is the property on which the core agricultural activity is being carried on.
Therefore, in this instance, the earthworks are being carried out on the agricultural property where the core agricultural activity that the earthworks are for use in, is being carried on.
Consequently, the second test is met. 3. Are the earthworks carried out by the person who carries on the core agricultural activity, or a person contracted by that person? As the earthworks are being carried out by a person contracted to the farmer who is carrying out the core agricultural activity, this test is also met.
Accordingly, earthworks carried out shortly after an entity has ceased cultivating crops, in order to prepare the property for a new agricultural activity, are 'an agricultural construction activity' as defined in section 25 of the EGCSA.
Date of decision: 23 July 2004 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 section 21 section 22 section 25 paragraph 25(e) section 31 section 53 Case References: Australian National Railways Commission v. Collector of Customs, SA (1985) 8 FCR 264 Re Central Norseman Gold Corporation Limited and Collector of Customs, Western Australia AAT No W84/118 (1985) 8 ALN N 288
Raymond Cedric and Brian Richard Wallace v. CEO of Customs (25 June 1998) [1998] AATA 633 (1998) 27 AAR 430 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2003/1162 ATO ID 2004/64 ATO ID 2004/740 ATO ID 2004/741 ATO ID 2004/742 ATO ID 2004/743 ATO ID 2004/744 Keywords EGCS agriculture EGCS agricultural construction activity Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 24 September 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 23 July 2004
Original statement You are here
13 September 2005
Archived