ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/341
==================================================

Income Tax
 Capital Gains Tax: deceased estate - foreign property
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as it is a straightforward application of the law. Guidance on the issue contained in this ATO ID can be found at the following: TD 2000/6 Income tax: capital gains: if a non-resident person bequeaths a CGT asset, which does not have the necessary connection with Australia, to a resident beneficiary, does that mean the resident makes a capital gain or capital loss if a CGT event later happens to the asset? (As at 19 January 2000)

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Where:

•a foreign government asserts ownership of a capital gains tax (CGT) asset owned by a non-resident individual under a 'nationalisation' program
•the individual dies intestate, and
•the nationalisation is later declared and acknowledged to have been void and without effect

is a resident taxpayer who gains title to the CGT asset as beneficiary of the deceased individual's estate taken for CGT purposes to have acquired the asset on the date of death of the deceased?
Decision
Yes. The CGT asset passed to the taxpayer in their capacity as beneficiary of the deceased individual's estate in accordance with the intestacy laws of the relevant jurisdiction. Under section 128-15 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997), the CGT asset is therefore taken to have been acquired by the taxpayer on the date of the deceased's death.
Facts
The taxpayer's parent owned a property outside of Australia, which they acquired more than 70 years ago.
The country in which the property was located was occupied by the Soviet Communist regime from 1940 to 1990.
In 1940, the Soviet regime passed a decree under which it purported to 'nationalise' all private property including the parent's property.
The taxpayer's parent died intestate shortly after the decree was passed.
When the country regained its independence a restoration program was initiated under which the former owners and their legal successors could apply to reclaim property purported to have been 'nationalised' under the Soviet Decree. Under the restoration program, legislation was passed under which the original Soviet Decree and the normative acts issued in accordance with it were declared and/or acknowledged to be null and void.
The taxpayer lodged an application asserting their right to reclaim ownership of the property in their capacity as their parent's legal successor according to the intestacy laws of the relevant jurisdiction. The Government accepted their application and certified their legal title to the property.
The taxpayer was, at all relevant times, a resident of Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Section 128-15 of the ITAA 1997 sets out the rules regarding the effect of death on a CGT asset that you own just before dying. Subsection 128-15(1) of the ITAA 1997 in conjunction with subsection 128-15(2) of the ITAA 1997 states that if a CGT asset you own just before your death devolves to your legal personal representative or passes to a beneficiary in your estate, the legal personal representative or the beneficiary is taken to have acquired the asset on the day you died. Subsection 128-20(1) of the ITAA 1997 provides, relevantly, that a CGT asset passes to a beneficiary where the beneficiary becomes the owner of the asset under a will or by operation of intestacy law.
In the present case, the decree under which the CGT asset was purported to be 'nationalised' was acknowledged and declared to be null and void and without effect. It follows, therefore, that the CGT asset is taken to have been among the assets owned by the deceased at the time of their death and was therefore part of their estate.
As the taxpayer reclaimed ownership in their capacity as beneficiary of their parent's estate in accordance with the intestacy laws of the relevant jurisdiction, it is concluded that the CGT asset 'passed' to the taxpayer as beneficiary of that estate under section 128-15 of the ITAA 1997. Under subsection 128-15(2) of the ITAA 1997 the taxpayer is taken to have acquired the CGT asset on the day their parent died.
Date of decision:
  4 December 2006

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2007

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 109-5(2)   section 128-15   section 128-20

Keywords

Acquisition of CGT assets
 Capital gains tax
 CGT assets

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  22 December 2006

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 4 December 2006
Original statement

You are here
 3 October 2014
Archived