ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/131
==================================================

Excise
 Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme: Diesel Fuel used in drying grain
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is a manufacturer of stockfeed entitled to a rebate under paragraph 78A(1)(aa) of the Excise Act 1901 for diesel fuel used in drying grain?
Decision
No. A manufacturer of stockfeed is not entitled to a rebate under paragraph 78A(1)(aa) of the Excise Act for diesel fuel used in drying grain.
Facts
The client operates a manufacturing plant for bulk and bagged stockfeed.
After the primary producer harvests the grain directly into trucks, it is delivered to the client's premises, in town, for manufacture.
During the manufacture process, the client processes the grain through a drier, which is operated on diesel fuel.
The grain is dried on the client's premises and stored in silos. The drying is necessary to prevent deterioration when the moisture content is too high.
The manufacturing plant is not located on an agricultural property.
Reasons for Decision
Paragraph 78A(1)(aa) of the Excise Act provides that a rebate is payable for diesel fuel used in primary production. Primary production is defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act 1901 as meaning agriculture. 'Agriculture' is further defined as including the prevention of deterioration of the produce of a core agricultural activity where three conditions are met, namely:

•the prevention of deterioration of the produce is carried out on an agricultural property where a core agricultural activity is carried on,
•there is no physical change to the produce, and
•the prevention of deterioration of the produce does not constitute a processing of the produce.

The term 'core agricultural activity' is defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act as:

a)the cultivation of soil,
b)the cultivation or gathering in of crops,
c)the rearing of livestock, or
d)viticulture, horticulture, pasturage or apiculture.

where such activity is carried out for the purposes of, or for purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
The phrase 'where a core agricultural activity is carried on' was discussed by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (the AAT) in a similar case. In LM & TMR Quinlivan and Chief Executive Officer of Customs (1997) 25 AAR 142, the AAT determined that a core agricultural activity is restricted to an activity referred to in paragraphs (a), (b), (c) or (d) of the definition of agriculture. The activity carried out at the commercial drier in the town of Esperance was not part of the 'gathering in of crops', specified in paragraph (b) of the definition of a core agricultural activity. The AAT held that the artificial drying occurred in the town of Esperance after the crop had been gathered in, and therefore the drying did not take place on a property 'where a core agricultural activity is carried on'.
The client dries grain in order to prevent deterioration when the moisture content is too high. The drying is carried out on their premises, in town, which is not located on an agricultural property.
As the drying of the produce is not carried out on an agricultural property where a core agricultural activity is carried on, the client is not entitled to a rebate for diesel fuel used in drying grain under paragraph 78A(1)(aa) of the Excise Act.
Date of decision:
  24 January 2003

Legislative References:

Excise Act 1901   paragraph 78A(1)(aa)
 Customs Act 1901   subsection 164(7)

Case References:

LM & TMR Quinlivan and Chief Executive Officer of Customs    (1997) 25 AAR 142

Keywords

Excise
 Excise Payments
 Diesel fuel rebate scheme
 DFRS Agriculture

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  15 March 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
24 January 2003
Original statement

You are here
 8 January 2010
Archived