ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/977
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and student accommodation in boarding schools FOI status: may be released CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a boarding school, making a GST-free supply under section 38-105 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it provides accommodation to a student from a metropolitan location undertaking a primary course at a separate institution?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply under section 38-105 of the GST Act when it provides accommodation to a student from a metropolitan location undertaking a primary course at a separate institution.
Facts
The entity is a boarding school. Its documented principal objectives are to provide education to primary students and to provide accommodation to students from rural or remote locations.
Students from rural or remote locations are given preference when accommodation places are offered by the entity. However, where vacancies exist, students from metropolitan locations may be accommodated.
The entity supplies supervised accommodation to a student from a metropolitan location who is undertaking a GST-free primary course supplied by another entity at a separate institution.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Section 38-105 of the GST Act sets out when a supply of student accommodation is GST-free.
A supply is GST-free under subsection 38-105(1) of the GST Act if: •it is a supply of student accommodation to students undertaking a primary course, a secondary course or a special education course, and
•the supplier of the accommodation also supplies the course. Although the entity is supplying student accommodation to a student that is undertaking a primary course, the student is undertaking that primary course at a separate institution. The entity is not the supplier of that primary course. Therefore, the entity's supply of accommodation is not GST-free under subsection 38-105(1) of the GST Act.
A supply of accommodation is GST-free under subsection 38-105(2) of the GST Act if: •it is a supply of student accommodation to students who are undertaking a primary, secondary or special education course, and
•the accommodation is provided in a hostel whose primary purpose is to provide accommodation for students from rural or remote locations who are undertaking such courses. Therefore, in order for the entity to provide GST-free student accommodation under subsection 38-105(2) of the GST Act, these criteria must be satisfied: 1. the supply of accommodation must be to students undertaking a primary, secondary or special education course
2. the supervised accommodation supplied by the entity must have similar characteristics to that of accommodation provided in a hostel, and
3. the primary purpose of the entity's boarding operation must be to provide accommodation to students from rural or remote locations who are undertaking a primary, secondary or special education course. The entity is supplying supervised accommodation to a student that is undertaking a primary course. It does not matter that the entity is not the supplier of the primary course, as long as the student is undertaking a primary course. Therefore, the first criterion is satisfied.
In relation to the second criterion, it must be determined whether the entity's boarding operation has similar characteristics to that of a 'hostel'. The word 'hostel' is defined in The Macquarie Dictionary, 1997, 3rd Edition, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW as 1. a supervised place of accommodation, usually supplying board and lodging, provided at a comparatively low cost, as one for students, nurses or the like. The entity supplies supervised accommodation, the characteristics of which are similar to those provided by a 'hostel'. Therefore, the entity's supervised accommodation will be treated as a hostel for the purposes of paragraph 38-105(2)(b) of the GST Act, and satisfies the second criterion.
In order to satisfy the third criterion, the stated and demonstrated primary purpose, objective, goal, aim or mission of the entity's boarding operation must be to provide accommodation to students from rural or remote locations who are undertaking a primary, secondary or special education course.
The documented principal objective of the entity's boarding operation is to provide accommodation to students from rural or remote locations. Further, as it gives preference to those students from rural or remote locations, the entity is demonstrating that its activities are consistent with its principal objective. The supply of accommodation to a student from a metropolitan location does not change the underlying primary purpose. Therefore, the third criterion is satisfied.
As all three criteria are satisfied, the entity is making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-105(2) of the GST Act when it provides accommodation to a student from a metropolitan location undertaking a primary course at a separate institution.
As the entity satisfies subsection 38-105(2) of the GST Act, the supply of accommodation by the entity to all students undertaking a primary course will be GST-free, whether or not the student is from a rural or remote location and whether or not the entity is making the supply of the primary course. Note. This decision also applies where students are undertaking GST-free secondary courses or GST-free special education courses. Date of decision: 15 December 2004 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 38-105 subsection 38-105(1) subsection 38-105(2) paragraph 38-105(2)(b) Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2000/30 Other References: The Macquarie Dictionary, 1997, 3rd Edition, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW Keywords Goods and services tax GST free GST education Student accommodation Student accommodation - non-tertiary Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 4368652 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 24 December 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782