ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/271
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: on-road credit - emergency vehicles - firefighting
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID was amended by adding the reference Road Transport (Vehicle Registration) Regulations 2007.
This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is a vehicle attached to a rural fire brigade in New South Wales a 'registered vehicle' for the purposes of section 47 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. A vehicle attached to a rural fire brigade in New South Wales is a 'registered vehicle' for the purposes of section 47 of the EGCSA.
Facts
The entity is a local shire operating emergency vehicles.
The vehicles used by the entity:

•are for fire fighting
•are designed, permanently fitted out and equipped for the purposes of preventing and fighting fires, and
•have external markings that identify the vehicle as a fire fighting vehicle.

The vehicles have a compliance plate attached identifying each individual vehicle that is recorded in the Bush Fire Vehicle register.
In the state of New South Wales, vehicles that are attached to a rural fire brigade, and which conform to the Fires Act 1997 (NSW), are exempted from registration requirements under Clause 12 of Schedule 1 of the Road Transport (Vehicle Registration) Regulations 1998.
Due to the above exemption, the vehicles are not recorded on the Roads and Traffic Authority register. However, in the event of an accident, these vehicles would be covered under the Nominal Defendant Scheme operated by the Motors Accidents Authority.
All emergency vehicles are inspected and certified for road worthiness by the Roads and Traffic Authority before they can be entered in the Bush Fire Vehicle register.
Reasons for Decision
Section 47 of the EGCSA provides that (subject to various conditions) an entity is entitled to an on-road credit if it purchases, or imports into Australia, on-road diesel fuel, or on-road alternative fuel, for use in an emergency vehicle that is a registered vehicle and has a gross vehicle mass of 4.5 tonnes or more.
The definition of the term 'registered vehicle' appears in section 4 of the EGCSA:

registered vehicle
 , means a vehicle that is registered for use on public roads.

The term 'registered' is not defined in the EGCSA. However, given its connection with vehicles, and use on a public road, it is reasonable to conclude that when determining whether a vehicle is registered, one must consider whether the vehicle meets the registration requirements set out in the relevant State's legislation.
The vehicle registration requirements in New South Wales are set out in the Road Transport (Vehicle Registration) Act 1997 (NSW) (RTA) and the Road Transport (Vehicle Registration) Regulation 1998 (RT regulations).
Section 3 of the RTA states that the objects of that Act are:

(a)to make provision for the registration of registrable vehicles in accordance with the agreements scheduled to the National Road Transport Commission Act 1991 of the Commonwealth as part of the uniform national road transport legislation envisaged by that Act, and
(b)to improve road safety and transport efficiency and reduce the costs of administering road transport.

Section 18 of the RTA prohibits the use of unregistered registrable vehicles on a road or road related area - except where the vehicle is covered by a regulation referred to in section 16 of the RTA.
Section 16 of the RTA states that the regulations to the Act may provide that the Act does not apply to registrable vehicles of a kind identified in the regulations.
The RTA provides for various exemptions from the registration requirements of the Act. The exemptions are set out in Schedule 1 of the RT regulations.
Clause 12 of the Schedule states that the registration provisions do not apply to any registrable vehicle that is used on a road or road related area if the vehicle is attached to a rural fire brigade formed under the Rural Fires Act 1997, and has painted on it, or securely fixed to it, a sign clearly identifying the rural fire brigade to which it is attached, and is used for specified purposes while travelling on a public street.
The rural fire brigade has advised that their vehicle meets the requirements of clause 12 of Schedule 1 of the RT regulations and is excluded from the registration provisions in the RTA.
While this may indicate that the vehicle is not registered in the sense of displaying licence plates and being entered on the vehicle registry by the NSW Road Traffic Authority, the vehicle nonetheless complies with the legislation pertaining to registration in NSW. Significantly, the vehicle can be driven lawfully on roads in that State.
When considering the meaning of the term 'registered vehicle', the purpose behind the requirement in the EGCSA should be considered. The explanatory memorandum to the bill that introduced energy grants is silent as to the reason for including the registration requirement. The on-road credit provisions of the EGCSA replaced the former Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 (DAFGSA) which contained a similar registration requirement. The explanatory memorandum to the Bill that introduced the former provisions is also silent as to the reasons why the registration requirement was introduced.
Consistent with beneficial Commonwealth legislation generally, it is implicit within the EGCSA that the focus of the Act is on encouraging activities that are conducted lawfully. Therefore, it is considered the main reason for including the registration requirement in the EGCSA was to ensure that vehicles that are not registered, in contravention of State laws, are excluded from entitlement to on-road credits. If credits were payable in respect of vehicles that should be registered but are not, the EGCSA would in effect be subsidising illegal transport activities.
Given this, it is reasonable to conclude that the registration requirement should be read as equating to a requirement that the use of the particular vehicles on public roads is sanctioned under the registration provisions that apply in the relevant State.
Therefore, a vehicle attached to a rural fire brigade in New South Wales is accepted as being a 'registered vehicle' for the purposes of section 47 of the EGCSA.

Note: The Agreements referred to in paragraph 3(a) of the RTA were the Heavy Vehicle Agreement and the Light Vehicle Agreement. The National Road Transport Commission Act 1991 has been repealed and replaced by the National Transport Commission Act 2003 of the Commonwealth. That Act does not have any Agreements scheduled to it but does make provision for an Agreement 'entered into in relation to [that] Act'. That Agreement is the Inter-Governmental Agreement for Regulatory and Operation Reform in Road, Rail and Intermodal Transport.

Although the Road Transport (Vehicle Registration) Regulations 1998 have been superseded by Road Transport (Vehicle Registration) Regulations 2007, clause 12 of Schedule 1 in the 1998 Regulations has been retained in the 2007 Regulations.

Date of decision:
  19 September 2006

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   section 4   section 47
Road Transport (Vehicle Registration) Act 1997 (NSW)   section 3   subsection 3(a)   subsection 3(b)   section 16   section 18
Road Transport (Vehicle Registration) Regulations 1998   Schedule 1   clause 12 of Schedule 1
Road Transport (Vehicle Registration) Regulations 2007   Schedule 1   clause 12 of Schedule 1
Rural Fires Act 1997 (NSW)   
 National Road Transport Commission Act 1991   NRTC91
 National Transport Commission Act 2003   NTC03
 Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999   DAFGS99

Other References:

Explanatory Memorandum to the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Bill 2003
Explanatory Memorandum to the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Bill 1998

Keywords

EGCS
 EGCS registered vehicle
 Fire brigade

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  22 September 2006

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
19 September 2006
Original statement

You are here
 1 July 2012
Archived