ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/52
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and fees for storage, cleaning and maintenance, testing and repairs of pawned goods FOI status: may be released This ATO ID contains references to provisions of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999, which have been replaced by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019. This ATO ID continues to apply in relation to the remade Regulations. A comparison table which provides the replacement provisions in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019 for regulations which are referenced in this ATO ID is available. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a pawnbroker, making an input taxed financial supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it supplies services for the storage, cleaning, maintenance, testing and repairs of pawned goods that are being held as security for a loan provided by the entity to a customer, and a separate fee is charged to the customer for these services?
Decision
No, the entity is not making an input taxed financial supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it supplies services for the storage, cleaning, maintenance, testing and repairs of pawned goods that are being held as security for a loan provided by the entity to a customer, and a separate fee is charged to the customer for these services.
The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a pawnbroker. The entity supplies services for the storage, cleaning, maintenance, testing and repairs of pawned goods. These pawned goods are being held as security for a loan provided by the entity to its customer. The provision of the loan is an input taxed financial supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act. The entity charges the customer a fee for the supply of the services separate from the consideration for the loan.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST) and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act, a financial supply is input taxed. Subsection 40-5(2) of the GST Act defines a financial supply as having the meaning given by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations).
Subregulation 40-5.08(1) provides that a supply is a financial supply if the supply is mentioned as: •a financial supply in regulation 40-5.09 of the GST Regulations, or
•an incidental financial supply in regulation 40-5.10 of the GST Regulations. Under regulation 40-5.09 of the GST Regulations, the first requirement for a financial supply is that the supply must be the provision, acquisition or disposal of an interest mentioned in subregulation 40-5.09(3) or (4) of the GST Regulations. The entity is supplying services of storage, cleaning, maintenance, testing and repairs. These services are not listed in either subregulation 40-5.09(3) or (4) of the GST Regulations. Therefore, the entity's supply is not a financial supply under regulation 40-5.09 of the GST Regulations.
Regulation 40-5.10 of the GST Regulations provides that something: •supplied by the same supplier to the same recipient as the original financial supply,
•supplied directly in connection with a financial supply, and
•is an incidental financial supply if it is: a) incidental to the financial supply,
b) supplied at or about the same time, as the financial supply but not for separate consideration, and
c) the usual practice of the entity to supply the thing (or similar things) and the financial supply together in the ordinary course of the entity's enterprise. The entity's original financial supply is the supply of the loan secured by pawned goods. The supply of the storage, cleaning, maintenance, testing and repair services is to the same customer that the entity supplied with the loan.
Paragraphs 126-132 of Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2002/2 discuss when something is 'directly in connection with' a financial supply. For a supply to be 'directly in connection with' a financial supply, the supply must have a direct relationship with the financial supply. A supply has a direct relationship with a financial supply where the supply: •is readily identifiable as having occurred because of the financial supply, and
•would not occur if there were not a financial supply. The supply of the storage, cleaning, maintenance, testing and repair services has occurred because the entity supplied a loan to the customer that was secured by pawned goods. The supply of the services would not have occurred if the entity had not made the financial supply of the loan. Therefore, there is a direct relationship between the services and the financial supply of the loan. As such, the entity's supply of services is 'directly in connection with' a financial supply.
As the entity's supply of services is to the same customer and is directly in connection with the entity's financial supply, the services will be an incidental financial supply where the requirements in paragraphs (a) to (c) of regulation 40-5.10 of the GST Regulations are satisfied.
Paragraph 40-5.10(b) of the GST Regulations requires that the financial supply and the incidental financial supply must be supplied at or about the same time, but not for separate consideration. The entity's supply of services is at or about the same time as the supply of the loan. However, the services are supplied for a separate fee from the consideration for the loan. Therefore, the requirement in paragraph 40-5.10(b) is not met and the entity is not making an incidental financial supply under regulation 40-5.10 of the GST Regulations.
As the entity is not making a financial supply under regulation 40-5.09 of the GST Regulations nor an incidental financial supply under regulation 40-5.10 of the GST Regulations, the entity is not making an input taxed financial supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is not GST free under Division 38 of the GST Act or input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it supplies services for the storage, administration, cleaning, maintenance, testing and repairs of pawned goods and charges a separate fee for these services.
Date of decision: 24 April 2002 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 9-5 Division 38 Division 40 subsection 40-5(1) subsection 40-5(2)
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 subregulation 40-5.08(1) regulation 40-5.09 subregulation 40-5.09(3) subregulation 40-5.09(4) regulation 40-5.10 paragraph 40-5.10(a) paragraph 40-5.10(b) paragraph 40-5.10(c) Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) GSTR 2002/2 Keywords Goods and services tax GST supplies and acquisitions Taxable supply Input taxed supplies GST financial supplies Incidental financial supplies Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 1266736 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 15 March 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782