ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/216
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of ordinary income - effect of overseas holiday on residency status
 FOI status: may be released

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the taxpayer's income assessable income under subsection 6-5(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) as an Australian resident?
Decision
Yes. The taxpayer is an Australian resident for income tax purposes and ordinary income derived by the taxpayer is assessable income under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer received salary and wages during the year of income.
The taxpayer lived with a partner on a genuine domestic basis for the whole of the income year. This included being named on a lease of property.
The taxpayer was present in Australia for 300 days in the income year.
The taxpayer travelled to Europe for 65 days in the income year to visit friends and family. The taxpayer has continued to reside in Australia since their return and is applying for permanent residency.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of an Australian resident includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all sources during the income year.
Salary and wages are ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
The term 'Australian resident' is defined in section 995-1 of the ITAA 1997 and means a person who is a resident of Australia for the purposes of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936).
Subsection 6(1) of the ITAA 1936 defines 'resident' or 'resident of Australia' to mean a person, other than a company, who resides in Australia and includes a person:

•whose domicile is in Australia, unless the Commissioner is satisfied that their permanent place of abode is outside Australia; or
•who has actually been in Australia, continuously or intermittently, during more than half of the income year, unless the Commissioner is satisfied that their usual place of abode is outside Australia and they do not intend to take up residence in Australia.

In Taxation Ruling TR 98/17 Income Tax: residency status of individuals entering Australia (TR 98/17) at paragraph 12, it states that if a taxpayer is considered to 'reside' in Australia according to the ordinary meaning of the word, the other tests do not need to be considered.
The term 'reside' is not defined in either the ITAA 1936 or ITAA 1997.
TR 98/17 provides the Commissioner's interpretation of the ordinary meaning of the word 'reside'. It states that the quality and character of an individual's behaviour while in Australia, as well as the period of physical presence of the individual in Australia, assist in determining whether the individual resides here.
Paragraph 20 of TR 98/17 states: 'All the facts and circumstances that describe an individual's behaviour in Australia are relevant. In particular, the following factors are useful in describing the quality and character of an individual's behaviour:

•intention or purpose of presence;
•family and business/employment ties;
•maintenance and location of assets; and
•social and living arrangements.'

TR 98/17, at paragraph 25, explains the Commissioner's view that individuals who enter Australia and extend their stay beyond 6 months are regarded as residents from the time of their arrival, as long as their presence has an habitual and routine character during the entire period.
The taxpayer has established permanent ties with Australia through their taking on a lease of property, and developing a permanent relationship here. The taxpayer's application for permanent residency and the length of time they were present in Australia during the year of income also indicate that the taxpayer is a resident of Australia for income tax purposes. The trip to Europe to visit friends and family does not affect this conclusion.
The taxpayer is considered to reside in Australia and is therefore considered a resident of Australia for income tax purposes under subsection 6(1) of the ITAA 1936. Accordingly, the taxpayer's salary and wages will be included in the taxpayer's assessable income under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
Amendment History

Date of amendment
Part
Comment

7 May 2014
Issue
Updated wording for technical clarity.

Decision
Updated wording for technical clarity.

Reasons For Decision
Updated legislative reference to be more specific.
Included full title of Taxation Ruling 98/17.
Adjusted wording to better reflect the legislation and relevant public ruling, and to improve clarity.

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)
ATO Taxation Ruling added

Date of decision:
  7 February 2002

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2001

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   subsection 6(1)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(2)   section 995-1

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

TR 98/17

Keywords

Residence in Australia
 Residence of individuals
 Domicile tests

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  DW329683; 1-5CG37S1

Business Line:
  Small Business/Individual Taxpayers

Date of publication:
  28 February 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 7 February 2002
Original statement

You are here
13 June 2014
Updated statement