ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2011/92
==================================================

Excise
 Wine equalisation tax: addition of unfermented grape juice to grape wine
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is a beverage, a grape wine, as defined in section 31-2 of the A New Tax System (Wine Equalisation Tax) Act 1999 (WET Act), if it is a product consisting of:

•grape wine (22% of the volume in the finished product);
•low sugar grape juice (60% of the volume in the finished product); and
•grape spirit: (18% of the volume in the finished product)

Decision
No, a beverage is not a grape wine, as defined in section 31-2 of the WET Act, if it is a product consisting of:

•grape wine (22% of the volume in the finished product)
•low sugar grape juice (60% of the volume in the finished product)
•grape spirit (18% of the volume in the finished product)

Facts
Low sugar grape juice is the product of either:

•Grapes that have been crushed and the juice of which is then subjected to a heating and cooling process to produce a distillate which has a low sugar content; or
•Grape wine which is then subjected to a dealcoholisation process. The dealcoholised wine is heated and cooled to produce a distillate which has a low sugar content.

Low sugar grape juice is added to a grape wine.
The blend is then fortified by the addition of grape spirit.
The percentages by volume of the constituents in the finished beverage are:

•grape wine - 22%
•low sugar grape juice - 60%
•grape spirit -18%

The finished beverage is 22% alcohol by volume.
Reasons for Decision
Section 31-2 of the WET Act defines grape wine as:

(1)
Grape wine
 is a beverage that:

(a)is the product of the complete or partial fermentation of fresh grapes or products derived solely from fresh grapes; and
(b)complies with any requirements of the regulations, made for the purposes of section 31-8, relating to grape wine.

(2) A beverage does not cease to be the product of the complete or partial fermentation of fresh grapes or products derived solely from fresh grapes merely because grape spirit, brandy, or both grape spirit and brandy, have been added to it.

Regulation 31-2.01 of the A New Tax System (Wine Equalisation Tax) Regulations 2000 (WET Regulations) states:

For paragraph 31-8(1)(a) of the Act, a beverage mentioned in paragraph 31-2(1)(a) of the Act must not contain more than 22% by volume of ethyl alcohol.

The product in question meets the requirement of regulation 31-2.01 of the WET Regulations.
Paragraph 31-2(1)(a) of the WET Act refers to the 'complete or partial fermentation of fresh grapes, or products derived solely from fresh grapes'. A literal reading of the provision would mean that no unfermented grape juice could be present for a product to meet the definition.
Further, other than grape spirit and brandy, the definition is silent on whether or not grape wine may include things other than fresh grapes or products derived solely from fresh grapes that have been fermented to an extent. A literal and narrow reading would mean that only grape spirit and brandy can be added to the fermented fresh grapes or products derived solely from fresh grapes.
The current section 31-2 of the WET Act was included in the WET Act under the A New Tax System (Indirect Tax and Consequential Amendments) Act 1999. Relevantly paragraph 1.236 of the Explanatory Memorandum to the A New Tax System (Indirect Tax and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1999 states:

Grape wine will cover traditional products such as table wine, sparkling wine and grape wines fortified by the addition of grape spirit and brandy.

The Commissioner is aware that the Australian New Zealand Food Standards Code (Food Standards), Standard 4.5.1 - Wine Production Requirements allows for additives to be used in the production of grape wine. While not directly relevant to the WET Act, Standard 4.5.1 is instructive in relation to what is seen as traditional products. Applying a literal reading to the definition such that nothing can be added to the fermented fresh grapes or products derived solely from fresh grapes would seem to result in many traditional products not meeting the definition of grape wine. Therefore, a preferred view is that additives, which are a normal part of the production of wine, may be present in the product.
The Commissioner does not seek to determine compliance with the Food Standards but notes that grape juice is an allowable additive in the production of wine. Therefore grape juice (including concentrated grape juice) could be allowed as an additive. It needs to be determined whether or not low sugar grape juice used in the production of the beverage is consistent with the normal production of wine.
The final beverage consists of 60% by volume of a product known as low sugar grape juice. The percentage of low sugar grape juice is so large that the beverage is not considered to be a product of the complete or partial fermentation of fresh grapes or products derived solely from fresh grapes to which permissible additives have been added. As such, the beverage is not a grape wine for the purposes of section 31-2 of the WET Act.
Date of decision:
  8 November 2011

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Wine Equalisation Tax) Act 1999   section 31-2   paragraph 31-2(1)(a)
A New Tax System (Wine Equalisation Tax) Regulations 2000   Regulation 31-2.01
A New Tax System (Indirect Tax and Consequential Amendments) Act 1999   The Act

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2007/192
 ATO ID 2009/15

Other References:

 Explanatory Memorandum to the A New Tax System (Indirect Tax and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1999
 Australian New Zealand Food Standard Code Standard 4.5.1 - Wine Production Requirements (Australia only)

Keywords

Grape wine

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  1-3IHFLCL

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  10 November 2011

ISSN:
 1445-2782