ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/308
================================================== Income Tax Assessability of a pension received by a South African / Australian dual resident FOI status: may be released This ATO ID has been withdrawn from the database because it contains references to the tax treaty between Australia and South Africa that was amended by the protocol to the tax treaty (Schedule 42A) which entered into force on 12 November 2008. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions up to, and including, 30 June 2009. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is a South African sourced pension received by a South African / Australian dual resident assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)
Decision
No. The South African sourced pension is not assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is an Australian resident for income tax purposes.
The taxpayer is a South African permanent resident.
The taxpayer has family residing in both Australia and South Africa (SA).
The taxpayer has a property in SA, in which they have resided in for most of their life, and property in Australia in which they live whilst visiting their family in Australia.
The taxpayer does not rent out any of their properties whilst they are not living in them. They are permanently available to the taxpayer.
The taxpayer derives pension income from SA.
The taxpayer also derives income from Australia.
The taxpayer plans to live part of each year in SA and part of each year in Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of an Australian resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all sources, whether in or out of Australia, during the income year.
Pensions are ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining liability to tax on Australian sourced income, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) and ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited provisions).
Schedule 42 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and South Africa (the SA Agreement). The SA Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and SA residents.
Article 4 of the SA Agreement provides the rules where an individual is a resident of Australia and South Africa for tax purposes (the 'tie breaker tests'). The tiebreaker tests ensure that the individual is only treated as a resident of one country for the purposes of applying the SA Agreement.
Article 4(2) of the SA Agreement states that where an individual is a resident of Australia and South Africa, then their residency status shall be determined in accordance with the following rules: (a) they shall be deemed to be a resident solely of the country in which they have a permanent home available to them, or
(b) if they have a permanent home available to them in both Australia and South Africa, they shall be deemed to be a resident solely of the country of which their personal or economic relations are the closer. The taxpayer has a permanent home available to them in both Australia and SA. The taxpayer derives income from both Australia and SA. The taxpayer also has family in Australia and in SA. The taxpayer has spent most of their life living in SA. The taxpayer does not intend to reside in Australia permanently and will still be spending part of each year in SA with their family there. As such, the taxpayer is considered to be a resident of SA for the purposes of the 'tie breaker' test.
Paragraph 66 of Taxation Ruling TR 98/17 states that where the tie breaker tests are used in determining the residence of an individual to a treaty partner country, the terms of the relevant double tax agreement should be referred to in determining the tax liability. TR 98/17 also states that where the tie breaker tests are used in determining the residence of an individual to a treaty partner country, the Australian resident status is not lost for the operation of the ITAA 1997 and the individual continues to be eligible, for example, for the tax-free threshold in respect of the Australian sourced income.
This means that even though the taxpayer is a resident of SA under the tie breaker tests, their Australian resident status is not lost for the operation of the ITAA 1997.
Article 18 of the SA Agreement deals with pensions. Article 18(1) of the SA Agreement states that a pension from sources in South Africa paid to a resident of Australia shall be exempt from tax in South Africa to the extent that the pension is included in taxable income in Australia.
As the taxpayer is a South African resident for the purposes of the SA Agreement and the pension has a South African source, Article 18(1) of the SA Agreement will not apply.
Article 21 of the SA Agreement deals with income not covered by any of the other Articles in the SA Agreement. Article 21(1) of the SA Agreement states that items of income of a resident of SA, wherever arising, not dealt with in the foregoing Articles of the SA Agreement shall be taxable only in SA.
The taxpayer's pension is not covered by any of the other Articles in the SA Agreement. Therefore, it will be taxable only in South Africa and not assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision: 29 January 2004 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2000 Year ended 30 June 2001 Year ended 30 June 2002 Year ended 30 June 2003 Year ended 30 June 2004 Year ended 30 June 2005 Year ended 30 June 2006 Year ended 30 June 2007 Year ended 30 June 2008 Year ended 30 June 2009 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subsection 6-5(2)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953 Section 4 Schedule 42 Schedule 42, Article 4 Schedule 42, Article 4(2) Schedule 42, Article 18 Schedule 42, Article 18(1) Schedule 42, Article 21 Schedule 42, Article 21(1) Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Ruling TR 98/17 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2004/307 Keywords Double tax agreements Dual residence International tax Pension South Africa Business Line: Public Groups and International Date of publication: 2 April 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 29 January 2004
Original statement You are here
10 December 2010
Archived