ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/194
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and a credit arrangement by way of an instalment contract for the sale of residential premises
 FOI status: may be released

With effect from 1 July 2015, the term 'Australia' is replaced in nearly all instances within the GST, Luxury Car Tax and Wine Equalisation Tax legislation with the term 'indirect tax zone' by the Treasury Legislation Amendment (Repeal Day) Act 2015. The scope of the new term, however, remains the same as the repealed definition of 'Australia' used in those Acts. For readability and other reasons, where the term 'Australia' is used in this document, it is referring to the 'indirect tax zone' as defined in subsection 195-1 of the GST Act.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a property investor, making an input taxed financial supply of a credit arrangement under subsection 40-5(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it gives the purchaser time to pay for a property under an instalment contract?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making an input taxed financial supply of a credit arrangement under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it gives the purchaser time to pay for a property under an instalment contract.
Facts
The entity is a property investor. The entity is selling residential premises that it owns.
The entity and the purchaser enter into an instalment contract, by which the entity provides the purchaser with a credit arrangement to enable the purchaser to purchase the residential premises.
Under the terms of the contract, the purchaser agrees to pay monthly instalments and interest over an extended period of time. The purchaser has a right to occupy the residential premises from the date on which the contract is signed (possession date) until the date on which the purchaser is required to pay the final instalment (settlement date). Title to the property does not pass to the purchaser until the settlement date.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply is made in the course of its enterprise and is connected with Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act, a financial supply is input taxed. Subsection 40-5(2) of the GST Act provides that a financial supply has the meaning given in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations).
GST Regulations subregulation 40-5.09(1) provides that the provision, acquisition, or disposal of an interest mentioned under GST Regulations subregulation 40-5.09(3) or 40-5.09(4) is a financial supply if:

(a)the provision, acquisition or disposal of that interest is:

•for consideration
•in the course or furtherance of an enterprise, and
•connected with Australia, and

(b)the supplier:

•is registered or required to be registered for GST, and
•is a financial supply provider in relation to supply of the interest.

Item 2 in the table in GST Regulations subregulation 40-5.09(3) (Item 2) lists a debt, credit arrangement or right to credit, including a letter of credit. The glossary in Schedule 1 of Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2002/2 defines a credit arrangement as 'an arrangement under which an entity lends money on terms that include deferred repayment, or under which payment of a debt owed by one entity to another is deferred or time is allowed to pay'.
The entity provides time to pay, by way of an instalment contract, to the purchaser of the residential premises. This supply is the provision of an interest in a credit arrangement and is covered by Item 2. The consideration received for the supply of an interest in a credit arrangement is the monthly interest payments paid by the purchaser under the terms of the contract.
In addition, the provision of this interest is made in the course of the entity's enterprise and it is connected with Australia. Therefore, all of the requirements of GST Regulations paragraph 40-5.09(1)(a) are satisfied.
The entity is registered for GST. As the entity created the interest in the credit arrangement, it is the financial supply provider in relation to the supply of the credit arrangement (GST Regulations subregulation 40-5.06(1)). Therefore, the requirements in GST Regulations paragraph 40-5.09(1)(b) are satisfied.
As all the requirements of GST Regulations subregulation 40-5.09(1) are satisfied, the supply of the credit arrangement is a financial supply. The entity is making an input taxed financial supply of a credit arrangement under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act.

Note 1: A financial supply under GST Regulations subregulation 40-5.09(1) includes the acquisition of an interest mentioned in GST Regulations subregulation 40-5.09(3) or 40-5.09(4) and as such, the purchaser, in acquiring an interest in a credit arrangement may also be making a financial supply where the other requirements of subregulation 40-5.09(1) are satisfied

Note 2: The supply of the residential premises is a separate supply to the credit arrangement.

Date of decision:
  18 November 2002

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   subsection 40-5(1)   subsection 40-5(2)
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999   subregulation 40-5.06(1)   subregulation 40-5.09(1)   paragraph 40-5.09(1)(a)   paragraph 40-5.09(1)(b)   subregulation 40-5.09(3)   subregulation 40-5.09(3) table item 2   subregulation 40-5.09(4)

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2002/2

Keywords

Goods and services tax
 GST financial supplies
 GST debt, loan and credit
 GST sale of residential premises
 GST residential premises

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3149164

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  8 July 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782