ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/685
==================================================

Income Tax
 Foreign tax credit on UK dividends paid by UK resident company to an Australian resident individual taxpayer
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains references to the tax treaty between Australia and the United Kingdom that was replaced with a new tax treaty which is effective from 17 December 2003. Despite its withdrawal , this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for income years up to, and including, the 2003-04 income year.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is an Australian resident individual taxpayer entitled to a credit under subsection 160AF(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) for foreign tax paid on dividends received from a United Kingdom (UK) company?
Decision
Yes. An Australian resident individual taxpayer is entitled to a credit for foreign tax paid on dividends received from a UK company pursuant to the interaction of Article 8(2) of Schedule 1 to the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act) and subsection 160AF(1) of ITAA the 1936.
Fact
The individual taxpayer is a resident of Australia for income tax purposes.
The taxpayer owns shares in a UK resident company.
The taxpayer received a dividend from the UK resident company.
The UK company has paid UK tax on the profits out of which the dividends were paid.
The dividend received from the UK company has an attached 'tax credit' of 1/9th of the dividend.
Under the dividend system introduced in the UK in 1999, a UK resident individual who receives a dividend from a UK company is entitled to a 'tax credit' of 1/9th of the dividend.
The taxpayer has not personally paid any UK tax on the dividend.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-10(4) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) provides that a resident taxpayer's assessable income includes statutory income from all sources, whether in or out of Australia.
Section 10-5 of the ITAA 1997 lists those provisions about assessable income. Included in this list is subsection 44(1) of the ITAA 1936 which deals with dividends.
Subsection 44(1) of the ITAA 1936 provides that the assessable income of a resident shareholder in a company (whether the company is resident or non-resident) will include dividends paid by the company out of profits derived by it from any source.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the Agreements Act.
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited situations).
Schedule 1 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the UK Agreement). Schedule 1A to the Agreements Act contains the Protocol amending the UK Agreement (the UK Protocol). The UK Agreement and the UK Protocol operate to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and UK residents.
Article 8(2) of the UK Agreement (amended by Article II of the UK Protocol) states that:

An Australian resident individual who receives dividends from a company which is resident in the United Kingdom shall, provided he is the beneficial owner of the dividends, be entitled to the tax credit in respect thereof to which an individual resident in the United Kingdom would have been entitled had he received those dividends, and to the payment of any excess of such credit over his liability to United Kingdom tax. Any such credit shall be treated for the purposes of Australian tax as assessable income from sources in the United Kingdom.

Article 8(2) of the UK Agreement (amended by Article II of the UK Protocol) therefore has the effect of including the tax credit on dividends received from the UK within the Australian resident individual taxpayer's assessable income.
Under Australia's foreign tax credit system, a credit is allowed for foreign tax paid on foreign income up to the amount of Australian tax payable. Subsection 160AF(1) of the ITAA 1936 provides that where the assessable income of a resident taxpayer contains foreign sourced income and foreign tax has been paid on that income, a foreign tax credit will be allowed. The foreign tax credit allowed against Australian income tax is the lesser of:

(a)the amount of that foreign tax, reduced in accordance with any relief available to the taxpayer under the law relating to that tax; or
(b)the amount of Australian tax payable in respect of the foreign income.

For the taxpayer to be entitled to a tax credit, they must have been personally liable for the foreign tax paid (paragraph 160AF(1)(b) of the ITAA 1936).
In the case of the dividend paid from the company resident in the UK to the Australian resident individual taxpayer, the tax credit in respect of the dividend represents 1/9th of the dividend. It is considered that the tax credit represents foreign tax paid and the Australian resident taxpayer is personally liable for the tax paid in the UK through the interaction of Article 8(2) of Schedule 1 to the Agreements Act and subsection 160AF(1) of the ITAA 1936.
Accordingly, the Australian resident individual taxpayer is required to gross up the dividend received from the UK company by the amount of the corresponding tax credit and include the grossed-up amount in their assessable income. The taxpayer is then eligible to claim a credit for the foreign tax paid under subsection 160AF(1) of the ITAA 1936 equal to 1/9th of the dividend paid by the UK company to the taxpayer.
As the taxpayer is a resident of Australia for income tax purposes, the dividend received from the UK company will be assessable under subsection 44(1) of the ITAA 1936. Accordingly, the dividend received from the UK company will form part of the assessable income under subsection 6-10(4) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision:
  28 July 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2001

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   subsection 44(1)   subsection 160AF(1)   paragraph 160AF(1)(b)
 Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-10(4)   section 10-5
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 1   Schedule 1, Article 8(2)   Schedule 1A   Schedule 1A, Article II

ATO Interpretative Decisions overturned by this decision

ATO ID 2002/311

Keywords

Dividend income
 Double tax agreements
 Foreign tax credits

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  1 August 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
28 July 2003
Original statement

You are here
20 June 2008
Archived