ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/1080
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of payment received by visiting university researcher from New Zealand
 FOI status: may be released

ATO ID 2003/1080 has been withdrawn from the database because it contains references to the tax treaty between Australia and New Zealand that was replaced with a new tax treaty which entered into force on 19 March 2010. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions up to, and including, 30 June 2010.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the fee received by the taxpayer, a resident of New Zealand (NZ), for the provision of research services to an Australian university assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. The fee received by the taxpayer, a resident of NZ, for the provision of research services to an Australian university is not assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is a resident of NZ and a non-resident of Australia for income tax purposes.
The taxpayer will be present in Australia for less than 183 days in the relevant year of income.
While in Australia, the taxpayer will carry out research activities for an Australian university.
The taxpayer will not have a fixed base in Australia for the purpose of performing the research activities.
The taxpayer is not an employee of the Australian university.
The taxpayer will receive a flat fee in return for the performance of the research activities.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a non resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all Australian sources during the income year.
Fees for personal services are ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining liability to tax on Australian sourced income received by a non resident, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreements contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one.
Schedule 4 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and NZ (the NZ Agreement). The NZ Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and NZ residents.
Article 14(1) of the NZ Agreement provides that income derived by a NZ resident in respect of professional services or other independent activities shall be taxable only in NZ unless the services are performed in Australia and:

(a) the individual is present in Australia for a period or periods exceeding in the aggregate 183 days in any 12 month period commencing or ending in the year of income concerned; or
(b) a fixed base is regularly available to the individual for the purpose of performing the individual's activities.

Article 14(2) of the NZ Agreement defines "professional services" to include services performed in the exercise of independent scientific, literary, artistic, educational or teaching activities as well as in the performance of the independent activities of physicians, lawyers, engineers, architects, dentists and accountants.
The services provided by the taxpayer constitute professional services for the purposes of Article 14(2) of the NZ Agreement.
The taxpayer is a resident of NZ who is present in Australia for less than 183 days in the relevant year of income and does not have a fixed base regularly available for the purpose of performing their activities in Australia.
Therefore, the income received by the taxpayer in respect of the provision of professional services is taxable only in NZ under Article 14(1) of the NZ Agreement and is not included in the taxpayer's assessable income under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision:
  20 October 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2004

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 4   Schedule 4, Article 14(1)   Schedule 4, Article 14(2)

Keywords

Academic staff
 Double tax agreements
 Exempt income
 International tax
 New Zealand

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  28 November 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
20 October 2003
Original statement

You are here
22 October 2010
Archived