ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/1099
==================================================

Fringe Benefits Tax
 Car fringe benefits: logbook requirements - exercise of the Commissioner's discretion
 FOI status: may be released

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Will the Commissioner, in the course of reviewing the affairs of an employer, exercise his discretion under subsection 123B(1) of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 (FBTAA) to waive the substantiation rules, when considering a log book which records business kilometres but fails to record opening and closing odometer readings for each business journey?
Decision
Yes. Where the Commissioner is satisfied that the calculation of business kilometres is accurate, the discretion under subsection 123B(1) of the FBTAA to waive strict log book substantiation requirements will be exercised.
Facts
The employer elects to calculate the taxable value of car fringe benefits under the operating cost method.
The employer maintains an electronic logbook for a 12-week period for each car. The log book records the following information:

1. opening and closing odometer readings for the start and end of the 12-week period
2. the date and appointment time for each business journey
3. the purpose of each business journey (including client details)
4. precise start and end address details for each business journey, and
5. the distance travelled for each business journey.

The log book does not record odometer readings at the start and end of each business journey.
At the end of the 12-week log book period the address details of each business journey are sent to a specialist third-party to independently and accurately calculate the kilometres for each business journey on the basis of the shortest possible direct road route.
The employer is the subject of an audit of its FBT return by the Australian Taxation Office.
Reasons for Decision
Car fringe benefits valued under the provisions of section 10 of the FBTAA are subject to the requirement in section 10A to maintain, amongst other things, 'log book records'. 'Logbook records' are defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA and require the following entries to be made in respect of each business journey:

• the date on which the journey began and the date on which it ended; and
• the respective odometer readings of the car at the beginning and end of the journey; and
• the number of kilometres travelled by the car in the course of the journey; and
• the purpose or purposes of the journey.

However, specific relief from the substantiation requirements exists in the form of a Commissioner's discretion under section 123B of the FBTAA which states that

the substantiation rules do not apply in relation to a benefit if the nature and quality of evidence that a person has satisfies the Commissioner that the taxable value of the benefit is not greater than the amount specified in the taxpayer's return for the FBT year as the taxable value of that benefit.

At the time that section 123B was incorporated into the FBTAA, it was stated that the intention was to give the Commissioner a similar discretion to that which operates under the income tax legislation. The similar requirements of the FBTAA and the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 means that Taxation Ruling TR 97/24 Income tax: relief from the effects of failing to substantiate, is also useful when considering the application of section 123B of the FBTAA. Taxation Ruling TR 97/24 at paragraph 41 has this to say about the nature of 'sufficient evidence':

It is not possible to specify the nature and quality of supporting evidence that satisfies the Commissioner in all circumstances. Each case must be considered on its own merits and a common sense approach applied.

Regard has to be had to the overall purpose of a log book when calculating a car fringe benefit under section 10 of the FBTAA. The Explanatory Memorandum to the FBTAA at Clause 10 says that a 'log book or similar document is required to be maintained to substantiate the number of kilometres on business journeys...'
Accordingly, the lack of opening and closing odometer readings for each business journey does not impact on the overall integrity of the log book. The employer has in place a system which results in the accurate calculation of business kilometres. The Commissioner's discretion under section 123B of the FBTAA will therefore be exercised in these circumstances to waive the strict log book requirements, as the employer is able to substantiate the number of business kilometres travelled.
The employer is therefore able to use the operating cost method and make the reduction for the number of business kilometres travelled.

Amendment History

Date of Amendment
Part
Comment

14 July 2015
Reasons for Decision
Changed formatting of 'Income Tax Assessment Act 1997' to be consistent with ATO Standards for Citation.

14 July 2015
Reasons for Decision
Capitalised 'Taxation Ruling' to be consistent with ATO Standards for Citation.

Date of decision:
  4 December 2003

Year of income:
  Year ending 31 March 2004

Legislative References:

Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986   section 10   section 10A   subsection 136(1)   section 123B
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   Table of Contents

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling TR 97/24

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2002/925

Other References:

 Explanatory Memorandum to the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986

Keywords

Car fringe benefits
 FBT business journey
 FBT business kilometre
 FBT car substantiation
 FBT log book records
 FBT operating cost
 Fringe benefits tax

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3624455; 1-69ZOPXP; 1-DESS6YY

Business Line:
  Superannuation and Employer Obligations

Date of publication:
  12 December 2003

Date reviewed:
  18 June 2026

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 4 December 2003
Original statement

You are here
14 July 2015
Updated statement