ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/318
==================================================

Income Tax
 Foreign Pension from the Australian Embassy in USA - whether assessable to an Australian resident
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn effective from 1 July 2007 due to the legislation being repealed. This ATO ID is still relevant for any issues prior to this date.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the monthly superannuation pension paid to an Australian resident taxpayer, from the Australian Embassy in the United States of America (USA), included in their assessable income under section 27H of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) ?
Decision
Yes. The monthly superannuation pension paid to an Australian resident taxpayer, from the Australian Embassy in the USA, is included in their assessable income under section 27H of the ITAA 1936.
Facts
The taxpayer was formerly a resident of the USA and they worked for the Australian Embassy in that country.
The taxpayer now lives in Australia and is a resident of Australia for tax purposes.
The taxpayer receives a monthly superannuation pension from the Australian Embassy in the USA.
The superannuation is paid out of funds provided to the Embassy by the Australian government.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) provides that the assessable income of a resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all sources during the income year.
Section 6-10 of the ITAA 1997 provides that a taxpayer's assessable income includes statutory income amounts that are not ordinary income but are included in assessable income by another provision. The assessable income of an Australian resident includes statutory income from all sources, whether in or out of Australia (subsection 6-10(4) of the ITAA 1997).
Section 10-5 of the ITAA 1997 lists those provisions about assessable income. Included in this list is section 27H of the ITAA 1936 which provides that annuities and superannuation pensions are included in assessable income.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income received by a resident it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double agreement contained in the International Tax Agreement Act 1953 (the Agreement Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited provisions).
Schedule 2 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australian and the USA (the USA Convention). The USA Convention operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and USA residents.
Article 19 of the USA Convention deals with Governmental remuneration. It provides that wages, salary and similar remuneration, including pensions, paid from the funds of the Australia government for Labor or personal services performed as an employee in discharge of governmental functions to an Australian citizen shall be exempt from tax in the USA.
The employees at an Australian Embassy perform services in discharge of governmental functions.
The taxpayer's pension is paid, from funds provided by the Australian government, in respect of their work at the embassy and therefore the pension will be exempt from tax in the USA.
The taxpayer will be assessable on the income received from the pension under section 27H of the ITAA 1936.
Date of decision:
  6 March 2002

Year of income:
  Year ending 30 June 2002

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   section 27H
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(2)   section 6-10   subsection 6-10(4)   section 10-5
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 2   Schedule 2, Article 19

Keywords

Annuities and superannuation
 Foreign pension income
 United States of America
 Foreign income
 Double tax agreements
 Superannuation

Business Line:
  Small Business/Individual Taxpayers

Date of publication:
  28 March 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 6 March 2002
Original statement

You are here
16 November 2007
Archived