ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/667
================================================== Income Tax Withholding Tax - UK resident receiving Australian sourced royalties FOI status: may be released This ATO Interpretative Decision is withdrawn from the database because it contains references to the tax treaty between Australia and the United Kingdom that was replaced with a new tax treaty which is effective from 17 December 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO Interpretative Decision continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for income years up to, and including, the 2003-2004 income year. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Are Australian sourced royalties derived by a United Kingdom (UK) resident subject to withholding tax under subsection 128B(2B) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936)?
Decision
Yes. Australian sourced royalties derived by a UK resident are subject to withholding tax under subsection 128B(2B) of the ITAA 1936 limited to the rate of 10 per cent.
Facts
The taxpayer is a resident of the UK and a non resident for Australian taxation purposes.
The taxpayer wrote an article in the UK which was published in Australia.
The taxpayer owned the copyright over this article.
The taxpayer received a one off payment in relation to the Australian publication of the article.
Australian tax was withheld from the payment.
The taxpayer is required to pay income tax on the gross amount of this payment in the UK.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6(1) of the ITAA 1936 provides that the term 'royalty' includes any amount paid or credited, and whether the payment or credit is periodical or not, to the extent to which it is consideration for the use of, or the right to use any copyright.
Taxation Ruling IT 2660 discusses the ordinary meaning of 'royalty' and how that meaning is extended by the definition in subsection 6(1) of the ITAA 1936. At paragraph 10 of IT 2660 it states that at common law a royalty: '... is a payment made in return for the right to exercise a beneficial privilege or right (eg ... to use a copyright...). ...Amongst other things, copyright can cover music, literary and artistic works...' The payment to the taxpayer received as a result of the publication of their article in Australia fits within the meaning of royalty. It is a payment they have received in consideration of the Australian use of the taxpayer's copyright.
Dividends, interest and royalties paid to non-residents are generally subject to withholding tax under subsections 128B(1), 128B(2) and 128B(2B) of the ITAA 1936 respectively.
Dividend, interest and royalty withholding taxes represent the final Australian tax liability for those payments and therefore, the payments are not included in the Australian assessable income of a non resident (section 128D of the ITAA 1936).
In determining liability to tax on Australian sourced income received by a non resident, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1936 so that those Acts are read as one. Subsection 4(2) of the Agreements Act provides that the Agreements Act overrides the ITAA 1936 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited provisions).
Schedule 1 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and the UK (the UK Agreement). The UK Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and UK residents.
Article 10 of the UK Agreement deals with the taxation of royalties. Paragraph (2) of Article 10 of the UK Agreement provides that the Australian tax on royalties derived and beneficially owned by a UK resident shall not exceed 10 per cent of the gross amount of the royalties.
The Australian sourced royalty payment received by the taxpayer will therefore be subject to withholding tax in Australia but the rate of tax is limited to 10 per cent of the gross amount of the payment.
Note: Paragraph (1) of Article 19 of the UK Agreement provides that, subject to the provisions of the law of the UK, Australian tax payable directly, or by deduction, on income from sources in Australia shall be allowed as a credit against any UK tax payable on the same income.
Date of decision: 2 May 2002 Year of income: Year ending 30 June 2002 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 subsection 6(1) subsection 128B(1) subsection 128B(2) subsection 128B(2B) section 128D
International Tax Agreements Act 1953 section 4 subsection 4(2) Schedule 1 Schedule 1, Article 10 Schedule 1, Article 10(2) Schedule 1, Article 19(1) Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Ruling IT 2660 Keywords Double tax agreements Non resident individuals No resident royalty withholding tax Royalties United Kingdom Withholding taxes Business Line: Small Business/Individual Taxpayers Date of publication: 26 June 2002 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 2 May 2002
Original statement You are here
25 January 2008
Archived