ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/53
================================================== Superannuation Superannuation Guarantee Scheme and scholarships FOI status: may be released This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Does the entity, an Australian University, have an obligation under the Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 (SGAA) to make superannuation contributions on 'industry based learning scholarships' paid by the entity to students?
Decision
An entity does not have an obligation under the SGAA to make superannuation contributions on 'industry based learning scholarships' paid by it to students.
Facts
Scholarships (industry based learning scholarships) are offered by the entity, an Australian University, to full-time students who are enrolled at the University and undertaking a course of study within the relevant faculty.
There are certain conditions that must be satisfied by a student of the University in order for the student to be eligible for a scholarship.
One of those conditions is that the student must undertake training within the industry relevant to the student's coursework.
The scholarship, which is paid by the University to the student, is funded by the relevant industry-based organisation.
Each student awarded a scholarship is to undertake a placement with the industry-based organisation for a prescribed time period.
The industry-based organisation is under no obligation to employ any student either during the scholarship or after its completion.
The stipend of the scholarship is paid fortnightly to the student by the University in his or her capacity as a student.
The payments made under the scholarship are not made on the condition that the student will become an employee of either the University or the industry-based organisation.
The industry based organisation does not make any direct payments to the student.
Reasons for Decision
An obligation to make contributions under the SGAA arises when there is an employer-employee relationship within the meaning of the SGAA. The terms 'employer' and 'employee' are defined in section 12 of the SGAA. Relevantly, subsection 12(1) of the SGAA states that 'employer' and 'employee' have their ordinary meaning. At general law, the relationship between an employer and an employee is a contractual one, or otherwise known as a 'contract of employment'. Ordinarily, an employer is a person or entity that engages another to perform work or provide services or labour under the contract. The person who performs the work or provides the services or labour is otherwise known as the employee. The consideration or remuneration that the employee receives for working under such a contractual arrangement is generally referred to as 'salary or wages'. Subsection 12(3) of the SGAA extends the definition of employee to include a person who receives payment under a contract wholly or principally for labour.
In the circumstances of this case, the relevant students enrolled at the University are engaged in a course of study with the University on a full-time basis. Some of the students undertaking this course of study may be eligible for a scholarship. Each student awarded a scholarship must undertake a work placement of a certain duration with an organisation in the industry relevant to the student's coursework. The stipend of the scholarship is paid to the student by the University in his or her capacity as a student. There is no evidence that the students are engaged in employment with the University nor is it a condition of the scholarship that a student engages in employment with the University.
Having regard to these facts, it is considered that there is no employer/employee relationship between the University and students who are offered a scholarship. The awarding of the scholarship does not alter the status of the student into that of an employee of the University. The student is not performing any work or services for the University under a contract of employment nor are they working under a contract wholly or principally for their labour. The payments under the scholarship relate solely to the student's course of study and do not constitute salary or wages.
Accordingly, the University will not have an obligation under the SGAA to make superannuation guarantee contributions on the scholarship awarded to the students. Amendment History Date of Amendment
Part
Comment 28 November 2025
Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)
Replaced reference to SGR 2005/1 with reference to TR 2023/4 Decision
Updated to meet accessibility and style requirements Date of decision: 1 September 2004 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2004 Legislative References: Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 subsection 12(1) subsection 12(3) Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Ruling 2023/4 Keywords Scholarships, fellowships & bursaries Superannuation guarantee scheme Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 4119949; 1-7U9QYIL; 1-JT71BGC Business Line: Superannuation Date of publication: 18 February 2005 Date reviewed: 21 October 2025 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 1 September 2004
Original statement You are here
28 November 2025
Updated statement