ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/1088
==================================================

Income Tax
 Exempt entities: non-profit status - surplus funds paid to parent body
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Can the taxpayer, a wholly owned subsidiary of a body which is an exempt entity by virtue of Division 50 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997), be considered an exempt entity in its own right if it pays surplus profits to its parent?
Decision
No. The distribution of profits to a member, even when that member is an exempt entity, will prevent an organisation from being considered to be a non-profit entity. Division 50 of the ITAA 1997 requires, among other things, that exempt entities must be non-profit.
Facts
The taxpayer company primarily engages in providing public clinical and other health services.
The company is a wholly-owned subsidiary of an exempt entity but operates with total autonomy and is self-funded.
The company's Memorandum of Association contains clauses preventing distributions of profit during operation and on winding up. The constitution of the company makes allowance for surplus funds to be retained by them as reserves for future expenditure, or to be 'donated' to the parent, with a request that they be used by the parent institution for research in areas relevant to the operations of the subsidiary.
The company has not made donations to research bodies other than the parent. However, there is a history of significant surplus funds being regularly passed to the parent.
Reasons
An entity will be considered to be an exempt entity under Division 50 of the ITAA 1997 if it fulfils the requirements of one of the entity types listed within Division 50, together with any special conditions which may attach to that entity type.
An entity cannot be an exempt entity unless it operates on a non-profit basis (Else-Mitchell J in McGarvie-Smith Institute v. Campbelltown Municipal Council [1965] NSWR 1641 and Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Cappid Pty Ltd, 71 ATC 4121; (1971) 2 ATR 319.
A 'non profit company' is defined in subsection 3(1) of the Income Tax Rates Act 1986 and means, among other things, a company that:

(a) is not carried on for the purposes of profit or gain to its individual members; and
(b) is, by the terms of its constituent documents, prohibited from making any distribution, whether in money, property or otherwise, to its members.

In the present case, the constitution of the company allows it to make donations to its parent body - its only member. In limited cases, it may be accepted that a subsidiary may make gifts to its parent or ultimate beneficiary, in that entity's capacity as, for example, a Deductible Gift Recipient or a charity or other type of exempt organisation. However, in the case where a payment is made to a parent body, whether the payment is truly a gift is a matter which must be determined objectively, at the time the gift is made.
A payment to a parent body is more likely to be a profit distribution and less likely to be a gift if there is evidence that the subsidiary has the ability to consistently make profits without the support of external funding or donors, and there is evidence of a purpose to distribute a significant portion of these profits to the parent body.
The ability of the subsidiary entity to consistently generate profits could be evidenced by the fact that the entity is operating in a commercial environment with profit making competitors. A purpose of passing profits to the parent could be evidenced by:

• Clauses in the subsidiary constitution which indicate a purpose of passing profits to the parent body.
• Informal arrangements which indicate an ongoing intention to regularly distribute profits.
• A history of distributing funds to the parent.
• The entity does not make donations to bodies other than the parent of the same scale and frequency as those made to the parent.

In the present case, the company operates in a commercial environment and has consistently generated significant profits. In addition, the form of the company's Memorandum of Association indicates that it has a purpose of generating funds to distribute to the parent body. The funds distributed to the parent are a significant portion of the company's annual profits. The company has no history of donating funds to bodies other than the parent.
Therefore, it is considered that the funds transferred to the parent body in this case are not donations, but distributions of profit. As the entity has paid profits to a member, it is not operating as a non-profit organisation and cannot be an exempt entity under Division 50 of the ITAA 1997.
Note: A body which makes profit distributions to members cannot be a Deductible Gift Recipient under Division 30 of the ITAA 1997, a public benevolent institution for the purposes of subsection 57A(1) of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act (1986) (FBTAA) or a rebatable employer for the purposes of subsection 65J(1) of the FBTAA.
Date of decision:
  26 August 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2002

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   Division 50   Division 30
Income Tax Rates Act 1986   subsection 3(1)
Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act (1986)   subsection 57A(1)   subsection 65J(1)

Case References:

McGarvie-Smith Institute v. Campbelltown Municipal Council   [1965] NSWR 1641

Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Cappid Pty Ltd   71 ATC 4121   (1971) 2 ATR 319

Keywords

Exempt benefits
 Fringe benefits tax
 Public Benevolent Institution
 Rebatable employer
 Charitable institution
 Gifts
 Non profit bodies
 Non profit entities
 Non profit companies

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3681324; 1-7SKGXP2, 1-E0KPYJT

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  5 December 2003

Date reviewed:
  22 March 2018

ISSN:
 1445-2782