ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/686
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and input tax credits for renovating farm manager's residence
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a farm operator, entitled to an input tax credit under section 11-20 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), for acquisitions made to renovate the farm manager's residence?
Decision
No, the entity is not entitled to an input tax credit under section 11-20 of the GST Act for acquisitions made to renovate the farm manager's residence.
Facts
The entity is a farm operator. The entity's farming property is located in a remote area.
The entity employs a farm manager to manage the property. The farm manager is an employee of the entity. It requires the manager to stay on the property and provides the manager with residential premises on the property. The farm manager does not pay any rent for the premises.
The entity engages various suppliers to renovate the residence. The supply of these goods and services to the entity are taxable supplies under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Section 11-20 of the GST Act provides that an entity is entitled to the input tax credit for any creditable acquisition that it makes.
Section 11-5 of the GST Act lists the requirements that must be satisfied for an entity to make a creditable acquisition. One of those requirements is that the entity must acquire the thing solely or partly for a creditable purpose (see paragraph 11-5(a) of the GST Act).
Section 11-15 of the GST Act defines the meaning of creditable purpose. Paragraph 11-15(2)(a) of the GST Act provides that an entity does not acquire a thing for a creditable purpose to the extent that the acquisition relates to making supplies that would be input taxed.
The entity's acquisitions relate to the provision of a residence to the farm manager. Therefore, it needs to be determined whether this provision of a residence is an input taxed supply.
Under section 40-35 of the GST Act, the supply of premises by way of lease, hire or licence is input taxed where the supply is of residential premises. Section 195-1 of the GST Act defines residential premises to mean, in part, land or a building that is occupied as a residence, or for residential accommodation; or is intended to be occupied and is capable of being occupied, as a residence, or for residential accomodation. The premises, in this instance, are capable of being, and are, occupied as a residence. Accordingly, the entity is providing the farm manager with residential premises.
The supply of the residential premises is also the provision of a housing fringe benefit to the farm manager as an employee. Paragraph 19 of Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2001/3 provides that the consideration for the supply of the fringe benefit is the services of the employee (unless the employee makes a payment or contribution). However, it must be determined if the supply of the fringe benefit is a taxable supply.
The supply of the residential premises cannot be by way of lease or hire as the farm manager does not pay any consideration for the residential premises. However, by virtue of the entity's requirement that the farm manager occupy the residential premises as a condition of employment, the farm manager subsequently has a licence to occupy the premises. The entity is therefore supplying residential premises by way of licence which is input taxed under section 40-35 of the GST Act.
As the entity is making an input taxed supply of the residential premises, the acquisitions made to renovate the residential premises are acquisitions that relate to the making of an input taxed supply. The entity is not making the acquisitions for a creditable purpose (see paragraph 11-15(2)(a) of the GST Act) and the acquisitions are not creditable acquisitions under section 11-5 of the GST Act.
The entity therefore is not entitled to an input tax credit under section 11-20 of the GST Act for acquisitions made to renovate the farm manager's residence.
Date of decision:
  15 February 2002

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 9-5   section 11-5   paragraph 11-5(a)   section 11-15   paragraph 11-15(2)(a)   section 11-20   section 40-35   section 195-1

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

GSTR 2001/3

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 GST property & construction
 GST residential premises
 GST residential rents
 GST supplies & acquisitions
 Creditable acquisition
 Creditable purpose
 Input taxed supplies

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  CW261738

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  3 July 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782