ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/204
================================================== Income tax Capital Allowances: business related costs - expenditure to defend your business against a takeover - finding a suitable bidder FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as former section 40-880 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 has been repealed. New section 40-880 provides deductions for a greater range of business related costs where the expenditure is incurred after 30 June 2005. Expenditure incurred after that date is deducted under new section 40-880. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of expenditure incurred before 1 July 2005. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the capital expenditure incurred by the taxpayer to seek out and encourage a suitable entity to takeover the taxpayer 'expenditure to defend your business against a takeover' for the purpose of paragraph 40-880(1)(d) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. The capital expenditure incurred by the taxpayer was to seek out and encourage a suitable entity to takeover the taxpayer and not to defend its business against a takeover as required by paragraph 40-880(1)(d) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer, a company that carried on business for a taxable purpose, was approached by an unrelated entity to acquire 100% of the taxpayer's issued shares. The taxpayer's Board of Directors did not accept the entity's proposal because they considered the proposal was not in the best interests of the taxpayer's members.
The proposal led the taxpayer to believe that they might be vulnerable to other offers of this nature. The taxpayer subsequently incurred capital expenditure on consultancy and advertising fees to locate and select an entity and to arrange for that entity to acquire 100% of the taxpayer's issued shares at a price considered by the Board of Directors to be in the best interests of the taxpayer's members.
The taxpayer successfully identified an entity which subsequently acquired 100% of its issued shares.
Reasons for Decision
Subject to the exclusions in subsection 40-880(3) of the ITAA 1997, paragraph 40-880(1)(d) of the ITAA 1997 provides a deduction for capital expenditure you incur to defend your business against a takeover, to the extent your business is carried on for a taxable purpose. For the paragraph to apply there must be, at the least, the attempt of a takeover.
The word 'takeover' is not defined for the purposes of section 40-880 of the ITAA 1997 and, accordingly, takes its ordinary meaning relevant to the context in which it is used. The Australian Oxford Dictionary, 1999, Oxford University Press, Melbourne, defines takeover as the 'assumption of control (especially of a business); the buying out of one company by another'.
The proposed purchase of all of the taxpayer's issued shares would have resulted in the purchaser assuming control of the company. For the purposes of paragraph 40-880(1)(d) of the ITAA 1997, the proposal to purchase all of the taxpayer's issued shares was an attempt to takeover the taxpayer's business, even though the proposal did not ultimately proceed.
The requirement in paragraph 40-880(1)(d) of the ITAA 1997 that the capital expenditure be incurred 'to defend' is satisfied where the expenditure is incurred directly for the purpose of, and as an integral part of the process of, defending your business against a takeover. The word 'defend' is not defined for the purpose of paragraph 40-880(1)(d) and, accordingly, takes its ordinary meaning relevant to the context in which it is used. The Australian Oxford Dictionary defines 'defend' as 'to resist an attack made on; protect (a person or thing) from harm or danger'.
Subsection 181(1) of the Corporations Act 2001 states that a director of a corporation must exercise their powers and discharge their duties in good faith in the best interests of the corporation. The taxpayer's Board of Directors did not accept the entity's proposal because they considered the proposal was not in the best interests of the taxpayer's members. The proposal led the taxpayer to believe that they might be vulnerable to other offers of this nature. Following the proposal, the taxpayer incurred capital expenditure on consultancy and advertising fees to locate, select and arrange for an entity to acquire 100% of the taxpayer's issued shares at a price considered by the Board of Directors to be in the best interests of the taxpayer's members.
Although the taxpayer's actions may have been prompted by the initial proposal to acquire its shares, the expenditure incurred on the consultancy and advertising fees was not directly for the purpose of, and as an integral part of, the process of defending their business against the entity's takeover proposal. Rather, the expenditure was incurred as a result of a separate commercial decision by the taxpayer to ensure that the taxpayer's members were able to dispose of their shares in the taxpayer at a price that the taxpayer's Board of Directors considered to be in the members' best interests. To implement this decision, the taxpayer took active steps to promote the sale of the issued shares in the taxpayer through a process developed to achieve a takeover that was acceptable to the taxpayer's Board of Directors.
The dominant purpose of the taxpayer's actions was to secure the ultimate sale of the issued shares in the taxpayer at an acceptable price. The taxpayer's actions lacked the necessary connection with the entity's takeover proposal for the expenditure incurred to be 'expenditure to defend your business against a takeover' for the purpose of paragraph 40-880(1)(d) of the ITAA 1997.
Accordingly, the capital expenditure incurred by the taxpayer on consultancy and advertising fees to successfully engage a suitable entity to takeover the taxpayer was not 'expenditure to defend your business against a takeover' for the purpose of paragraph 40-880(1)(d) of the ITAA 1997, because it was not incurred directly for the purpose of, and as an integral part of the process of, defending their business against a takeover.
Date of decision: 20 July 2006 Year of income: Year ending 30 June 2005 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 40-880 paragraph 40-880(1)(d)v subsection 40-880(3)
Corporations Act 2001 subsection 181(1) Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2004/72 ATO ID 2005/265 ATO ID 2005/342 ATO ID 2006/205 Other References: Australian Oxford Dictionary, 1999, Oxford University Press, Melbourne Keywords Blackhole expenditure Business related costs Capital expenditure Takeovers & mergers Uniform capital allowances system Business Line: Administration, Business and Personal Taxes Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 11 August 2006 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 20 July 2006
Original statement You are here
11 August 2006
Archived