ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/518
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and student accommodation in boarding schools
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn and is replaced by ATO ID 2004/977.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a boarding school with more than 50% of its boarders being students from rural or remote locations, making a GST-free supply under section 38-105 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it provides accommodation to a student undertaking a primary course at a separate institution?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply under section 38-105 of the GST Act when it provides accommodation to a student undertaking a primary course at a separate institution.
Facts
The entity is a boarding school. The entity supplies GST-free primary courses. The entity supplies accommodation (board and lodging) in its supervised boarding house to students undertaking its primary courses.
The entity also supplies accommodation to a student who is undertaking a GST-free primary course supplied by another entity at a separate institution.
More than 50% of the students in receipt of the entity's supply of accommodation are from rural or remote locations.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Section 38-105 of the GST Act sets out when a supply of student accommodation is GST-free.
A supply is GST-free under subsection 38-105(1) of the GST Act if:

•it is a supply of student accommodation to students undertaking a primary course, a secondary course or a special education course; and
•the supplier of the accommodation also supplies the course.

Although the entity is supplying student accommodation to a student that is undertaking a primary course, the student is undertaking that primary course at a separate institution. The entity is not the supplier of that primary course. Therefore, the entity's supply of accommodation is not GST-free under subsection 38-105(1) of the GST Act.
A supply of accommodation is GST-free under subsection 38-105(2) of the GST Act if:

•it is a supply of student accommodation to students who are undertaking a primary, secondary or special education course; and
•the accommodation is provided in a hostel whose primary purpose is to provide accommodation for students from rural or remote locations who are undertaking such courses.

Therefore, in order for the entity (a boarding school) to provide GST-free student accommodation under subsection 38-105(2) of the GST Act, these criteria must be satisfied:

1. the supply of accommodation must be to students undertaking a primary, secondary or special education course;
2. the entity's boarding house must be a hostel; and
3. the primary purpose of the entity's boarding house must be to provide accommodation to students from rural or remote locations who are undertaking a primary, secondary or special education course.

The entity is supplying accommodation in its boarding house to a student that is undertaking a primary course. It does not matter that the entity is not the supplier of the primary course, as long as the student is undertaking a primary course. Therefore, the first criterion is satisfied.
In relation to the second criterion, it must be determined whether the entity's boarding house is a 'hostel'. The word 'hostel' is defined in The Macquarie Dictionary (1997) as

'1. a supervised place of accommodation, usually supplying board and lodging, provided at a comparatively low cost, as one for students, nurses or the like.'

The entity supplies board and lodging from its supervised boarding house. In terms of the accommodation provided, the characteristics of the entity's boarding house and a 'hostel' are similar. Therefore, the entity's boarding house is a hostel for the purposes of paragraph 38-105(2)(b) of the GST Act, and satisfies the second criterion.
Under the third criterion, the primary purpose of the entity's boarding house must be to provide accommodation to students from rural or remote locations who are undertaking a primary, secondary or special education course.
The primary purpose of a boarding school's accommodation facilities is determined by the actual or expected proportion of students from rural or remote locations being accommodated during each calendar year. Therefore, if the number of boarding students from rural or remote locations is expected to or actually does exceed the number of boarding students not from rural or remote locations, the primary purpose test is satisfied. It does not matter whether the individual student receiving the supply is from a rural or remote location as long as the primary purpose test is met.
As more than 50% of the students in receipt of the supply of accommodation by the entity are from rural or remote locations and are undertaking primary courses, the third criterion is satisfied.
As all three criteria are satisfied, the entity is making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-105(2) of the GST Act when it provides accommodation to a student undertaking a primary course at a separate institution. The supply is GST-free under subsection 38-105(2) of the GST Act regardless of who is supplying the primary course and regardless of whether the individual student is from a remote or rural location.

[Note 1: The primary purpose test need only be conducted once in a calendar year unless it is believed that changing circumstances would result in the proportion of rural or remote students being 50% or less. If this were the case, the primary purpose test is not satisfied from the date the proportion fell to, or below, 50%.

Note 2: This decision also applies where students are undertaking GST-free secondary courses or GST-free special education courses.]

Date of decision:
  9 May 2002

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 38-105   subsection 38-105(1)   subsection 38-105(2)   paragraph 38-105(2)(b)

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2000/30

Other References:

The Macquarie Dictionary, 1997, 3rd Edition, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, New South Wales.

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 GST free
 GST education
 Student accommodation
 Student accommodation - non-tertiary

Business Line:
  GST

Date of publication:
  31 May 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 9 May 2002
Original statement

You are here
24 December 2004
Archived