ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2011/60
==================================================

Fringe Benefits Tax
 Exempt benefits: emergency assistance - cash payment to victim of natural disaster to provide immediate relief
 FOI status: may be released

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
If an employer makes an emergency relief cash payment to an employee who is a victim of a natural disaster, is that payment a benefit that is exempt under section 58N of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 (FBTAA)?
Decision
Yes. The emergency relief cash payment provided by the employer to the employee who was a victim of a natural disaster is an exempt benefit under section 58N of the FBTAA.
Facts
Part-way through the FBT year an employee's house is destroyed in a flood.
The house is uninhabitable from the date of the flood.
The employee has no other accommodation following the natural disaster.
The employer subsequently made an emergency relief cash payment to the employee to cover the immediate expenses for meals and food supplies, clothing and hire of household goods. This emergency relief cash payment also covered anticipated rent for a reasonable period of time to enable the employee to find alternative permanent accommodation.
The emergency relief cash payment to the employee is not a payment of 'salary or wages' as defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA.
The emergency relief cash payment to the employee is a property benefit in accordance with section 40 of the FBTAA.

Reasons for Decision
Section 58N of the FBTAA provides an exemption for 'emergency assistance' provided to an employee or to an associate of an employee.
In this situation in order for the benefit to be exempt under section 58N of the FBTAA, the following two conditions must be satisfied:

(a)a benefit is provided in respect of the employment of an employee of an employer; and
(b)the benefit is provided solely by way of the grant of emergency assistance to the recipient.

The emergency relief cash payment is a benefit provided in respect of the employment of the employee of the employer as required by paragraph 58N(a) of the FBTAA.
For the purposes of the exemption provided by section 58N an 'emergency' is defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA to mean:

an emergency involving any of the following matters:

(a)a natural disaster;
(b)a conflict involving an armed force;
(c)a civil disturbance;
(d)an accident;
(e)a serious illness;
(f)any similar matter.

The flood was an emergency involving a natural disaster as defined in paragraph (a) of the definition of 'emergency' in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA.
The definition of 'emergency assistance' in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA states:

in relation to a person, means assistance granted to the person where:

(a)the person is, or is at immediate risk of becoming, the victim of an emergency;
(b)the assistance is granted to the person solely in order to provide immediate relief;
(c)the assistance is in respect of all or any of the following matters:

(i)first aid or other emergency health care;
(ii)emergency meals or food supplies;
(iii)emergency clothing;
(iv)emergency transport;
(v)emergency accommodation;
(vi)emergency use of household goods;
(vii)temporary repairs;
(viii)any similar matter.

The emergency relief cash payment to the employee is 'emergency assistance' as defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA as:

(a)the payment has been made to an employee whose house was destroyed in the flood and therefore was granted to a person who is a victim of an emergency;
(b)the payment was to cover immediate expenses for meals and food supplies, hire of household goods and rent for a reasonable period of time to enable an employee to find alternative permanent accommodation. Therefore, the assistance was granted to the employee solely to provide immediate relief as a victim of an emergency; and
(c)the assistance is in respect of emergency meals or food supplies, emergency clothing, emergency use of household goods and emergency accommodation.

Accordingly, the emergency relief cash payment by the employer to the employee who was a victim of a natural disaster is an exempt benefit under section 58N of the FBTAA.

Note

If the benefit (being the emergency relief cash payment) provided is not limited in the relevant categories to what can reasonably be considered to be adequate to meet the immediate relief of an employee, no part of the payment would be exempt under section 58N of the FBTAA. The payment would be a property fringe benefit.

Long-term benefits such as the provision of a new house or household goods to replace those destroyed as a result of an emergency are not exempt under section 58N of the FBTAA.

Amendment History

Date of Amendment
Part
Comment

9 June 2017
Reason for Decision
Paragraph two updated for clarity. Insert the word 'two'

Date of decision:
  31 May 2011

Year of income:
  Year ended 31st March 2012

Legislative References:

Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986   section 58N   paragraph 58N(a)   paragraph 58N(b)   subsection 136(1)

Keywords

Fringe benefits tax
 Exempt benefits
 FBT emergency assistance

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  1-2U1NDVA, 1-BJ4O89W

Business Line:
  Superannuation and Employer Obligations

Date of publication:
  29 July 2011

Date reviewed:
  15 April 2026

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
31 May 2011
Original statement

You are here
 9 June 2017
Updated statement