ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/732
==================================================

Excise
 Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme: Residential - Generation of electricity
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is a client entitled to a diesel fuel rebate under paragraph 78A(1)(b) of the Excise Act 1901 or paragraph 164(1)(b) of the Customs Act 1901, for diesel fuel they purchase and use to generate electricity supplied free of charge to three groups of residences within a defined area of land?
Decision
Yes. The client is entitled to a diesel fuel rebate under paragraph 78A(1)(b) of the Excise Act or paragraph 164(1)(b) of the Customs Act, for diesel fuel they purchase and use to generate electricity supplied free of charge to three groups of residences within a defined area of land as:

(a)they purchase and use fuel to generate electricity 'at' the residential premises; and
(b)the electricity is used in meeting various domestic requirements of residents of those premises.

Facts
The client leases a defined area of land. The land is managed by a board of management.
A plan of management has been drawn up setting out how the land will be managed. The plan provides that the client is the essential service provider for the land, which includes the provision of power, water, sewage and rubbish disposal services to the residents of the land.
Responsibility for providing essential services may be transferred to a more appropriate body at some time in the future.
The client purchases diesel fuel which they use to generate electricity at a powerhouse. The electricity is supplied, free of charge, to three sites on the land.
'Site A' comprises:

•houses accommodating staff (and their families) employed by the client; and
•houses accommodating teachers and a small number of other staff not employed by the client.

'Site B' comprises:

•houses accommodating medical staff, doctors and nurses who work at Site B; and
•one commercial building.

'Site C' comprises:

•houses accommodating several hundred community members; and
•a small number of commercial buildings.

The powerhouse used to generate the electricity to these buildings is approximately 200 metres from Site A and approximately 700-800 metres from sites B and C.
Residents of sites B and C have no involvement in the power station that is used to generate electricity.
The powerhouse installation is operating at maximum capacity to supply the current needs of the three sites.
The electricity is used by the residents of the houses for various domestic purposes, such as heating, cooling and cooking. The electricity is also used to power the commercial buildings at sites B and C.
The client calculates that 80% of the fuel is used for residential and 20% for commercial purposes. Of the proportion of fuel considered consumed for residential use, approximately 25% is used in site A, 15% in site B and 60% in site C.
Reasons for Decision
In order to be entitled to a diesel fuel rebate under paragraph 78A(b) of the Excise Act, or paragraph 164(1)(b) of the Customs Act, a person must purchase diesel fuel for use by them, at residential premises, in generating electricity for use in meeting various domestic requirements of the residents of those premises.
It is accepted that the client purchases the diesel fuel and uses that fuel to generate electricity and that houses accommodating the client's staff, medical staff and community members are 'residential premises'.
The tests to be applied in this case are:

•is the diesel fuel used 'at' residential premises; and
•is the diesel fuel purchased for use (at residential premises) in generating electricity for use in meeting various domestic requirements of residents of those premises?

Is the diesel fuel used 'at' residential premises?

Two cases considered by the courts are useful in determining whether fuel has been used 'at' residential premises, Customs, Collector of (Tas) v. Flinders Island Community Association (1985) 7 FCR 205 and Collector of Customs v. Rottnest Inland Authority (1994) 48 FCR 177 (Rottnest Case). From those cases we can determine that a person will be considered to have purchased diesel fuel, for use in generating electricity 'at' residential premises where:

(a)the generator is physically proximate to the premises; and
(b)belongs to the premises and forms a coherent part of them.

In considering whether or not a generator is located 'at' more than one premises (e.g. employee cabins, remote communities), the following factors will be taken into consideration, along with any other facts specific to that particular case:

1. if the supply of electricity to each resident is at cost, rather than as a commercial transaction
2. the proximity of each premises to the generator
3. if the generator is of a suitable size and design to fulfil the purpose of meeting the domestic needs of the residents of the premises
4. if there is common ownership of the premises
5. the existence of relationships, other than merely contractual relationships, between the user of the diesel fuel and the residents of the premises, and between the residents themselves; and
6. the communality of operation of the generator.

The electricity is currently supplied free of charge rather than as a commercial transaction.
The proximity of the power house to residences is 200 to 800 metres. This is a similar distance to a case involving the Warmun community (Warmun Community (Turkey Creek) Inc v. Chief Executive Officer of Customs [2000] AATA 177) where the Administrative Appeals Tribunal considered that the 'at residential premises' requirement was met.
The distance of the generator from the residences also needs to be considered in the context of the nature of the location. For example, a distance of 200 metres from a house in an urban street would not be as proximate as a distance of 200 metres from a farm house where there are no other dwellings within 5 kilometres. In this case we are considering an isolated community of a little over 100 buildings, mostly residential, far removed from any other township or other buildings.
Accordingly the generator is considered reasonably proximate to all three groups of residences.
The power station supplies power to three sites and 80% of the power is calculated as being used for residential premises.
In the Rottnest Case, supply of electricity to relevant premises was found to be incidental to its overall purpose of providing power for all the requirements of the island. In this case the supply of power to residential premises is more than incidental. While the client is the essential service provider for the whole area of land, the practical application of this is to meet the domestic needs of their employees residing there and the local community. Responsibility for providing essential services may be transferred to a more appropriate body at some time in the future. It may well be that the supply of power to residential premises becomes incidental when this transition occurs, but that is not the case at the present time.
Accordingly, the diesel fuel generators at the powerhouse are considered of a suitable size and design to fulfil the purpose of meeting the domestic needs of the residents of the premises.
The factors present in this case are that the electricity is supplied as a non commercial transaction, all the dwellings are reasonably proximate to the generator and the generator is appropriate in size and design to meet the needs of the three sites. In the case of the residential premises at site A there is an additional factor of common ownership of the dwellings.
Accordingly, the diesel fuel is used 'at' all three groups of residential premises.

Has the diesel fuel has been purchased for use (at residential premises) in generating electricity for use in meeting various domestic requirements of residents of those premises?

In this case, the supply of electricity is not a commercial operation and is used predominantly (80%) for the domestic needs of persons in residential premises.
As the client is not generating electricity in a commercial operation it can be accepted that they are purchasing diesel fuel for use (at residential premises) in generating electricity for use in meeting various domestic requirements of residents of those premises.
Date of decision:
  25 June 2003

Legislative References:

Excise Act 1901   paragraph 78A(1)(b)
Customs Act 1901   paragraph 164(1)(b)

Case References:

Customs, Collector of (Tas) v. Flinders Island Community Association   (1985) 7 FCR 205

Customs, Collector of v. Rottnest Island Authority   (1994) 48 FCR 177

Warmun Community (Turkey Creek) Inc v. Chief Executive Officer of Customs   [2000] AATA 177

Keywords

DFRS generation of electricity
 DFRS power generation
 DFRS residential premises
 Diesel fuel rebate scheme

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  22 August 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
25 June 2003
Original statement

You are here
 8 January 2010
Archived