ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2007/53
================================================== Excise Fuel Tax Credits: supply of kerosene for domestic heating FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as it is a restatement of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is fuel used for domestic heating for the purposes of subsection 41-10(1) of the Fuel Tax Act 2006 (FTA) when it is used in a household to fuel a stove or a hot water system?
Decision
Yes. Fuel is used for domestic heating for the purposes of subsection 41-10(1) of the FTA when it is used in a household to fuel a stove or a hot water system.
Facts
An entity makes taxable supplies of kerosene to a household.
The kerosene is used by the household to fuel a stove and a hot water system.
Reasons for decision
Subsection 41-10(1) of the FTA provides that: You are entitled to a fuel tax credit for taxable fuel that you acquire or manufacture in, or import into, Australia to the extent that: (a)you do so to make a taxable supply of the fuel to an entity; and
(b)the fuel is kerosene, heating oil or any other fuel prescribed by the regulations; and
(c)you have a reasonable belief that the entity: (i)will not use the fuel in carrying on an enterprise; but
(ii)will use the fuel for domestic heating. The key issue is whether the use of the kerosene as fuel in a stove and hot water system falls within the scope of 'domestic heating' for the purposes of subsection 41-10(1) of the FTA.
The expression 'domestic heating' is not defined in the FTA. Accordingly, it is necessary to consider the ordinary meaning of the phrase.
The Australian Oxford Dictionary, 1999, Oxford University Press, Melbourne, relevantly defines 'domestic' as: of the home, household 'Heating' is defined in The Australian Oxford Dictionary as: the imparting or generation of heat. Based on this ordinary meaning, it is arguable that the expression 'domestic heating' in subsection 41-10(1) of the FTA encompasses both the actual heating of a home, and the generation of heat for other domestic purposes within the home.
The Revised Explanatory Memorandum to the Fuel Tax Bill 2006 and the Fuel Tax (Consequential and Transitional Provisions) Bill 2006 (the Explanatory Memorandum) provides support for this view. Paragraph 1.23 of the Explanatory Memorandum states: All fuels acquired or manufactured in, or imported into, Australia for use other than in an internal combustion engine will be effectively fuel tax-free from 1 July 2006. Use of fuel other than in an internal combustion engine includes: •fuel used in burner applications such as heating (use as a fuel); Paragraph 1.27 of the Explanatory Memorandum further provides that: In order that private users ... will not have to enter the fuel tax credit system, a fuel tax credit will apply further up the supply chain with the benefit passed on in the price of the product, ensuring that the product is effectively fuel tax-free for these users. For products used as burner fuels, such as kerosene and heating oil, the distributor will be entitled to claim a fuel tax credit for fuel sold to a private household [emphasis added] ... We consider the Explanatory Memorandum supports the conclusion that the term 'domestic heating' should be interpreted in a broad manner, so that households enjoy relief from the burden of excise on kerosene, heating oil or any other prescribed fuel that will be used within the household as a burner fuel (and will not be used in an internal combustion engine).
Therefore the Commissioner's view is that fuel is used for domestic heating for the purposes of subsection 41-10(1) of the FTA when it is used in a household to fuel a stove or a hot water system.
Date of decision: 9 March 2007 Legislative References: Fuel Tax Act 2006 subsection 41-10(1) Other References: Revised Explanatory Memorandum to Fuel Tax Bill 2006 and the Fuel Tax (Consequential and Transitional Provisions) Bill 2006
The Australian Oxford Dictionary, 1999, Oxford University Press, Melbourne Keywords FTC Domestic heating FTC burner fuel Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 5502736 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 16 March 2007 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 9 March 2007
Original statement You are here
17 January 2019
Archived