ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/1027
==================================================

Income Tax
 Whether a foreign government can be characterised as a 'company' where it owns an Australian resident company that carries on commercial activities in Australia
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Can a foreign government be characterised as a 'company' for the purposes of subsection 995-1(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) where it has ultimate ownership of an Australian resident company that carries on commercial activities in Australia?
Decision
Yes. A foreign government can be characterised as a 'company' for the purposes of subsection 995-1(1) of the ITAA 1997 where it has ultimate ownership of an Australian resident company that carries on commercial activities in Australia.
Facts
A foreign government has ultimate ownership of an Australian resident company which carries on commercial activities in Australia.
The government's interest is held by a government minister acting as a trustee.
Reasons for Decision
A 'company' is defined in subsection 995-1(1) of the ITAA 1997 to mean a body corporate or any other unincorporated association or body of persons but does not include a partnership or a non-entity joint venture. A 'body corporate' is not defined in the ITAA 1997 or the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 and therefore takes its ordinary meaning.
The Oxford English Dictionary 1989, 2nd edn, Clarendon Press, Oxford defines 'body corporate' to mean 'an artificial "person" created by legal authority for certain ends; a corporation; commonly a corporation aggregate, but also applied to a corporation sole'.
The term 'government', of itself, has no reliable technical meaning. In order to ascribe a meaningful characterisation to the term one must look to the context in which it is used (see Ryder v. Foley (1906) 6 CLR 422 at pp. 423-433 per Griffith CJ).
In the majority of matters in which government acts in an executive capacity it does so through ministers, or their equivalent, who operate as a corporation sole, i.e. an incorporated series of successive persons, so that the minister and their successors have continuous corporate personality (see Hubbard Association of Scientologists International v. The Attorney General for the State of Victoria [1976] VR 119 (Hubbard Association's Case).
The judgment of Gowans J in the Hubbard Association's Case discusses, among other things, the two fundamental types of corporation: corporation sole; and corporation aggregate. The former is constituted in one person and the latter in a group of persons, but they have in common the characteristic of perpetual succession which distinguishes the corporation from the person or persons who from time to time constitute it. Speaking generally, whilst government ministers ordinarily operate in their official capacity as corporations sole it is also the case that 'government' in its wider executive capacity can be regarded as exhibiting the characteristics of a corporation aggregate in that it consists of a number of persons united together in one society preserved by a succession of members.
In the present case, in the circumstances in which the shares in question are held, the minister and the Government would hold the shares as a repository with corporate characteristics of sufficient significance to conclude that the government would satisfy the definition of 'company' in subsection 995-1(1) of the ITAA 1997.
Note: in identifying various 'entities', section 960-100 of the ITAA 1997 makes separate reference to the terms 'body corporate' and 'body politic'. The fact that the two terms are mentioned separately does not preclude a reconciliation of the meaning of these terms for the purposes of the Act. It appears that bodies politic may be constituted as bodies corporate in certain circumstances in order to engage in the multifarious activities of executive government. Nevertheless, even if it were to be accepted that these terms are mutually exclusive it is tenable to conclude that the capacity in which the minister and the government hold the investment in the shareholding is consistent with their acting in the nature of a corporation rather than simply in the nature of a body politic.
Date of decision:
  15 September 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2004

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 995-1(1)   section 960-100

Case References:

Hubbard Association of Scientologists International v. The Attorney General for the State of Victoria   [1976] VR 119

Ryder v. Foley   (1906) 4 CLR 422

Other References:

The Oxford English Dictionary 1989, 2nd edn, Clarendon Press, Oxford

Keywords

Company tax
 Government & government business enterprises

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3753814

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  21 November 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782