ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/102
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off - road credit - agriculture - distillation of essential oils
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as it has been superseded by Product Grants and Benefits Ruling PGBR 2005/3

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the distillation of essential oils 'agriculture' as defined in section 22 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA) for the purposes of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme?
Decision
No. The distillation of essential oils is not 'agriculture' as defined in section 22 of the EGCSA for the purposes of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme.
Facts
A client grows various herbs which are picked and immediately brought to the site of a distillation plant in mobile tubs. The distillation plant is located on the client's agricultural property.
Diesel fuel is used in a boiler to generate steam for the distillation and extraction of essential oils from the herbs.
Reasons for Decision
Under the EGCSA an energy grant is payable to a person who purchases diesel fuel for use by them in certain activities including 'agriculture'.
Section 22 of the EGCSA defines 'agriculture' as:

(a) the cultivation of the soil; or
(b) the cultivation or gathering in of crops; or
(c) the rearing of live-stock; or
(d) viticulture, horticulture, pasturage or apicultureand includes:
(e) a live-stock activity; or
(f) an agricultural soil/water activity; or
(g) an agricultural construction activity; or
(h) an agricultural waste activity; or
(i) a sundry agricultural activity.

Therefore, the distillation of herbs will be 'agriculture' if it is considered to be part of the gathering in of crops, or one of the specific included activities.
In Vicmint Partners Pty Ltd v. Chief Executive Officer of Customs (1997) 48 ALD 475 (the Vicmint Case), the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) considered the issue of whether the extraction of essential oils through the process of steam distillation fell within the meaning of 'agriculture' under the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme (DFRS).
The DFRS was the precursor to the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme and was administered under the Excise Act 1901 and the Customs Act 1901. The Customs Act contained a definition of 'agriculture' in subsection 164(7). That definition is very similar to the definition contained in section 22 of the EGCSA and the findings of the Vicmint Case remain relevant.
The AAT considered that the gathering in of the crop finished when the picked leaves were brought to the site of the distillation plant, located on the applicant's property. As the steam distillation of the herbs occurred after the crop had been gathered in, it did not form part of the gathering in of the crop.
The AAT went on to consider whether the distillation of essential oils was eligible under any of the specific inclusions within the definition of 'agriculture'. The AAT focused its discussion on two types of activities.
The first activity considered by the AAT was the packing, or the prevention of deterioration of the produce of a core agricultural activity. Under paragraph x of the definition of 'agriculture' in the Customs Act, mirrored by subsection 27(g) of the EGCSA, such an activity will constitute 'agriculture' if it satisfies three tests.

1. The packing or the prevention of deterioration of the produce must be carried out on an agricultural property where a core agricultural activity is carried on.
2. There must be no physical change to the produce.
3. The packing or the prevention of deterioration of the produce must not constitute processing of the produce.

The AAT concluded that the distillation process resulted in a physical change to the produce, and the second test was therefore not satisfied.
The second activity considered by the AAT was the removal of waste products of an agricultural activity from the property where the activity is carried on (which was contained in paragraph 164(7)(za) of the Customs Act and is mirrored in subsection 26(a) of the EGCSA. The AAT determined that this was not a relevant consideration because the distillation was not carried out for the purpose of disposing of the herbage as waste, but for the purpose of extracting the oil from the leaves and stalk.
Conclusion
As the distillation of essential oils occurs after the crop has been gathered in, and does not qualify under any of the specific inclusions in the definition of agriculture, the activity is not agriculture for the purposes of the EGCS.
Date of decision:
  23 January 2004

Legislative References:

Excise Act 1901   Table of Content
Customs Act 1901   subsection 164(7)   paragraph 164(7)(x)   paragraph 164(7)(za)
The Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   section 22   subsection 26(a)   subsection 27(g)

Case References:

Vicmint Partners Pty Ltd v. Chief Executive Officer of Customs   (1997) 48 ALD 475

Keywords

EGCS- agriculture
 EGCS cultivation or gathering in of crops
 EGCS off-road
 EGCS prevention of deterioration of produce
 EGCS primary production

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  6 February 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
23 January 2004
Original statement

You are here
 2 September 2005
Archived