ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/435
================================================== Superannuation Superannuation contributions tax - contributions and surcharge liability FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn because it contains a provision of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 that has been repealed. A replacement ATO ID will issue. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Are payments made by a member to their unfunded defined benefits provider in respect of surcharge payable under the Superannuation Contributions Tax (Assessment and Collection) Act 1997 (SCTA) to be regarded as contributions made to obtain superannuation benefits?
Decision
No. The member payments are made to the provider under subsection 16(7) of the SCTA for the purpose of reducing the amount by which the member's surcharge debt account is in debit and are not contributions made by the member to the provider for the purpose of obtaining superannuation benefits.
Facts
The fund is an unfunded defined benefits provider.
The members can make payments to the fund in respect of the superannuation contributions surcharge payable.
This is permitted by the fund's governing rules which allow the members to make such payments in respect of the surcharge payable in respect of the contributor (the member).
Reasons for Decision
Section 16 of the SCTA makes provision for the deferment of the liability of an unfunded defined benefits provider to pay surcharge assessed as payable on a member's surchargeable contributions for a financial year.
The unfunded defined benefits provider is required to keep a surcharge debt account for each member and debit the account for surcharge assessed to be payable on the member's surchargeable contributions. If the member's account is in debit at the end of a financial year, the provider is required to debit the account for interest.
Subsection 16(7) of the SCTA operates to allow a member to make payments to the provider for the purpose of reducing the amount by which their surcharge debt account is in debit. A specific subsection of the fund's governing rules allows a contributor '...to pay amounts to the fund in respect of the superannuation contributions surcharge payable in respect of the contributor.'
The 'purchase price' in relation to a superannuation pension is defined in subsection 27A(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) and means the sum of contributions made by any person to a superannuation fund to obtain superannuation benefits.
A member payment received by the fund pursuant to subsection 16(7) of the SCTA and permitted by the specific subsection of the fund's governing rules are amounts paid to the fund in respect of surcharge payable in respect of the contributor and accordingly are not contributions to obtain superannuation benefits.
If a member makes a payment to their provider pursuant to subsection 16(7) of the SCTA, the provider is required to forward the payment to the Commissioner of Taxation. Accordingly, the amount of such a payment do not take on the characteristics of a contribution to obtain superannuation benefits but is clearly a payment made to reduce the amount of the member's surcharge debt account.
In addition, the fund's governing rules require the fund to refund to the member, any such payments that are received which are in excess of the member's surcharge debt account. This means the excess payments do not result in additional pension benefits and do not remain in the fund. Accordingly, the amounts are not contributions to obtain superannuation benefits but are member payments specifically made to the fund pursuant to subsection 16(7) of the SCTA to reduce surcharge payable in respect of the member's surchargeable contributions.
Date of decision: 2 June 2003 Year of income: Year ending 30 June 2003 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 subsection 27A(1)
Superannuation Contributions Tax (Assessment and Collection) Act 1997 section 16 subsection 16(7) Keywords Purchase price Superannuation contributions Superannuation contributions surcharge Undeducted purchase price Business Line: Superannuation Date of publication: 6 June 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 2 June 2003
Original statement You are here
18 July 2014
Archived