ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/948
================================================== Income Tax Capital gains tax: CGT event C2 - contractual or other rights FOI status: may be released This ATO ID has been withdrawn from the database as section 104-145 (CGT Event G3) now applies. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Has CGT event C2 in section 104-25 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) happened to the taxpayer's rights against a company as a result of the company being placed in liquidation?
Decision
No. CGT event C2 did not happen to the taxpayer's rights when the company was placed in liquidation or when the liquidator advised the taxpayer that no funds were available to meet their claim. CGT event C2 may happen at a later time, for example, when the company is deregistered.
Facts
The taxpayer entered into a contract with a company after 19 September 1985 to acquire a specified piece of land. The taxpayer paid the purchase price but a transfer could not be effected because the land which the taxpayer was to acquire had not been subdivided.
Due to problems with the proposed subdivision, the company instructed a solicitor to lodge a caveat on behalf of several purchasers, including the taxpayer, to protect their interests.
Without notifying the taxpayer, the company removed the caveat in order to mortgage the land as security for a loan.
The company could not repay the loan. A liquidator was appointed to the company and the land was sold.
The taxpayer lodged a proof of debt with the liquidator of the company but has been advised that there are no funds available for distribution to unsecured creditors (of which the taxpayer is one).
The liquidation of the company has not been completed.
Reasons for Decision
The taxpayer's asset in this case is their rights against the company in respect of the purchase price paid for the land.
Section 104-25 of the ITAA 1997 provides that CGT event C2 happens if the ownership of an intangible CGT asset ends because it expires or is redeemed, cancelled, released, discharged, satisfied, abandoned, surrendered or forfeited. The time of the event is when a taxpayer enters into the contract that results in the asset ending. If there is no contract, the event happens when the asset ends.
The taxpayer's rights did not end when the company was placed in liquidation. Emmett J in discussing the rights of creditors in Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Macquarie Health Corporation Limited & Ors (1998) 88 FCR 451; 98 ATC 5214; (1998) 40 ATR 349 said: There is no doubt that the effect of winding up and of sequestration is that there is a restriction imposed on the capacity of a creditor to enforce payment of a debt without the leave of the court. A creditor will not be entitled to payment from the debtor and if the creditor receives payment, he will be required to repay the amount to the liquidator or trustee in bankruptcy. In that sense, the creditor's remedies are converted into a right to prove in the winding up or in the bankruptcy. However, it does not follow, in my view, that the debt ceases to exist. The right to enforce payment is restricted. Nevertheless, the right to prove in the winding up or bankruptcy is a right to prove in respect of the debt which continues to exist. In the context of bankruptcy Emmet J noted that 'it is the discharge from bankruptcy which extinguishes the debts of a bankrupt'. He went on to state that 'whether or not there is an analogy in the context of the winding up of a company, that question does not arise in the present case'.
The advice from the liquidator that no distribution will be made to any unsecured creditors is not enough to end the taxpayer's rights in one of the ways contemplated by subsection 104-25(1) of the ITAA 1997. If further funds became available to the liquidator, the taxpayer may be entitled to a distribution.
Accordingly CGT event C2 has not happened in relation to the taxpayer's rights.
CGT event C2 may happen if: • for example, the taxpayer executes a deed of release in favour of the company (Taxation Determination TD 95/29), or
• the company is deregistered (Taxation Determination TD 2000/7). Date of decision: 13 October 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2001 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 104-25 subsection 104-25(1) Case References: Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Macquarie Health Corporation Limited & Ors (1998) 88 FCR 451 98 ATC 5214 (1998) 40 ATR 349 Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Determination TD 95/29 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2003/215 Keywords Capital gains tax CGT assets CGT events C1-C3 - end of a CGT asset Business Line: Losses and Capital Gains Tax Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 21 October 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 13 October 2003
Original statement You are here 1 April 2010
Archived