ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2008/30
================================================== Fringe Benefits Tax In-house residual expense payment fringe benefit FOI status: Decision Current This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Has the employee who is invoiced for and pays their water service charges, incurred recipients expenditure in respect of the provision of a residual benefit in accordance with paragraph (a) of the definition of 'in-house residual expense payment fringe benefit' in subsection 136(1) of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 (FBTAA)?
Decision
Yes. The employee has incurred the expenditure in respect of the provision of a residual benefit being the provision of water services by the employer in accordance with paragraph (a) of the definition of 'in-house residual expense payment fringe benefit' in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA.
Facts
The employer is a water service provider whose function is to provide water, sewerage and other services to residential and business customers in a State of Australia.
The employer is a body corporate which has been established under a State Act. The State Government is the sole shareholder.
The employer includes provision of water services in its pricing structure. It derives revenue for these services from its customers. The employer is required to and is able to recover all costs in association with the provision of its functions.
The employer provides its residential customers, including employees, with water services. These water services are the provision of a right to a supply of water to the land and the provision of sewerage and drainage services.
The employer invoices its residential customers for water service charges which are payable for the right to a supply of water to the land and for sewerage and drainage services.
The employer provides its employees with the same water services it provides to its residential customers. The employer charges its employees for water services on the same basis as for residential customers.
As part of a salary packaging arrangement, the employer reimburses its employees for costs incurred in respect of invoiced water service charges.
These reimbursements are provided as expense payment fringe benefits as defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA defines 'in-house residual expense payment fringe benefit', relevantly as follows: "in-house residual expense payment fringe benefit", in relation to an employer, means an expense payment fringe benefit in relation to the employer where: (a)the recipients expenditure was incurred in respect of the provision of a residual benefit (other than a benefit provided under a contract of investment insurance) by a person (in this definition called the "residual benefit provider"); .... The employee is invoiced for and pays their water service charges. The employee has incurred an expense. This expense incurred is 'recipients expenditure' under subsection 136(1) and paragraph 20(b) of the FBTAA.
The employer reimburses this expense under a salary sacrifice arrangement as an 'expense payment fringe benefit' under subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA.
The recipients expenditure is in respect of the water services provided to the employee by the employer.
Residual benefits are those benefits which do not fall within Divisions 2 to 11 of Part III of the FBTAA.
The provision of a right to a supply of water to the land and the provision of sewerage and drainage services are not the provision of property benefits or any other form of benefit as provided for in Divisions 2 to 11 of Part III of the FBTAA. These benefits are residual benefits as defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA.
The residual benefits are provided by the employer.
The employee who is invoiced for and pays their water service charges, incurs recipients expenditure in respect of the provision of a residual benefit in accordance with paragraph (a) of the definition of 'in-house residual expense payment fringe benefit' in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA. Amendment History Date of Amendment
Part
Comment 20 March 2026
Business line
Updated to correct business line Date of decision: 6 February 2008 Year of income: Year ended 31 March 2008 Legislative References: Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 paragraph 20(b) subsection 136(1) Keywords Fringe benefits Fringe benefits tax In-house residual expense payment fringe benefits Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 5579624; 1-6DMT1KU, 1-DNL3KDI Business Line: Superannuation and Employer Obligations Date of publication: 8 February 2008 Date reviewed: 10 March 2026 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 6 February 2008
Original statement You are here
20 March 2026
Updated statement