ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/278
==================================================

Income Tax
 Capital Allowances: - hold - depreciating asset constructed by a contractor
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn due to the limited application of the facts of the arrangement, and that ATO view on this topic is contained in Guide to depreciating assets 2018.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Does the taxpayer hold the depreciating assets under item 3 in the table in section 40-40 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (Item 3) if it has constructed improvements on land that is leased by another entity?
Decision
No. The taxpayer does not hold the depreciating assets because the improvements to the land are not, for the purposes of Item 3, made by the taxpayer.
Facts
The taxpayer, an entity that carries on a construction business for a taxable purpose, entered into an arrangement with an unrelated entity to construct a facility on land held in leasehold form by the unrelated entity (the lessee entity) in return for a construction payment. The facility includes depreciating assets that constitute improvements (including fixtures) to the land.
The lessee entity uses the land in carrying on its business. Under the terms of the arrangement the taxpayer has access to the land under a license for the construction period. Under the terms of the arrangement, the improvements constructed on the land, including improvements that are depreciating assets, become the property of the lessee entity and the taxpayer thus has no right to remove any of the assets they construct on the land. The income from the arrangement is derived by the taxpayer in the ordinary course of its construction business.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 40-25(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) provides that you can deduct the decline in value for an income year of a depreciating asset that you held for any time during the year. Therefore, an entity must hold a depreciating asset in order to obtain any entitlement to a capital allowance deduction.
The meaning of 'a depreciating asset' is defined in section 40-30 of the ITAA 1997. 'Hold' in reference to a depreciating asset has the meaning given by section 40-40 of the ITAA 1997.
For particular listed circumstances the table in section 40-40 of the ITAA 1997 identifies the holder of a depreciating asset. The primary rule is that the taxpayer holds an asset if they are the owner of it (item 10 in the table in section 40-40 of the ITAA 1997). However, there are items that identify a holder in various other circumstances even though they are not the asset's owner. Item 3 specifies that an owner of a quasi-ownership right (while it exists) will be a holder of a depreciating asset where the depreciating asset is:

an improvement to land (whether a fixture or not) subject to [the] quasi-ownership right (including any extension or renewal of such a right) made, or itself improved, by any owner of the right for the owner's own use where the owner of the right has no right to remove the asset.

Paragraph 1.41 of the Explanatory Memorandum to the New Business Tax System (Capital Allowances) Bill 2001 (Cth) explains that the table in section 40-40 of the ITAA 1997 addresses specific cases where a depreciating asset is fixed to land which is itself subject to a quasi-ownership right.
In making the construction payment to the taxpayer the lessee entity incurs capital expenditure in return for the carrying out by the taxpayer of construction works on the land. The lessee entity, and not the constructing taxpayer, receives the enduring benefit of the improvements that are depreciating assets on land it uses in its business. The lessee entity is thus the entity that has enabled itself by its payment to access the economic benefits of the constructed depreciating assets. For the purpose of Item 3, it is the lessee entity, and not the taxpayer, that has 'made' the improvements, and so holds the depreciating assets.
Amendment History

Date of Amendment
Part
Comment

20 May 2016
Reason for Decision
Minor changes to table references and gramma for readability

Legislative reference
Include reference to Explanatory Memorandum

Date of decision:
  19 August 2005

Year of income:
  Year ending 30 June 2006

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 40-25(1)   section 40-30   section 40-40

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling IT 2450

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2005/277

Other References:

 Explanatory Memorandum to the New Business Tax System (Capital Allowances) Bill 2001 (Cth)

Keywords

Capital Allowances CoE
 Capital expenditure
 Construction costs
 Decline in value
 Hold a depreciating asset
 Legal owner
 Quasi-ownership right

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  4689759; 1-FIM9SQR

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  14 October 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
19 August 2005
Original statement

 
20 May 2016
Updated statement

You are here
22 February 2019
Archived