ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/723
==================================================

Superannuation
 Reasonable benefit limits (RBL): RBL Determination
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of Division 14 of Part III of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 and Part 5A of the Income Tax Regulations 1936 (the RBL provisions). The RBL provisions do not apply for the 2007-08 income year and later income years. This ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for income years up to, and including, the 2006-07 income years.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Are various allowances received by the taxpayer 'salary' within the definition of that term for the purposes of regulation 47 of the Income Tax Regulations (ITR), and therefore included in the calculation of the Highest Average Salary (HAS) of the taxpayer in determining the taxpayer's transitional RBL?
Decision
Only the 'allowances' which would have been included in the taxpayer's assessable income, if they had been paid in Australia, are 'salary' for the purposes of regulation 47 of the ITR. Other allowances, which would have been classified as fringe benefits had the payments been made in Australia, are not 'salary' for the purposes of calculating the HAS.
Facts
The taxpayer worked overseas for three consecutive years. During the three year period the taxpayer received several 'allowances' from the employer some of which would have been included in the taxpayer's assessable income if they had been paid in Australia (e.g. a resettlement allowance). Some of the other allowances would have been classified as fringe benefits if they had been paid in Australia (e.g. reimbursement of private motor vehicle expenses).
Reasons for Decision
Subregulation 47(1) of the ITR defines 'salary' to include salary, wages, commissions, bonuses, fees, allowances or gratuities, and also to include benefits to which sections 57, 57A or 58 of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 (FBTAA 1986) apply. Paragraph 47(1)(d) of ITR further provides that the term 'salary' also includes, in the case of a person who is an Australian citizen or a resident of Australia, any amounts paid to the person from a source outside Australia that would fall within the definition if they had been paid from a source in Australia. Paragraph 47(1)(f) of ITR excludes from the definition of 'salary' allowances covering expenses incurred on behalf of the person's employer or business, that is, reimbursements.
The definition of 'salary' in subregulation 47(1) ITR differentiates between 'allowances' and 'benefits' to only allow specific fringe benefits to be included in the scope of the term 'salary'. The benefits covered by sections 57, 57A and 58 of the FBTAA 1986 cover benefits paid to employees of religious institutions, public benevolent institutions and other organisations that care for the aged and disadvantaged. Other fringe benefits are not included in the meaning of the term 'salary' for RBL purposes.
This interpretation of the definition of 'salary' for the purposes of subregulation 47(1) of the ITR for HAS purposes is further supported by provisions of the Occupational Superannuation Standards Regulations (OSSR) which are similar in effect to the ITR. The Explanatory Statement to the OSSR highlights the fact that fringe benefits, (other than the fringe benefits covered by sections 57, 57A and 58 of the FBTAA 1986), are not to be included in 'salary' for RBL purposes.
Date of decision:
  7 August 1997

Legislative References:

Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986   section 57   section 57A   section 58
Income Tax Regulations   regulation 47
Occupational Superannuation Standards Regulations   regulation 4A

Other References:

Previously released as CDS10239

Keywords

Reasonable benefit limits
 Transitional RBLs
 Overseas employees
 Fringe benefits
 Employee allowances
 Salary

Business Line:
  Superannuation

Date of publication:
  31 July 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 7 August 1997
Original statement

You are here
23 November 2007
Archived