ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/319
================================================== Income Tax Reduction in a shareholder's equity interest by the way of share buy-back: section 45B does not apply FOI status: may be released The Government has announced that from 7:30pm AEDST on 25 October 2022, there will no longer be a dividend component in respect of the price paid by a listed public company undertaking an off-market share buy-back. The entire buy-back price paid for the share will be treated as capital proceeds for a share held on capital account, or as the entire proceeds for a share held as trading stock or on revenue account (but not as trading stock). Retrospective tax law changes have effect for a period before the date of enactment once the legislation is passed. See Administrative treatment of retrospective legislation. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Will a return of capital to a shareholder whose equity interest is reduced trigger the application of section 45B of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) to enable the Commissioner to treat the distribution as a dividend for taxation purposes?
Decision
No. Section 45B of the ITAA 1936 will not apply in respect of the return of capital component of the buy-back consideration paid to a shareholder whose equity interest is reduced. The distribution of share capital will not be treated as a dividend for income tax purposes.
Facts
Company A is equally owned by family companies B and C. Both companies B and C are Australian resident companies. Most of the company A shares were issued pre-CGT, that is, before 20 September 1985. The original owner of shares in company B died and ownership of the shares passed to that shareholder's children. Company A is primarily operated and managed by persons associated with company C. The shareholders in company B wish to reduce company B's equity interest in company A.
Company A proposes to undertake a selective share buy-back of almost all the shares held by company B at the price of $3.85 per share. A nominal shareholding is to be retained by company B. The buy-back is to consist entirely of pre-CGT shares.
The buy-back consideration is to be debited to the share capital account at $2 per share (the original subscription price) with the remaining balance of $1.85 debited against retained profits. Company A has confirmed that there have not been any transfers to share capital account that would constitute to the tainting of the share capital account for the purposes of Division 7B of Part IIIAA of the ITAA 1936.
Reasons for Decision
A purpose of section 45B of the ITAA 1936 is to ensure that amounts paid in substitution for dividends are treated as unfranked dividends for income tax purposes. Section 45B of the ITAA 1936 applies if: • there is a 'scheme' under which a person is 'provided with a capital benefit' by a company; and
• a taxpayer (whether receiving the capital benefit or not) 'obtains a tax benefit'; and
• having regard to the 'relevant circumstances' of the scheme, it would be concluded that the person, or one of the persons, who entered into or carried out the scheme or any part of the scheme did so for a purpose (whether or not the dominant purpose but not including an incidental purpose) of enabling a taxpayer to 'obtain a tax benefit'. The proposed share buy-back is a 'scheme' contemplated by section 45B of the ITAA 1936 that provides a shareholder (company B), with a capital benefit, as defined by subsection 45B(5) of the ITAA 1936.
As part of the buy-back consideration consists of a distribution of a capital on which no tax is payable, company B would 'obtain a tax benefit' (within meaning of the phrase in subsection 45B(9) of the ITAA 1936).
Subsection 45B(8) of the ITAA 1936 lists the circumstances that are relevant to determining whether any person has a more than incidental purpose of enabling a person to obtain a tax benefit.
Significantly, under the proposed share buy-back: • the buy-back price consists of dividend and return of capital components - but as the return of capital corresponds to the capital originally contributed the capital benefit is not attributable to the profits of the company
• company A had not paid dividends regularly, but the buy-back consideration consists of a franked dividend component that reflected company B's underlying share of retained profits
• the shares to be bought back were acquired by company B before 20 September 1985
• company B's equity interest in company A would be substantially reduced in accordance with commercial objective of the shareholders and
• the scheme effects a change in the financial position of the shareholders reflecting the intended reduction in company B's equity interest in company A. After considering all the relevant circumstances, it cannot reasonably be concluded that there exists the requisite level of purpose of providing a tax benefit to company B by way of the capital reduction.
Therefore, section 45B of the ITAA 1936 does not apply to deem the return of capital under the proposed share buy-back to be a dividend.
Date of decision: 29 October 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2004 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 Section 45B Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2002/858 ATO ID 2003/486 Keywords Share capital Capital reduction Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 3742808 Business Line: Public Groups and International Date of publication: 8 April 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782