ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/154
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 Luxury Car Tax and supply of a GST-free luxury car to an eligible disabled person
 FOI status: may be released

The ATO view for this issue is covered in Guide to luxury car tax (NAT 3394).

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a car dealer, making a taxable supply of a luxury car under subsection 5-10(1) of the A New Tax System (Luxury Car Tax) Act 1999 (LCT Act), when it makes a GST-free supply of a car to an eligible disabled person, when:

• the value of the car exceeds the luxury car tax threshold, and
• the car is specifically fitted out for transporting disabled people seated in wheelchairs?

Decision
Yes, the entity is making a taxable supply of a luxury car under subsection 5-10(1) of the LCT Act, when it makes a GST-free supply of a car to an eligible disabled person, when the value of the car exceeds the luxury car tax threshold and the car is specifically fitted out for transporting disabled people seated in wheelchairs.
Facts
The entity is a car dealer. The entity is supplying a car GST-free to an eligible disabled person, under Subdivision 38-P of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act).
The luxury car tax value of the car (excluding modifications) is in excess of the luxury car tax threshold. The car is specifically fitted out for transporting disabled people seated in wheelchairs.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST) and the supply is connected with Australia.
The car is not a car covered by subsection 5(1) of the A New Tax System (Wine Equalisation Tax and Luxury Car Tax Transition) Act 1999 (WET and LCT Transition Act). The car is not a prescribed emergency vehicle, a commercial vehicle, a motor home or a campervan.
The car is not excluded from being a taxable supply of a luxury car under subsection 5-10(2) of the LCT Act.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 5-10(1) of the LCT Act, an entity makes a taxable supply of a luxury car if:

• it makes a supply of a luxury car
• the supply is made in the course or furtherance of an enterprise that it carries on
• the supply is connected with Australia, and
• the entity is registered, or required to be registered for GST.

Under subsection 25-1(1) of the LCT Act, a luxury car is a car whose luxury car tax value exceeds the luxury car tax threshold. The entity is supplying a luxury car with a luxury car tax value (excluding the value of the modification) in excess of the luxury car tax threshold.
However, subsection 25-1(2) of the LCT Act, provides that a car is not a luxury car if it is:

• a prescribed emergency vehicle
• specifically fitted out for transporting disabled people seated in wheelchairs (unless the supply of the car is GST-free under Subdivision 38-P of the GST Act)
• a commercial vehicle, or
• a motor home or campervan.

The car is not excluded from being a luxury car as it is not a prescribed emergency vehicle, a commercial vehicle, a motor home or a campervan.
Although the entity is supplying a car that is specifically fitted out for transporting disabled people seated in wheelchairs, the supply of the car is GST-free under Subdivision 38-P of the GST Act. As such, the car is not excluded from being a luxury car under subsection 25-1(2) of the LCT Act.
The entity supplies the car in the course of its car dealership enterprise, the supply is connected with Australia and the entity is registered for GST.
Accordingly, the entity is making a taxable supply of a luxury car under subsection 5-10(1) of the LCT Act, when it makes a GST-free supply of a car to an eligible disabled person where the value of the car (excluding the value of the modification) exceeds the luxury car tax threshold and the car is specifically fitted out for transporting disabled people seated in wheelchairs.
Note: Under subsection 5-20(5) of the LCT Act, the luxury car tax value of a car does not include the price of modifications made to the car solely for the purpose of adapting it for driving by a disabled person or adapting it for transporting a disabled person.
Date of decision:
  25 November 2002

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Luxury Car Tax) Act 1999   subsection 5-10(1)   subsection 5-10(2)   subsection 5-20(5)   subsection 25-1(1)   subsection 25-1(2)
A New Tax System (Wine Equalisation Tax and Luxury Car Tax Transition) Act 1999   subsection 5(1)
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   Subdivision 38-P

Other References:

Guide to Luxury Car Tax - Nat 3394
 Luxury Car Tax Fact Sheet - Nat 2963

Keywords

Goods and services tax
 Cars for other disabled people
 GST Luxury Car Tax
 Luxury vehicles

Business Line:
  GST

Date of publication:
  20 February 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
25 November 2002
Original statement

You are here
 4 November 2005
Archived