ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/121
==================================================

Income Tax
 CGT small business concessions: retirement - choice made by beneficiary of deceased estate
 FOI status: may be released

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Can the beneficiary of a deceased estate choose the small business retirement exemption in Subdivision 152-D of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) on the sale of the deceased's business assets by the estate's executor, if the beneficiary is absolutely entitled to the business assets as against the trustee?
Decision
Yes. In the circumstances, the beneficiary is entitled to choose the small business retirement exemption in Subdivision 152-D.
Facts
The deceased operated a business and owned a number of assets which were used in the business.
The executor/trustee appointed by the deceased has continued to operate the business since the death of the deceased.
The deceased's spouse is the only beneficiary under the deceased's will.
The executor has called in all of the deceased's assets and paid all of their debts. All that remains to be done is to distribute the assets (or the proceeds from their sale) to the sole beneficiary.
As the beneficiary is not able to operate the business, the beneficiary has requested that it be sold by the trustee.
The net value of the beneficiary's CGT assets, including the assets to which the beneficiary is entitled under the will, is less than $5 million.
The beneficiary has asked whether they or the executor is entitled to choose the small business retirement exemption in respect of any capital gain made on the sale of the business assets.
Reasons for Decision
A CGT asset passes to a beneficiary in the estate of a deceased person if the beneficiary becomes the owner of the asset under the will of the deceased person or in one of the other ways outlined in section 128-20 of the ITAA 1997.
It is considered that a CGT asset passes to a beneficiary of a deceased estate under section 128-20 of the ITAA 1997 when the beneficiary becomes absolutely entitled to the asset as against the estate's trustee (whether or not the asset is later transmitted or transferred to the beneficiary).
Because the administration of the estate in this case is complete, the executor is now acting in the capacity of trustee. The beneficiary is absolutely entitled to the assets of the business as against the trustee, because the beneficiary has a vested, indefeasible and absolute interest in each asset and is able to direct how each asset be dealt with.
Therefore, the assets of the deceased's business have passed to the beneficiary which means that anything done by the trustee, including the carrying on of the business and its sale, is taken to have been done by the beneficiary (section 106-50 of the ITAA 1997).
Because any capital gain made on the sale of the business will be taken to have been made by the beneficiary, the beneficiary is entitled to choose the small business retirement exemption in Subdivision 152-D of the ITAA 1997 in respect of the gain, provided the other conditions for the exemption are satisfied.
The beneficiary satisfies the maximum net asset value test in section 152-15 of the ITAA 1997 (because the net value of their assets is less than $5 million) and the active asset test in section 152-35 of the ITAA 1997 (because the actions of the executor in continuing to operate the business are attributed to the beneficiary).
Therefore the beneficiary is entitled to choose the small business retirement exemption to the extent that their CGT retirement exemption limit is not exceeded.
Note: For CGT events happening in the 2007-08 and later income years, section 152-15 of the ITAA 1997 has been amended by the Tax Laws Amendment (Small Business) Act 2007 to increase the maximum net asset value test to $6 million.
Amendment History

Date
Part
Comment

19 August 2014
Reason for Decision
Note added regarding the increase to maximum net asset value test.

Related Public Rulings and Determinations
Inserted reference to TR 2004/D25.

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions
Removed.

Date of decision:
  23 December 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2004

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   Subdivision 152-D   section 106-50   section 128-20   section 152-15   section 152-35

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Determination TD 2004/3
Draft Taxation Ruling TR 2004/D25

Keywords

capital gains tax
 CGT deceased estates
 CGT event A1-disposal of a CGT asset
 CGT retirement exemptions

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3889912; 1-5IQBSCM; 1-AZAPGSD

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  6 February 2004

Date reviewed:
  2 March 2017

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
23 December 2003
Original statement

You are here
19 August 2014
Original statement