ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/727
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and entitlement to an input tax credit for an acquisition under an asset loan agreement FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn, as it is no longer necessary. The ATO view expressed in this ATO ID is a straight application of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. Guidance on the view contained in this ATO ID can be found in GSTD 2004/4 Goods and services tax: can consideration for a supply be provided or received without transferring money (such as where the parties only make book entries recording their agreement that the supply is paid for)? This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a business operator, entitled to an input tax credit under section 11-20 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it acquires an asset under an asset loan agreement?
Decision
Yes, the entity is entitled to an input tax credit under section 11-20 of the GST Act when it acquires an asset under an asset loan agreement.
Facts
The entity is a business operator. The entity purchased an asset that is to be used solely for business purposes. The asset does not relate to the making of input taxed supplies. The purchase of the asset was fully financed by a finance company under an asset loan agreement. The supply of the asset is a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
An asset loan agreement is similar to a chattel mortgage where the borrower assumes ownership of the goods but transfers to the lender an equitable interest in the goods, enabling the lender to seize and sell the goods in the event of default. By providing a mortgage over the goods as security the borrower is able to obtain funds from the lender. These funds are used by the borrower as full or part payment for the purchase of the goods.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Under section 11-20 of the GST Act an entity is entitled to an input tax credit for any creditable acquisition that it makes.
Section 11-5 of the GST Act provides that an entity makes a creditable acquisition if: •the entity acquires anything solely or partly for a creditable purpose;
•the supply of the thing to the entity is a taxable supply;
•the entity provides, or is liable to provide consideration for the supply; and
•the entity is registered or required to be registered for GST. Under subsection 11-15(1) of the GST Act an entity acquires a thing for a creditable purpose to the extent that the entity makes the acquisition in carrying on its enterprise. However, under subsection 11-15(2) a thing is not acquired for a creditable purpose to the extent that it is of a private or domestic nature or relates to making input taxed supplies.
In this case, the asset acquired by the entity is to be used solely for business purposes and does not relate to making input taxed supplies. Therefore, the entity has acquired the asset for a creditable purpose.
The supply of the asset was a taxable supply and the entity is registered for GST.
The last requirement to be satisfied for an entity to make a creditable acquisition is that the entity must provide, or be liable to provide consideration for the supply.
In this case, there are two separate supplies for GST purposes. The supply of the asset to the entity from the supplier and the provision of finance to the entity by the finance company.
The entity obtains the funds from the finance company under the asset loan agreement. The entity then uses these funds to purchase the asset from the supplier. As such, it is the entity that is providing the consideration for the supply of the asset (not the finance company).
Therefore, as all of the requirements for a creditable acquisition have been satisfied the entity is entitled to claim an input tax credit under section 11-20 of the GST Act when it acquires an asset under an asset loan agreement.
Date of decision: 10 October 2001 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 9-5 section 11-5 subsection 11-15(1) subsection 11-15(2) section 11-20 Keywords Goods & services tax GST supplies and acquisitions Creditable acquisition GST consideration Input taxed supplies Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: CW231347 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 30 November 2001 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 10 October 2001
Original statement You are here 5 May 2022
Archived