ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/648
==================================================

Income Tax
 Legal expenses and CGT
 FOI status: may be released

This decision does not accurately represent the ATO view and has been withdrawn.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Are the capital gains tax provisions of Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) applicable when a taxpayer incurs legal expenses?
Decision
Yes. Where the legal expenses incurred are of a capital nature the capital gains provisions of the ITAA 1997 are applicable.
Facts
You were employed as an account manager.
The taxpayer's employment agreement may be terminated by the taxpayer giving their employer one month's written notice if there is a diminution or threatened diminution of their job content, status, responsibility or authority. In the event that the taxpayer give notice for any of these reasons, the employer shall give either 26 weeks' notice (or payment in lieu) or a period of notice (or payment in lieu) equal to the taxpayer's total completed years of service multiplied by two up to a maximum of 52 weeks, whichever is the greater'
The taxpayer considered that they had suffered a diminution or threatened diminution of their job content, status, responsibility and authority.
The taxpayer terminated their employment by giving one month's written notice.
The taxpayer's employer refused to make a payment in lieu of 26 weeks notice that the taxpayer considered they were entitled to.
The taxpayer took legal action to recover the payment in lieu plus interest and costs. The case was dismissed.
The taxpayer incurred legal expenses in relation to the above matter.
The payment is considered to be of a capital nature.
Reasons for Decision
The taxpayer's employment contract was terminated after 20 September 1985 and the legal expenses are of a capital nature it is necessary to consider whether the capital gains tax (CGT) provisions of the ITAA 1997 are applicable.
Section 102-5 of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a taxpayer includes any net capital gain made by the taxpayer during the income year.
A net capital gain is calculated as the taxpayer's total capital gains for the income year less the sum of the taxpayer's total capital losses for the income year and any previously unapplied net capital losses from earlier income years.
A taxpayer can only make a capital gain or a capital loss if a CGT event happens.
In the taxpayer's case, CGT event C2 'Cancellation, surrender and similar endings' is applicable.
CGT event C2 happens if a taxpayer's ownership of an intangible CGT asset ends by the asset being redeemed, cancelled, released, discharged, satisfied, abandoned, surrendered, forfeited or expiring. The time of the event is when the taxpayer enters into the contract that results in the asset ending or, if there is no contract, when the asset ends. The taxpayer makes a capital gain if the capital proceeds from the ending are more than the asset's cost base. The taxpayer makes a capital loss if the capital proceeds are less than the asset's reduced cost base.
The right to sue is an asset for CGT purposes. The right to sue is acquired at the time of occurrence of the breach of contract, personal injury or other compensable damage or injury. The right to sue is disposed of when a court order is made or an out of court settlement is reached.
As a result of your legal action you incurred legal expenses but did not receive the 26 weeks of pay payable to you under your employment contract which would have been assessable as an ETP. Therefore you made a capital loss. A capital gain made in relation to an ETP is disregarded. However a capital loss made in relation to an ETP is not disregarded under any section of the ITAA 1997. A capital loss cannot be deducted from a taxpayer's assessable income but can reduce a capital gain in the current income year or a later income year.
Date of decision:
  28 February 2002

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2001

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   section 102-5   section 104-5   section 104-25   section 118-20   section 118-22

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling TR 95/35

Keywords

Eligible termination payments
 Legal expenses
 Employment contracts

Business Line:
  Small Business/Individual Taxpayers

Date of publication:
  14 June 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
28 February 2002
Original statement

You are here
19 June 2002
Archived