ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/111
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and the meaning of 'corridors' in relation to serviced apartments in a retirement village FOI status: may be released ATO ID 2006/111 has been withdrawn. The issues discussed in ATO ID 2006/111 are now covered in Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2012/3 - Goods and services tax: GST treatment of care services and accommodation in retirement villages and privately funded nursing homes and hostels. GSTR 2012/3 was released on 11 July 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Are pathways and roads in a retirement village 'corridors' for the purposes of paragraph (c) of the definition of 'serviced apartment' in section 195-1 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act)?
Decision
No. Pathways and roads in a retirement village are not 'corridors' for the purposes of paragraph (c) of the definition of 'serviced apartment' in section 195-1 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity operates a retirement village.
The retirement village consists of a number of apartments in small groups with each small group under a single roof. Each apartment is accessible from an external door, and has pathways and/or roads around it. The apartments are not accessible to each other from within the building.
Reasons for Decision
Paragraph 38-25(3A)(a) of the GST Act provides that services provided to a resident of a retirement village are taken, for the purposes of paragraph 38-25(3)(a) of the GST Act, to be provided in a residential setting if, and only if he or she is a resident of a serviced apartment in the retirement village.
The term 'serviced apartment' in paragraph 38-25(3A)(a) of the GST Act is defined in section 195-1 of the GST Act. Paragraph (c) of that definition states: the apartment is part of a single complex of apartments to which paragraphs (a) and (b) apply, and is accessible from a common corridor linking the apartment to the other apartments in the complex There are several dictionary definitions describing the meaning of a 'corridor'. Of these definitions the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, 2002, 5th edn, Oxford University Press (Oxford Dictionary) defines a 'corridor' as: 1. A passage or covered way between two places
2. An outdoor covered way round the inside of a quadrangle or the court of a building
3. A long passage in a building esp. one with many doors to side rooms. However, the explanatory memorandum to the Tax Laws Amendment (Retirement Villages) Bill 2004 (EM) confirms the intention for 'corridor' to refer to passages within a building, stating at paragraph 1.31: Serviced apartment accommodation is generally higher density accommodation than independent living units. Accordingly, serviced apartments must be part of a single complex of apartments that all meet the necessary conditions to qualify as serviced apartments. The serviced apartments need to be accessible from a common corridor (with or without linking lifts) connecting the apartment to the other apartments in that building. [emphasis added] Therefore, having regard to the EM a corridor for the purposes of satisfying the definition of a 'serviced apartment' is a passage in a single building that connects an apartment to other apartments in that building. It would not include passages to connect an apartment to another apartment that is outside the building but part of the retirement village.
As such, the pathways and roads in a retirement village are not corridors for the purposes of paragraph (c) of the definition of 'serviced apartment'. Note: Paragraph 15AB(1)(a) of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 provides that consideration may be given to material not forming part of an Act to confirm that the meaning of a provision is the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision taking into account its context in the Act and the purposes or object underlying the Act. Paragraph 15AB(2)(e) of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 provides that any explanatory memorandum relating to the Bill containing the provision is extrinsic material that may be considered for this purpose. Date of decision: 20 March 2006 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 paragraph 38-25(3)(a) paragraph 38-25(3A)(a) section 195-1
Acts Interpretation Act 1901 Paragraph 15AB(1)(a) paragraph 15AB(2)(e)
Tax Laws Amendment (Retirement Villages) Bill 2004 TLA(RV)B04 Other References: Shorter Oxford Dictionary, 2002, 5th edn, Oxford University Press Keywords Goods and services tax GST health Section 38-25 - residential care Taxable supply Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 28 April 2006 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 20 March 2006
Original statement You are here 5 April 2013
Archived