ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/101
================================================== Goods and Services GST and supply of rights to sell education packages to Australian resident affiliates that carry on an enterprise in Australia FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn, as it is no longer necessary. The ATO view expressed in this ATO ID is a straight application of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. Guidance on the view contained in this ATO ID can be found in GSTR 2003/8 Goods and services tax: supply of rights for use outside Australia - subsection 38-190(1), item 4, paragraph (a) and subsection 38-190(2), GSTR 2004/7 Goods and services tax: in the application of items 2 and 3 and paragraph (b) of item 4 in the table in subsection 38-190(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999: when is a 'non-resident' or other 'recipient' of a supply 'not in Australia when the thing supplied is done'? when is 'an entity that is not an Australian resident' 'outside Australia when the thing supplied is done'? and GSTD 2012/9 Goods and services tax: is the supply of a right to capacity in an international telecommunication network made by an Australian resident telecommunication supplier GST-free under item 4 in the table in subsection 38-190(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999? This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a company that produces and sells education packages, making a GST-free supply under item 4 in the table in subsection 38-190(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act) where: •it supplies rights to sell its education packages to Australian resident affiliates that carry on an enterprise in Australia, and
•the Australian resident affiliates then supply the education packages to non-residents? Decision
No, the entity is not making a GST-free supply of rights for use outside Australia under item 4 in the table in subsection 38-190(1) of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a company that produces and sells education packages. The entity also operates an affiliate program. The entity supplies the members of the affiliate program the rights to sell its education packages upon payment of a fee. The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST) and carries on its enterprise in Australia.
Members of the affiliate program (affiliates) are able to exercise the right to sell the education packages to both residents and non-residents. The affiliate is entitled to a portion of the sale proceeds. However, while the educational packages may be sold to non-resident entities, the affiliates carry on their enterprise in Australia and have no presence outside of Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Under section 38-190 of the GST Act, certain supplies of things other than goods and real property are GST-free. The supply of rights to sell education packages are neither that of goods or real property. As such, the supply is appropriately considered under section 38-190 of the GST Act.
Item 4 in the table in subsection 38-190(1) of the GST Act (Item 4) applies to make a supply of rights GST-free if the rights are for use outside Australia. Item 4 states that a supply is made in relation to rights and is GST-free if: (a)the rights are for use outside Australia, or
(b)the supply is to an entity that is not an Australian resident and is outside Australia when the thing supplied is done. In respect of paragraph (a) in Item 4, notwithstanding that the affiliates are able to sell the entity's education packages to resident and non-resident customers, the relevant question to ask is where the rights are used. In the context of the supply in question, the supply of rights can only be used outside Australia where those rights are actually exercised by an entity that is outside of Australia. The rights to sell education packages can only be exercised outside of Australia where the affiliate is physically located outside of Australia and procures customers from this presence.
The entity supplies the right to sell education packages to Australian resident affiliates with no business presence outside of Australia. Therefore, the supply of the right to sell the education package is not used outside of Australia and the requirements of paragraph (a) in Item 4 are not met.
The requirements of paragraph (b) in item 4 will be met where the supply is made to an entity that is not an Australian resident and is outside Australia when the thing supplied is done. As the entity makes the supply of rights to Australian resident affiliates who carry on their business in Australia and are not outside of Australia in relation to the supply, the requirements of paragraph (b) in item 4 are not met.
As the requirements of paragraph (a) and (b) are not met, the supply of the right to sell education products is not GST-free under Item 4.
Date of decision: 13 March 2006 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 38-190 section 38-190 table item 4 section 38-190 table item 4 paragraph (a) section 38-190 table item 4 paragraph (b) Keywords Goods and services tax GST free GST international services Rights for use outside Australia Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 1-KP3TNMM; 1-KSZB2JR Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 7 April 2006 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 13 March 2006
Original statement You are here
11 September 2020
Archived