ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/22
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and provision of superannuation support for contractors FOI status: may be released With effect from 1 July 2015, the term 'Australia' is replaced in nearly all instances within the GST, Luxury Car Tax and Wine Equalisation Tax legislation with the term 'indirect tax zone' by the Treasury Legislation Amendment (Repeal Day) Act 2015. The scope of the new term, however, remains the same as the repealed definition of 'Australia' used in those Acts. For readability and other reasons, where the term 'Australia' is used in this document, it is referring to the 'indirect tax zone' as defined in subsection 195-1 of the GST Act. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Do superannuation support contributions, made on behalf of an entity, an independent contractor, by the recipient of the entity's services, form part of the consideration for the entity's taxable supply of services to the recipient under section 9-5 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act)?
Decision
No, superannuation support contributions, made on behalf of the entity, by the recipient of the entity's services, do not form part of the consideration for the entity's taxable supply of services to the recipient under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is an independent contractor that is carrying on an enterprise in Australia. In the course of this enterprise, the entity is contracted to provide specified services to a recipient. These services are wholly or principally for the entity's labour and are a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
The entity is paid an agreed fee for the services. In addition to the agreed fee, the recipient is required under the Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 (SGA Act) to pay superannuation support contributions for the entity at a prescribed rate.
Both the entity and the recipient are registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Under section 9-5 of the GST Act, an entity makes a taxable supply if: •it makes a supply for consideration;
•the supply is made in the course or furtherance of an enterprise that it carries on;
•the supply is connected with Australia; and
•the entity is registered or required to be registered for GST. The entity is making a taxable supply of services to the recipient. However, it needs to be determined whether the payment of the superannuation support contributions form part of the consideration for the entity's taxable supply of services to the recipient.
The superannuation support contributions have been made as a result of the operation of subsection 12(3) of the SGA Act. This subsection expanded the common law definition of an employee to include contractors who are engaged 'wholly or principally' for their labour.
In this case, the entity is contracted wholly or principally to provide labour to the recipient and is deemed to be an employee of the recipient for the purposes of the SGA Act. As such, the recipient is under a statutory obligation to provide superannuation support contributions for the entity.
The deeming effect of the definition of employee in the SGA Act is for the purposes of providing superannuation support only and does not alter the contractual relationship between the parties. For GST purposes, the effect of the deemed employee relationship is that payment of the superannuation support contribution is not consideration for something done in the course or furtherance of an enterprise carried on by the entity (paragraph 9-20(2)(a) of the GST Act). On this basis, the superannuation support contributions made by the recipient are not part of the total payment for the taxable supply of labour.
Therefore, the superannuation support contributions made on behalf of the entity, by the recipient of the entity's services, do not form part of the consideration for the entity's taxable supply of services to the recipient under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Date of decision: 8 October 2001 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 9-5 paragraph 9-20(2)(a)
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 subsection 12(3) Keywords Goods & services tax GST supplies & acquisitions GST consideration Taxable supply Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: CW225467 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 17 January 2002 ISSN: 1445-2782