ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/86
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: agriculture - waste removal - loaders
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as it has been superseded by Product Grants and Benefits Ruling PGBR 2005/3

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the use of a loader on agricultural properties to load manure from dairies and straw from piggeries onto a truck for removal from the property an 'agricultural waste activity' as defined in section 26 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. The use of a loader on agricultural properties to load manure from dairies and straw from piggeries onto a truck for removal from the property is an 'agricultural waste activity' as defined in section 26 of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity collects manure and straw from various agricultural properties where the agricultural activity of rearing livestock is carried on.
The entity uses diesel-powered loaders to load the waste onto trucks for removal from the agricultural properties. The entity then composts these products and uses them to manufacture fertiliser.
Reasons for Decision
Under the energy grants credits scheme an entity is entitled to an energy grant if it purchases diesel fuel for use by it in defined activities, including agriculture. 'Agriculture' is defined in section 22 of the EGCSA and includes an 'agricultural waste activity', which is in turn defined in section 26 of the EGCSA which states:

The expression agricultural waste activity means:

(a) the removal of waste products of an agricultural activity from the agricultural property where the activity is carried on; or
(b) the disposal of waste products of an agricultural activity on the agricultural property where the activity is carried on

As the products are not being disposed of on the agricultural properties, paragraph 26(b) of the EGCSA of the above definition is not relevant. Therefore, the activities will be an 'agricultural waste activity' if:

• the manure and straw are 'waste products of an agricultural activity'
• the loading of the truck constitutes the removal of such products; and
• the waste products are being removed from the agricultural property where the agricultural activity they resulted from is carried on.

Each requirement will be considered in turn.

Are the manure and straw 'waste products of an agricultural activity'?

In Water Administration Ministerial Corporation v. CEO of Customs N96/1212 AAT No 12111, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal said that a waste product can be described as something that is an excess material, or is unproductive and superfluous. The concept of waste embraces all unwanted and economically unusable or rejected by-products at any given time, and any other matter which may be discharged, accidentally or otherwise to the environment.
Agricultural activity is defined in section 28 of the EGCSA as meaning:
An activity referred to in any one of the paragraphs of the definition of agriculture in subsection 22(1) of the EGCSA (other than an activity referred to in paragraph (i) or (j) of the definition of sundry agricultural activity in section 27 of the EGCSA) if that activity is carried out for the purposes of, or purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
The definition of 'agriculture' in subsection 22(1) of the EGCSA includes, among other things, the activities of 'cultivation of the soil', 'cultivation and gathering in of crops', 'rearing of livestock', 'horticulture', 'viticulture', 'pasturage' and 'apiculture'. It also includes live-stock activities, which are defined in subsection 23(1) of the EGCSA to mean (among other things) the milking of live-stock.
Used straw and manure are waste products of the agricultural activities 'rearing of livestock' and 'milking of live-stock'' (which as discussed above is a live-stock activity and therefore an agricultural activity).
The fact that someone other than the farmer may at some later time reuse a product discarded as waste by the farmer does not necessarily preclude it from being waste. Therefore, in this instance the manure from dairies and straw from piggeries discarded by the farmer and removed as waste from the agricultural property, and subsequently used to manufacture fertiliser for sale, would still be regarded as the waste product of an agricultural activity.

Does the loading of the straw and manure onto a truck constitute the 'removal' of these products?

Removal in the context of paragraph 26(a) of the EGCSA means the taking away, or the movement of the waste product from the agricultural property. The loading of the waste product onto trucks which will take the waste from the agricultural property is part of this removal process.

Are the waste products being removed from the agricultural property where the agricultural activity they resulted from is carried on?

As the straw and manure are the waste products of agricultural activities and are being removed from the agricultural property where this activity is carried on, this test is met.
Conclusion
As all the requirements are met, the use of a diesel-powered loader to load waste products of an agricultural activity onto trucks for removal from the agricultural property is an 'agricultural waste activity' as defined in section 26 of the EGCSA.
Date of decision:
  15 January 2004

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   section 22   section 26

Case References:

Water Administration Ministerial Corporation v. CEO of Customs   N96/1212 AAT No 12111

Keywords

EGCS off-road
 EGCS removal
 Energy grants (credits) scheme

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  30 January 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
15 January 2004
Original statement

You are here
 2 September 2005
Archived