ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/639
================================================== Excise Energy Grants Credits Scheme: lodgement of claim forms - weekends and public holidays FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Has a client lodged an application for an energy grant within the three year time limit specified in section 15 of the Product Grants and Benefits Administration Act 2000 (PGBAA) if the application is received by the Tax Office on the first business day after a weekend or public holiday and the three year time limit would otherwise have expired on the weekend or public holiday?
Decision
Yes. A client has lodged an application for an energy grant within the three year time limit specified in section 15 of the PGBAA if the application is received by the Tax Office on the first business day after a weekend or public holiday and the three year time limit would otherwise have expired on the weekend or public holiday.
Facts
A client made a claim for an energy grant under the provisions of the PBGAA.
The claim period to which the claim related commenced three years prior to a Saturday.
The claim was received by the Commissioner on the Monday immediately following the relevant Saturday.
Reasons for Decision
The PGBAA provides the administrative provisions for a number of grant and benefit schemes administered by the Commissioner. Section 8 of the PGBAA lists energy grants as one of these.
Section 15 of the PGBAA deals with making claims for an energy grant.
Paragraph 15(2)(e) of the PGBAA states that the claim: must be given to the Commissioner before the end of 3 years after the start of the claim period. Paragraph 15(2)(b) of the PGBAA adds that the claim must be given to the Commissioner in the 'approved form'.
Section 5 of the PGBAA defines 'approved form' as having the meaning given by section 995-1 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997).
Section 995-1 of the ITAA 1997 then defines 'approved form' as having the meaning given by section 388-50 in Schedule 1 to the Tax Administration Act 1953 (TAA).
Subdivision 388-B of the TAA 1953 sets out a number of arrangements that apply to information that must be given to the Commissioner in the approved form as defined in section 388-50 of Schedule 1 to the TAA.
Section 7 of the PGBAA states: The Commissioner has the general administration of this Act. Section 7 also contains a note that states that an effect of section 7 is that the TAA applies to the PGBAA as a taxation law.
Therefore, the approved form provisions contained within the TAA are applicable to applications for energy grants under the PGBAA.
Section 388-52 in Schedule 1 to the TAA states Where an approved form is required to be given to the Commissioner ... by, or on, a day (the lodgement day) that is not a business day, the approved form may be given on the first business day after the lodgement day. Section 3A of the TAA states that terms in Schedule 1 to the TAA draw their meaning from section 995-1 of the ITAA 97.
The term 'business day' is relevantly defined in section 995-1 of the ITAA 97 as follows: business day means a day other than: (a)a Saturday or a Sunday; or
(b)a day which is a public holiday for the whole of: (i)any State; or
(ii)the Australian Capital Territory; or
(iii)the Northern Territory In this instance, the date by which the entity's claim for an energy credit had to be given to the Commissioner fell on a Saturday.
Section 388-52 of the TAA provides that where an approved form must be given to the Commissioner on a day that is not a business day, the entity will have until the next business day to give the form to the Commissioner. Given the definition of 'business day', the entity will be able to give the form to the Commissioner on the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday in the whole of a State, or the Northern Territory or the Australian Capital Territory.
Date of decision: 22 July 2004 Legislative References: Product Grants and Benefits Administration Act 2000 section 5 section 7 section 15 paragraph 15(2)(b) paragraph 15(2)(e)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 995-1
Tax Administration Act 1953 section 3A Schedule 1, 388-50 Schedule 1, 388-52 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2004/638 Keywords EGCS general Energy grants (credits) scheme Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 30 July 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 22 July 2004
Original statement You are here 1 July 2012
Archived