ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/966
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and the meaning of 'State' for the purposes of sections 38-445 and 38-450 of the GST Act FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn on the basis that a precedential view exists. The ATO view for this issue is covered in Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2005/D3 (paragraphs 96 - 99). This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a company established to undertake certain State Government business activities, the 'State' for the purposes of sections 38-445 and 38-450 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act) when: •one class of shares is owned wholly by another company that is controlled by the state (State shareholder), with the remaining class of shares being owned by private investors
•the State shareholder appointed half of the board of directors and these nominees can carry any motion proposed by them, and
•the entity's objects do not include any reference to advancing any interests of the State? Decision
No, the entity is not a 'State' for the purposes of sections 38-445 and 38-450 of the GST Act as it is not wholly owned and controlled by the State and does not act solely in the interests of the State.
Facts
The entity is a company that was established to undertake certain State Government business activities.
There are two classes of shares in the entity. All of one class of shares are held by another company that is wholly owned and controlled by the State and which is accepted as 'the State' (State shareholder). All of the other class of shares are held by private investors.
The State shareholder appointed half of the entity's directors. The entity is governed by the board of directors and rules governing voting at the directors' meetings enable the nominees of the State shareholder to carry any motion proposed by them.
The objects of the entity do not include any reference to advancing any interests of the State.
Reasons for Decision
Under sections 38-445 and 38-450 of the GST Act, certain supplies by 'the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory' of land on which there are no improvements are GST-free. Thus, before sections 38-445 and 38-450 of the GST Act can apply, the entity must be the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory. In this case it is only relevant to consider whether the entity is a State.
'State' is not defined in the GST Act, however, paragraph 17(o) of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 provides that in any Act, unless the contrary intention appears, 'State' means a 'State of the Commonwealth'.
There have been a number of cases where the courts have considered the meaning of 'State', particularly in relation to section 114 of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act (Constitution), which relevantly includes that the Commonwealth shall not '...impose any tax on property of any kind belonging to a State.'
In Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v. State Bank (NSW) (1992) 174 CLR 219; 92 ATC 4079; (1992) 23 ATR 1, the court rejected the argument for a restricted meaning of 'State' for the purposes of applying section 114 of the Constitution, as to do this would not achieve the intent of the section. The court said that there can be no doubt that section 114 of the Constitution refers to the polity which is a State within the Australian federation, and that references to the States in the Constitution are wide enough to denote a corporation which is an agency or instrumentality of a State.
In SGH Limited v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (2001) HCA 18 (SGH) the majority of the court said: ....whether SGH was 'the State' requires demonstration of more than government policy favouring or facilitating the creation of the entity in pursuit of some aspect of the public interest. No doubt it requires consideration of the circumstances and purposes of the entity's creation, but it also requires consideration of every feature of the entity which bears upon its relationship with the polity. That is why cases about s 114 have focused upon the ownership and management of the entity and the purposes the entity was required to pursue. It is those features which will most often reveal the relationship the entity has with the State, and if it is revealed by examination of them that the entity is wholly owned and controlled by the State concerned, and must act solely in the interests of the State, the conclusion that it is the State ... will readily follow. In reaching its decision that SGH was not the State, the majority of the court specifically considered the following factors: •the circumstances of the establishment of SGH
•the ownership and management of SGH
•the presence or absence of corporators and whether SGH could disregard the interests of persons other than the State, and
•the objects of SGH and whether SGH was required to advance the interests of the State. The factors considered in the SGH case are relevant in determining whether an entity is a 'State' for the purposes of the GST Act. As such, an entity will be a 'State' if it is wholly owned and controlled by the State and must act solely in the interests of the State.
The entity is partly owned by the State through the State shareholder and partly owned by private investors. The entity is managed by its board of directors and, even though the rules governing voting at directors' meetings enable the nominees of the State shareholder to carry any motion proposed by them, it cannot be said that the State fully controls the entity. The entity cannot act in disregard of the interests of private investors. In addition, the objects of the entity do not include any reference to advancing any interests of the State.
Therefore, as the entity is not wholly owned and controlled by the State and does not act solely in the interests of the State, the entity is not a 'State' for the purposes of section 38-445 and 38-450 of the GST Act. Note: the factors applied in reaching the decision as to whether the entity is a 'State' for the purposes of the GST Act, apply equally to determining whether an entity is the 'Commonwealth' or a 'Territory'. Date of decision: 2 September 2004 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 38-445 section 38-450
Acts Interpretation Act 1901 paragraph 17(o) Case References: Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v. State Bank (NSW) (1992) 174 CLR 219 92 ATC 4079 23 ATR 1 SGH Limited v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation 2002 ATC 4366 49 ATR 521 210 CLR 51 [2002] HCA 18 Keywords Goods and services tax Government entities Business Line: GST Date of publication: 10 December 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 2 September 2004
Original statement You are here
17 February 2006
Archived