ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/131
==================================================

Income Tax
 Medical expenses rebate
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as the interpretative issues are considered in TR 93/34 and ATO ID 2001/243.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue

Whether the taxpayer can claim the medical expenses rebate under section 159P of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) for the following expenses incurred to assist a child with autism:

(1) the cost of behavioural therapy; and
(2) the cost of computer games, toys and books for use in the therapy.

Decision
1. The costs of program supervision, administration and therapy fees in respect of the behavioural therapy are rebatable medical expenses as payments made for therapeutic treatment administered by direction of a legally qualified medical practitioner under paragraph 159P(4)(d) (ITAA 1936).
2. Expenses incurred in respect of the purchase of materials for the program are not medical expenses under subsection 159P(4) (ITAA 1936).
Facts

The taxpayer has a child who is autistic. The child is examined by a Paediatric Register, who refers the child to a behavioural therapy program run by a clinic that specialises in treating autism and related disorders. The Paediatric Register, who is a legally qualified medical practitioner, wishes to review the progress of the treatment at regular intervals.
The child undergoes intensive behavioural therapy, which is conducted by a psychologist. The taxpayer pays the costs of program supervision, therapy and administration associated with the treatment. The taxpayer also purchases materials, such as computer games, books and toys, for use in the therapy.
Reasons For Decision
Subsection 159P(1) (ITAA 1936) provides that an amount paid by a taxpayer in the year of income as medical expenses for either the taxpayer or a resident dependant of the taxpayer, less any amount paid to the taxpayer in respect of those medical expenses, shall be treated as a rebatable amount in respect of that year of income. The amount of the rebate of tax is determined under subsection 159P(3A) (ITAA 1936).
To qualify for the rebate, the amount paid by the taxpayer must come within the definition of 'medical expenses' in subsection 159P(4) (ITAA 1936).
Under paragraph 159P(4)(d) (ITAA 1936), the definition of 'medical expenses' includes payments made for therapeutic treatment administered by direction of a legally qualified medical practitioner.
In Case R95 84 ATC 633, the Tribunal found that 'therapeutic treatment' necessitated the exercise of professional skill in the medical field in some positive way, which would normally involve the person undertaking the act of administering the treatment using chemical agents or drugs or a physical or mental process of one kind or another in a manner that is directed towards the cure or management of disease or of diseased patients
Therapeutic treatment is administered by direction of a legally qualified medical practitioner when the treatment is undergone as part of the medical practitioner's care of the patient. Treatment may be administered by the direction of the medical practitioner when the patient is referred by the practitioner to a particular specialist for specific treatment: Case A53 69 ATC 313 at 314.
In this case, the behavioural therapy is a form of therapeutic treatment, as it involves the exercise of professional skill in a manner that is directed toward the management of the child's autism. The taxpayer's child was referred to the specialist behavioural therapy program for children with autism by a legally qualified medical practitioner. The treatment is clearly undergone as part of the medical practitioner's ongoing care of the child as the physician regularly reviews the child's progress. Accordingly, the costs associated with the provision of behavioural therapy to the taxpayer's child are medical expenses under paragraph 159P(4)(d) (ITAA 1936).
Paragraph 159P(f) (ITAA1936) provides that medical expenses include payments made in respect of a medical or surgical appliance prescribed by a legally qualified medical practitioner. Taxation Ruling TR 93/34 explains the meaning of a 'medical or surgical appliance' as an instrument, apparatus or device which is manufactured as, distributed as, or generally recognised to be an aid to the function or capacity of a person with a disability or illness.
Paragraph 4 of Taxation Ruling TR 93/34 states that an appliance is an aid to function or capacity if it helps the person with the disability or illness perform the activities of daily living. As materials such as computer games, books and toys clearly do not aid function or capacity, these materials are not medical expenses that qualify for the rebate under section 159P (ITAA 1936).
Date of decision:
  10 November 2000

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   section 159P   subsection 159P(1)   subsection 159P(3A)   subsection 159P(4)   paragraph 159P(4)(d)   paragraph 159P(4)(f)

Case References:

Case R95   84 ATC 633
Case A53   69 ATC 313

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

TR 93/34

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2001/29

Keywords

Rebates
 Medical expenses
 Medical expenses rebates

Business Line:
  Small Business/Individual Taxpayers

Date of publication:
  1 August 2001

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
10 November 2000
Original statement

You are here
16 April 2010
Archived