ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/777
================================================== Income Tax Deductions and expenses: Investment expenses (Non-profit organisation) FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database as the ATO view is contained in chapter 2 of ClubPack (NAT 2442). This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the taxpayer, a non-profit organisation, entitled to a deduction under section 8-1 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 ('ITAA 1997') for expenses incurred in deriving investment income, where the expenses also relate to income received from members of the organisation?
Decision
Yes. The taxpayer, a non-profit organisation, is entitled to a deduction under section 8-1 of the ITAA 1997 for the proportion of the expenses, which are incurred in deriving the investment income.
Facts
A non-profit organisation derived income from members. It also derived non-member income in the form of rent and interest.
The organisation incurred various expenses including rent, telephone, electricity, accounting fees, insurance and office expenses, which could not be identified as relating specifically to either the member income or the investment income.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 8-1(1) of the ITAA 1997 allows a deduction for any loss or outgoing to the extent that it is incurred in gaining or producing assessable income, or is necessarily incurred in carrying on a business for the purpose of gaining or producing assessable income. Subsection 8-1(2) of the ITAA 1997 however, excludes a loss or outgoing of a capital, private or domestic nature, or where the loss or outgoing is incurred in gaining or producing exempt income.
Under the mutuality principle, the assessable income of non-profit organisations only includes income which relates to non-members, or is received from an outside source, such as interest, dividends or other income derived from investment of moneys. Therefore, under subsection 8-1(1) of the ITAA 1997, where the non-profit organisation is not carrying on a business, losses or outgoings which are not excluded under subsection 8-1(2) of the ITAA 1997, are only deductible where they are incurred in gaining or producing income from non-members or from outside sources.
Expenses incurred by a taxpayer in protecting investment income and in managing investments are generally deductible (F C of T v. Green (1950) 81 CLR 313). These expenses can include collection expenses, bookkeeping and secretarial expenses, audit fees, management fees and office expenses. The expenses incurred by the non-profit organisation were incurred to some extent in gaining or producing assessable income for the purposes of subsection 8-1(1) of the ITAA 1997, as they were partly incurred in protecting the investment income of the organisation, and in managing the investments.
However, as the expenses have been incurred in earning both assessable income and non-assessable amounts, they must be apportioned.
In this situation, the non-profit organisation can choose a practical and suitable method of apportioning the expenses. The method will be acceptable provided: 1.There is a reason for apportioning the expenditure,
2.The method chosen is suitable for that type of expenditure,
3.The method chosen is reasonable and is not arbitrary, and
4.It gives a correct reflection of the expenditure incurred. Where there is no special relationship between the income and expenditure which would indicate the portion of an expense incurred in producing a particular income type, the following formula may be used to determine the proportion of the total expenditure which relates to both member and investment income. Total expenses relating to both member and investment income * (Investment income / Total income) The amount calculated by this formula would be an allowable deduction for the non-profit organisation under section 8-1 of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision: 25 June 2002 Year of income: Year ending 30 June 2001 Year ending 30 June 2002 Year ending 30 June 2003 Year ending 30 June 2004 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 8-1 subsection 8-1(1) subsection 8-1(2) Case References: F C of T v. Green (1950) 81 CLR 313 (1950) 4 AITR 471 (1950) 9 ATD 142 Keywords Mutuality principle Investment income Deductions & expenses Business Line: Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals Date of publication: 31 July 2002 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 25 June 2002
Original statement You are here
25 July 2008
Archived