ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2011/102
==================================================

Income Tax
 Amendment of income tax assessment outside limited amendment period on an application for amendment by the taxpayer
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Does the Commissioner have the power to amend an income tax assessment for an income year under subsection 170(5) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) to include additional income where:

(a)within the 2 year limited amendment period under subsection 170(1) of the ITAA 1936, the taxpayer had lodged an application under subsection 170(5) of the ITAA 1936 for amendment of the assessment claiming additional deductions in respect of that income year; and
(b)the 2 year limited amendment period has expired?

Decision
No. The Commissioner is outside the 2 year limited amendment period under subsection 170(1) of the ITAA 1936 and cannot amend the assessment under subsection 170(5) of the ITAA 1936 to include the additional income in the taxpayer's assessment. The Commissioner can only amend the assessment in relation to the additional deductions claimed by the taxpayer in the application for amendment.
Facts
A taxpayer (an individual) is a partner in a partnership. The partnership requested an amendment of the partnership income tax return for an income year (the relevant year) on the basis of a claim for additional partnership deductions.
The taxpayer lodged an application for amendment of their income tax assessment for the relevant year to reflect their share of the additional deductions claimed by the partnership. In accordance with subsection 170(5) of the ITAA 1936 the application for amendment was made in the approved form before the end of the 2 year limited amendment period under item 1 of the table in subsection 170(1) of the ITAA 1936 (the limited amendment period).
Before the end of the limited amendment period, the Commissioner discovered the partnership had omitted assessable income from its partnership income tax return for the relevant year. The Commissioner did not request the taxpayer to consent to extending the limited amendment period in accordance with subsection 170(7) of the ITAA 1936.
Reasons for Decision
Under item 1 of the table in subsection 170(1) of the ITAA 1936, the Commissioner may amend the taxpayer's assessment within the limited amendment period to either increase or decrease the taxpayer's liability. Because of legislative amendments to section 170 of the ITAA 1936 enacted by Parliament in 2005, the period in which the Commissioner can amend an assessment for most individuals and very small business taxpayers was reduced to 2 years.
The clear intent behind these amendments is to give certainty to taxpayers about whether they have correctly self-assessed their income tax liability. Relevantly, paragraph 2.14 of the Explanatory Memorandum to the Taw Laws Amendment (Improvements to Self Assessment) Bill (No. 2) 2005, which introduced section 170 of the ITAA 1936 in its current form, states:

The purpose of these amendments is to ensure that the time during which taxpayers experience uncertainty over whether they have correctly self assessed their income tax liability approaches the minimum required for the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) to identify the majority of incorrect assessments of that type and correct them.

The limited amendment period specified in subsection 170(1) of the ITAA 1936 may be extended in several cases including where the taxpayer applies for an amendment in the approved form before the end of the limited amendment period under subsection 170(5) of the ITAA 1936. In such a case the Commissioner may amend the assessment after the end of the limited amendment period 'to give effect to the decision on the application'. The power to amend conferred by this subsection is limited to giving effect to a decision concerning a particular (or particulars) of the assessment in respect of which the taxpayer has applied for amendment and nothing more.
It is contrary to the intent and effect of section 170 of the ITAA 1936 to adopt an interpretation of subsection 170(5) of the ITAA 1936 which enables the Commissioner to use a taxpayer's application for amendment in respect of a particular of an assessment (such as a deduction) to amend another particular (such as income) where the Commissioner is otherwise out of time to amend the taxpayer's assessment.
Accordingly, the Commissioner is able to amend the taxpayer's assessment under subsection 170(5) of the ITAA 1936 outside the limited amendment period only in respect of the taxpayer's share of the additional deductions claimed by the partnership. The Commissioner cannot amend the taxpayer's assessment outside the limited amendment period to include the taxpayer's share of the omitted partnership income.
Date of decision:
  1 December 2011

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2012

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   section 170   subsection 170(1)   subsection 170(5)   subsection 170(7)

Other References:

 Explanatory Memorandum to the Taw Laws Amendment (Improvements to Self Assessment) Bill (No. 2) 2005

Keywords

Self assessment
 Self amendment of assessments
 Tax assessments
 Assessment period

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  1-3LZBB9W

Business Line:
  Administration, Business and Personal Taxes Centre of Expertise

Date of publication:
  23 December 2011

ISSN:
 1445-2782