ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/602
================================================== Superannuation Superannuation, retirement & employment termination: eligible termination payment and invalidity FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of a provision of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 that doesn't apply to superannuation fund payments after the 2006-2007 income year. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO Interpretative Decision continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for income years up to, and including, the 2006-2007 income year. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the payment from the superannuation fund, consideration of a capital nature for, or in respect of, personal injury to the member and therefore come within paragraph (n) of the definition of 'eligible termination payment' (ETP) in subsection 27A(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936)?
Decision
No, the payment from the superannuation fund is not excluded by paragraph (n) of the definition of 'eligible termination payment' in subsection 27A(1) of the ITAA 1936.
Facts
The member terminated their employment as a result of a personal injury.
A payment from the superannuation fund was made to the member on invalidity grounds under the governing rules of the fund.
Reasons for Decision
Paragraph (b) of the definition of "eligible termination payment" in subsection 27A(1) of the ITAA 1936 includes as an ETP: 'any payment made from a superannuation fund in respect of the taxpayer by reason that the taxpayer is or was a member of the fund, not being a payment: (i)that is income of the taxpayer
(ii)to which paragraph (d), (da), (e) or (ga) applies; or
(iii)that is a benefit to which subsection 26AF(1), 26AFA(1) or 26AFB(2) or (3) applies, reduced by any amount that has been or will be included in the assessable income of the taxpayer under subsection 26AF(2), 26AFA(3) or 26AFB(5) in respect of the transfer by the taxpayer of a right to receive the payment or any part of the payment;' However, paragraph (n) of the definition of "eligible termination payment" in subsection 27A(1) of the ITAA 1936 excludes the following amounts from being ETPs: 'consideration of a capital nature for, or in respect of, personal injury to the taxpayer, to the extent to which the amount or value of the consideration is, in the opinion of the Commissioner, reasonable having regard to the nature of the personal injury and its likely effect on the capacity of the taxpayer to derive income from personal exertion;' If a payment is an ETP, a further concession is available if the payment is considered to be an invalidity payment. The amount of an invalidity payment is determined in accordance with section 27G of the ITAA 1936.
The issue of whether a payment in these circumstances is an ETP was recently examined by the High Court in FC of T v Scully [2000] HCA 6. By majority (Kirby J dissenting) the High Court has held that the payment from a superannuation fund for total and permanent disability was an ETP. The following relevant statements were made: 'In our opinion, the words "in respect of" are principally concerned with payments such as those for loss of earnings consequent on personal injury. That that is the effect of that phrase appears from the words of par (n) itself - the consideration must be "reasonable having regard to the nature of the personal injury and its likely effect on the capacity of the taxpayer to derive income from personal exertion" (emphasis added). That meaning is also confirmed by the Explanatory Memorandum which stated that: "[p]ayments being excluded from the definition by paragraphs (k), (m) and (n) are sums paid as loans or under covenants in restraint of trade or by way of compensation for loss of income through personal injury." In their context, the words "in respect of" do not cut down the requirement that the payment must be a payment to compensate for the injury. In our opinion, the payment in this case cannot be characterised as "consideration ... in respect of, personal injury". The fact that the payment is not calculated by reference to the nature and extent of the injury or likely loss to the respondent and the fact that the other benefits are similar to that for total and permanent disablement point inevitable to the conclusion that the payment was "consideration ... for, or in respect of" the respondent's termination of employment and her rights under the Trust Deed and was not "consideration ... for, or in respect of" her injury.' The payment was actually paid under the terms of the superannuation trust deed and was the taxpayer's entitlement in the fund at the time the employment was terminated. No consideration was given to the injury itself in determining the level of the payment.
The payment made to the taxpayer from the superannuation fund was an ETP and not excluded from taxation by reason that the payment was 'of a capital nature for, or in respect of, personal injury'.
Date of decision: 11 July 2001 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 section 27A section 27G Case References: FC of T v Scully [2000] HCA 6 43 ATR 718 Keywords ETP post June 1994 invalidity component Sickness & invalidity payments Invalidity & disablement Business Line: Superannuation Date of publication: 18 July 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 11 July 2001
Original statement You are here
20 August 2010
Archived