ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/743
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road use - agriculture- earthworks
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is land levelling undertaken to rehabilitate a rubble pit located on an agricultural property, 'earthworks' as defined in paragraph 25(e) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. Land levelling undertaken to rehabilitate a rubble pit located on an agricultural property is 'earthworks' as defined in paragraph 25(e) of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity (the farmer) carries on a core agricultural activity on an agricultural property.
The farmer carries out rehabilitation work on a rubble pit located on the agricultural property.
The rehabilitation involves land levelling. The land levelling activities include the levelling of the site of the actual rubble pit and the levelling of overburden. The rehabilitation is necessary so that the land can be reused for agricultural purposes.
Reasons for Decision
Section 53 of the EGCSA provides that, subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Regulations 2003, an entity is entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase or import into Australia off-road diesel fuel for a use by them that qualifies, including 'agriculture'.
'Agriculture' is defined in section 22 of the EGCSA to include an 'agricultural construction activity', which is defined in turn in section 25 of the EGCSA.
The most pertinent activity in section 25 of the EGCSA is set out in paragraph 25(e), which states that the expression 'agricultural construction activity' includes:

the carrying out of earthworks for use in a core agricultural activity if the earthworks:

(i)are carried out on an agricultural property where the core agricultural activity is carried on; and
(ii)are carried out by the person who carries on the core agricultural activity or by a person contracted by that person to carry out the earthworks.

Based on the above definition, land levelling activities undertaken to rehabilitate a rubble pit on an agricultural property will constitute 'earthworks' if the following requirements are satisfied:

1. the land levelling falls within the definition of 'earthworks'
2. the earthworks are 'for use in a core agricultural activity'
3. the earthworks take place on an agricultural property where a core agricultural activity is carried on, and
4. the earthworks are carried out by the person who carries on the core agricultural activity or by a person contracted to carry out the earthworks.

Each of these requirements will be examined in turn.

1. Is land levelling undertaken to rehabilitate a rubble pit 'earthworks'?

Section 32 of the EGCSA defines 'earthworks' as:

(a)the forming or maintenance of levee banks or windbreaks; or
(b)contour banking; or
(c)land levelling or land grading.

The rehabilitation of the rubble pit involves the levelling of the site of the pit and levelling of overburden. The levelling activities are focused on making the area reusable for agricultural purposes.
The land levelling activities would therefore constitute 'earthworks' within section 32 of the EGCSA as land-levelling is specifically included within the definition of 'earthworks'.

2. Are the earthworks 'for use in a core agricultural activity'?

The land levelling is carried out so that the land can continue to be used for agricultural purposes, and the farmer is undertaking a core agricultural activity. As the earthworks are for use in a core agricultural activity, this requirement is met.

3. Are the earthworks carried out on the agricultural property where a core agricultural activity is carried on?

The farmer is conducting a core agricultural activity. As the earthworks are being carried out on the agricultural property where the core agricultural activity is carried on, this requirement is satisfied.

4. Are the earthworks being carried out by the person who carries on the core agricultural activity or by a person contracted to carry out the work?

The earthworks are being carried out by the farmer who is carrying on a core agricultural activity. Therefore this requirement is satisfied.
Conclusion
The land levelling activities satisfy the definition of earthworks in the EGCSA. The earthworks are carried out for use in a core agricultural activity, on the agricultural property where the core agricultural activity is being carried out, and are carried out by the farmer who is carrying on the core agricultural activity.
Accordingly, the land levelling undertaken to rehabilitate a rubble pit located on an agricultural property is 'earthworks' as defined in paragraph 25(e) of the EGCSA.
Date of decision:
  26 August 2004

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   section 22   section 25   paragraph 25(e)   section 32   section 53

Keywords

EGCS agricultural construction activity
 EGCS agricultural earthworks
 EGCS agriculture
 EGCS off-road

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  10 September 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
26 August 2004
Original statement

You are here
 1 July 2012
Archived