ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/640
================================================== Excise Energy Grants Credits Scheme: off-road credit - generation of electricity - retail enterprise - media broadcast vans FOI status: may be released This ATO ID should be withdrawn as the fuel tax credits scheme has replaced the energy grants credit scheme for eligible fuel acquired from 1 July 2006 for the purpose of electricity generation.
This decision is applicable to eligible fuel purchased between 1 July 2003 and 30 June 2006 for the purposes of the Energy Grants (Credits Scheme) Act 2003. Entitlement to a credit for eligible fuel acquired from 1 July 2006 for use in generating electricity is dealt with under the Fuel Tax Act 2006 and Fuel Tax (Consequential and Transitional Provisions) Act 2006. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Does an entity which carries on a media production and broadcasting enterprise have the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality as its principal purpose at the place where the mobile broadcast vans are used, as required by subparagraph 53(4)(a)(i) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
No. An entity which carries on a media production and broadcasting enterprise does not have the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality as its principal purpose at the place where the mobile broadcast vans are used, as required by subparagraph 53(4)(a)(i) of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity runs an enterprise involved in media production, broadcasting and sundry other activities.
As part of that enterprise, the entity uses mobile media broadcast vans. From these vans the entity carries out media production and/or media broadcast activities.
In some places the vans do not have ready access to a commercial supply of electricity. In these instances, a mobile diesel powered generator is used to generate electricity for air conditioning and lighting for the vans.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 53(1) of the EGCSA states that a person is entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase diesel fuel for a use by them that qualifies.
Paragraph 53(4)(a) of the EGCSA provides that the following is a use that qualifies: use at particular premises to generate electricity for use in the course of carrying on, at those premises, an enterprise that: (i)has, as its principal purpose, the retail sale of goods or services (other than electricity) or the provision of hospitality; and
(ii)and does not have, at those premises, ready access to a commercial supply of electricity;... In this instance what must be considered is whether the electricity is for use in the course of carrying on, at those premises, an enterprise that has as its principal purpose the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality.
Accordingly, although the entity may carry on a range of activities as part of its media enterprise, we need to consider the nature of the activities carried on at the place where the diesel fuel is used to generate electricity, that is, the place where the media broadcast vans are placed, and determine if the principal purpose of those activities is the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality.
In the Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW,
'Retail' is defined as: 1. the sale of commodities to household or ultimate consumers, usually in small quantities (opposed to wholesale)... 'Hospitality' is defined as: the reception and entertainment of guests or strangers with liberality or kindness. At the place where the broadcast vans are positioned, the entity is engaged in the activities of media production and or media broadcasting. These activities clearly do not involve the retail sale of either goods or services. Neither do they constitute hospitality as defined above.
Therefore, the entity cannot be considered to be carrying on, at the place where the electricity is generated, an enterprise that has as its principal purpose the retail sale of goods or services or the provision of hospitality for the purposes of subparagraph 53(4)(a)(i) of the EGCSA.
Date of decision: 12 May 2004 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 subsection 53(1) paragraph 53(4)(a) subparagraph 53(4)(a)(i) Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2004/421 ATO ID 2004/422 ATO ID 2004/423 Other References: The Macquarie Dictionary 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie University Pty Ltd, NSW Keywords EGCS off-road EGCS use of eligible fuel at certain premises EGCS use to generate electricity EGCS use to generate electricity at a retail/hospitality enterprise Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 30 July 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 12 May 2004
Original statement You are here
26 March 2010
Archived