ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/1105
================================================== Income Tax Franking of dividends: holding period and related payments - qualified person - no family trust election FOI status: may be released Though Part IIIAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 ceased to have application from 1 July 2002, it is necessary to have regard to the rules in Division 1A of the former Part IIIAA in determining whether an entity is a qualified person for the purpose of the new rules contained in the Simplified Imputation System in respect of a franked distribution made directly or indirectly to the entity on or after 1 July 2002. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is a beneficiary of a non-fixed trust a qualified person under section 160APHO of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) in relation to a dividend paid on ordinary shares acquired by the trustee post 31 December 1997 and held at risk for 45 days where the trustee has not made a family trust election?
Decision
No. The beneficiary will not be a qualified person under section 160APHO of the ITAA 1936 in relation to the dividend as the failure by the trustee to make a family trust election would result in the beneficiary's risk of loss or opportunity for gain being materially diminished.
Facts
An individual beneficiary claimed $6,200 in franking credits on a distribution of franked dividends on ordinary shares acquired by the trustee of a non-fixed trust on 16 January 2002. The trustee held the shares at risk from the date of purchase to the end of April 2002. The trustee has not made a family trust election. Neither the trustee nor any associate of the trustee has made, is under an obligation to make, or is likely to make, a related payment in respect of the dividend. The beneficiary did not acquire any independent positions in relation to the shares.
Reasons for Decision
As a non-fixed trust, the trust would constitute a non-widely held trust. A beneficiary of a non-widely held trust is taken to acquire, hold and dispose of an interest in shares held by the trust when the trustee acquires, holds and disposes of shares or an interest in shares (sub-section 160APHG(3) of the ITAA 1936).
If a beneficiary of a non-widely held trust is to be a qualified person under section 160APHO of the ITAA 1936, they must hold their interest at risk for not less than 45 days during the primary qualification period where no related payments have been made.
A beneficiary's interest in the trust holding is determined under section 160APHL of the ITAA 1936. Under sub-section 160APHL(5), the beneficiary of a trust is taken to have an interest in the trust holding that is determined in proportion to their entitlement to the relevant dividend income. Sub-section 160APHL(7) attributes a long position with a delta of +1 in respect of that interest. However, where the trustee has not made a family trust election, this long position will be negated and a further long position created to reflect any fixed interest the beneficiary may hold in the trust holding. (paragraph 160APHL(10)(a)). The beneficiary will be taken to have a fixed interest where they have an indefeasible vested interest in the corpus of the trust.
Consequently, in the absence of a family trust election as well as a vested and indefeasible interest in the corpus of the trust, a beneficiary would experience a material diminution in the risk of loss or opportunity for gain in respect of their interest in the trust holding and will not be taken to have held their interest at risk for the requisite period.
Therefore, the beneficiary of a non-fixed trust will not be a qualified person under section 160APHO of the ITAA 1936 in relation to the dividend paid where the trustee has not made a family trust election.
Amendment History Date of Amendment
Part
Comment 17 February 2017
Issues, Facts
Amended to correct typographical errors. Date of decision: 27 November 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2004 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 section 160APHL section 160APHO subsection 160APHG(3) Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 3352668/ 1-7SKXL4E Business Line: Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals Date of publication: 12 December 2003 Date reviewed: 17 February 2017 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 27 November 2003
Original statement You are here
17 February 2017
Updated statement