ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/92
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and supply of farm land that is also part of a GST-free supply of a going concern
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a vineyard owner and wine seller, making a GST-free supply of farm land under section 38-480 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when:

•the farm land is comprised of a vineyard and residential cottages, and
•the vineyard forms part of the entity's GST-free supply of its vineyard business, to the same purchaser, as a going concern under section 38-325 of the GST Act?

Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply of farm land under section 38-480 of the GST Act.
The combined operation of sections 38-325 and 38-480 of the GST Act has the effect that the entire sale is GST-free.
Facts
The entity is a vineyard owner and wine seller that is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The entity is selling farm land consisting of a vineyard, and two residential cottages. The entity is also selling its vineyard business to the same purchaser as a supply of a going concern.
The farm land has been used by the entity to carry on its vineyard business for at least five years prior to sale. Even though not all portions of the land are used to carry on a farming business, the essential character of the land is such that it is accepted that the land in its entirety is land on which a farming business has been carried on. The purchaser intends to continue the vineyard business.
The land used as the vineyard forms part of the supply of the going concern that is GST-free under section 38-325 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 38-480 of the GST Act provides that the supply of a freehold interest in land is GST-free if:

•the land is land on which a farming business has been carried on for at least the period of five years preceding the supply, and
•the recipient of the supply intends that a farming business be carried on, on the land.

The entity has used the farm land to carry on the vineyard business for at least five years before the sale and the purchaser intends to continue the vineyard business. However, as there are two residential cottages on the land, the entity has not directly used all of the land in its farming business. It is recognised that there will be cases where not all of the land is used for farming purposes. For the purposes of section 38-480 of the GST Act, farming must be the predominant activity carried out on the land. In other words, the land must have the essential characteristics of farm land. The other activities cannot be so significant that the land cannot be considered to be farm land. The essential character of the entity's land is such that it is accepted that the land in its entirety is land on which a farming business has been carried on.
However, the part of the land that is actually used to carry on the farming business, the vineyard, is part of a GST-free supply of a going concern under section 38-325 of the GST Act. Therefore, it is necessary to consider whether this fact precludes the application of section 38-480 of the GST Act to the farm land in its entirety.
There is nothing in the wording of section 38-480 of the GST Act that precludes it operating concurrently with another GST-free provision in the GST Act. In addition, there is no provision in the GST Act that precludes two GST-free provisions from operating concurrently. Accordingly, in appropriate circumstances, a supply may be GST-free under more than one provision of Division 38 of the GST Act.
The fact that part of the land used for a vineyard is also GST-free under section 38-325 of the GST Act does not detract from the characterisation of the land for the purpose of section 38-480 of the GST Act.
Accordingly, the supply of the land in its entirety, including the residential cottages, is GST-free under section 38-480 of the GST Act.

Note: guidance on determining the 'essential character' of land for the purposes of section 38-480 of the GST Act can be found in Part 6 of the Tax Office Primary Production Industry Partnership Issues Register.

Date of decision:
  23 September 2004

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   Division 38   section 38-325   section 38-480

Other References:

Tax Office Primary Production Industry Partnership Issues Register

Keywords

Goods and services tax
 GST free
 GST farm land
 Farming business
 GST supply of going concern

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  4196366

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  8 April 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782