ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/783
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road - agriculture - new core agricultural activity on a disused agricultural property
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as it has been superseded by Product Grants and Benefits Ruling PGBR 2005/3

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is an entity that undertakes earthworks on a disused farm to make it suitable for a new core agricultural activity, carrying out an 'agricultural construction activity' as defined in section 25 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
No. An entity that undertakes earthworks on a disused farm to make it suitable for a new core agricultural activity is not carrying out an 'agricultural construction activity' as defined in section 25 of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity purchases a disused farm on which no agricultural activities have been carried on for some time.
The entity intends to utilise the property's existing infrastructure to operate it as a viticultural property, which is not the core agricultural activity it was originally used for. No agricultural activities are currently being carried out on the property.
The entity has contracted an earthmoving contractor to carry out earthworks necessary to prepare the property for viticultural activities.
Reasons for Decision
Section 53 of the EGCSA provides that, subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Regulations 2003, an entity is entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase or import into Australia off-road diesel fuel for a use by them that qualifies, including 'primary production'. The term 'primary production' is defined in section 21 of the EGCSA to mean a number of activities including 'agriculture'.
'Agriculture' is defined in section 22 of the EGCSA to mean a number of activities including an 'agricultural construction activity', which is defined in turn in section 25.
In this situation, the most pertinent activity is in paragraph 25(e), which states that the expression 'agricultural construction activity' means:

the 'carrying out of earthworks' for use in a core agricultural activity if the earthworks:

(i)are carried out on the agricultural property where the core agricultural activity is carried on; and
(ii)are carried out by the person who carries on the core agricultural activity or by a person contracted by that person to carry out the earthworks.

Therefore, the activities will be an 'agricultural construction activity' for the purposes of section 25 of the EGCSA if the earthworks are:

•for use in a core agricultural activity
•carried out on the agricultural property where that core agricultural activity is carried on, and
•carried out by the person who carried on the core agricultural activity or a person contracted by that person.

Each test will be considered in turn.

1. Are the earthworks for use in a 'core agricultural activity'?

The term 'core agricultural activity' is defined in section 31 of the EGCSA to mean any of the following activities:

(a)the cultivation of the soil
(b)the cultivation or gathering in of crops
(c)the rearing of live-stock, or
(d)viticulture, horticulture, pasturage or apiculture

provided they are undertaken for the purpose of or for purposes that will directly benefit a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
In this case, the earthworks are to be used in a core agricultural activity, namely viticulture, which will be undertaken for the purpose of a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale. Therefore, the first test is met.

2. Are the earthworks being carried out on the agricultural property where that core agricultural activity is carried on?

The EGCSA specifically requires that the earthworks be carried out on the agricultural property where the core agricultural activity that the earthworks will be used in, is carried on.
However, what must firstly be determined is whether the land where the earthworks are undertaken is an 'agricultural property'.
The term 'agricultural property' is not defined in the EGCSA. The issue of what constitutes an agricultural property for the purposes of the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme (DFRS) was considered by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) in Raymond Cedric and Brian Richard Wallace v. CEO of Customs [1998] AATA 633 (25 June 1998); (1998) 27 AAR 430 (Wallace). As the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme maintains similar entitlements to its predecessor (the DFRS), the decision in Wallace remains relevant.
Wallace is authority for the view that an agricultural property is a property on which the activities of cultivation of the soil, the growing and gathering in of crops or the rearing of livestock or a mixture of more than one of these activities are carried out for the purpose of, or for purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
The area of land where the earthworks are being carried on is a disused agricultural property, on which agricultural activities have been carried out, but have not been for sometime.
Therefore, as the entity is undertaking the earthworks in order to commence a core agricultural activity and the land had been disused for some time prior to the work, the property is not an agricultural property at the time the earthworks are undertaken.
Accordingly, earthworks undertaken on a disused farm to make it suitable for a new core agricultural activity do not constitute an 'agricultural construction activity' as defined in section 25 of the EGCSA.
Date of decision:
  23 July 2004

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   section 21   section 22   section 25   paragraph 25(e)   section 31   section 53

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2003/1162
 ATO ID 2004/64
 ATO ID 2004/740
 ATO ID 2004/741
 ATO ID 2004/742
 ATO ID 2004/743
 ATO ID 2004/744

Keywords

EGCS agriculture
 EGCS agricultural earthworks
 EGCS agricultural construction activity

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  24 September 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
23 July 2004
Original statement

You are here
13 September 2005
Archived