ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/829
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road credit - marine transport - reefer loaded onto vessel and plugged into vessel's power supply
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the use of diesel fuel in a vessel's generator to power the refrigeration plant of a reefer being transported by the vessel 'use in marine transport' for the purposes of section 36 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. The use of diesel fuel in a vessel's generator to power the refrigeration plant of a reefer being transported by the vessel is 'use in marine transport' for the purposes of section 36 of the EGCSA.
Facts
A vessel is engaged in marine transport.
A reefer is placed on the entity's vessel and transported between two places by sea.
A reefer is a refrigerated container that ordinarily uses diesel fuel from its own tank to power the reefer's refrigeration plant. The reefer's refrigeration plant must be kept running at all times to ensure that the contents of the reefer are kept at the required temperature. In this case, while it is being transported by the vessel, the reefer does not use its own fuel, but draws its electricity from the vessel's power supply.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 53(1) of the EGCSA provides that an entity is, subject to certain conditions, entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase diesel fuel for a use by them that qualifies. Under subsection 53(3) of the EGCSA, 'use in marine transport' is a use that qualifies.
Section 36 of the EGCSA sets out the meaning of the expression '
 use in marine transport
 '. The most pertinent provision that needs to be considered is contained in subsection 36(6), which states that:

Use:
(a)in equipment in or on a vessel; and
(b)while the vessel is in or on the sea or fresh water; and
(c)for air-conditioning, heating, lighting or for any purpose incidental to use of the vessel:

(i)in marine transport; or
(ii)for any of the purposes mentioned in subsection (4); or
(iii)as mentioned in paragraph (5)(c);
is use in marine transport.

In order for the diesel fuel consumed by the vessel to be accepted as being for 'use in marine transport' the fuel must be for use in equipment in or on a vessel, while the vessel is in or on the sea or fresh water, for any purpose incidental to use of the vessel in marine transport. Each test will be considered in turn.

Is the use of diesel fuel in the vessel to power the reefer, 'use in equipment in or on a vessel'?

In this instance the reefer is placed onto and transported by the entity's vessel. Whilst on the vessel the reefer is hooked up to electrical power from the vessel's power supply.
The vessel's generator is clearly equipment on the vessel (or part of the vessel itself). Therefore this requirement is satisfied.

Is the diesel fuel used while the vessel is in or on sea or fresh water?

The diesel fuel is used while the vessel is at sea. Therefore this requirement is satisfied.

Is the diesel fuel used 'for any purpose incidental to use of the vessel in marine transport'?

The phrase 'incidental to' is not defined in the EGCSA in relation to marine transport. The ordinary meaning of the phrase must then be considered.
The phrase 'incidental to' is defined in The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW as:

liable to happen in connection with; naturally appertaining to.

In this case the reefer's refrigeration plant must be kept running at all times to ensure that the contents of the reefer are kept at the required temperature. In addition, the diesel fuel is being consumed while the vessel is transporting the reefer.
Therefore, the use of diesel fuel in the vessel's generator to power the reefer is a use of diesel fuel that is both liable to happen in connection with and naturally appertaining to the transport of a reefer by a vessel engaged in marine transport.
Accordingly, the use of diesel fuel in a vessel's generator to power the refrigeration plant of a reefer being transported by the vessel is 'use in marine transport' for the purposes of section 36 of the EGCSA.
Date of decision:
  7 October 2004

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   section 36   section 36(6)   subsection 53(1)   subsection 53(3)

Other References:

The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW

Keywords

EGCS marine transport
 EGCS marine transport incidental use

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  15 October 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 7 October 2004
Original statement

You are here
 1 July 2012
Archived