ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/907
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and the treatment of surcharge levied by taxi company for the provision of a credit facility
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID contains references to provisions of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999, which have been replaced by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019. This ATO ID continues to apply in relation to the remade Regulations.

 A comparison table which provides the replacement provisions in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019 for regulations which are referenced in this ATO ID is available.
With effect from 1 July 2015, the term 'Australia' is replaced in nearly all instances within the GST, Luxury Car Tax and Wine Equalisation Tax legislation with the term 'indirect tax zone' by the Treasury Legislation Amendment (Repeal Day) Act 2015. The scope of the new term, however, remains the same as the repealed definition of 'Australia' used in those Acts. For readability and other reasons, where the term 'Australia' is used in this document, it is referring to the 'indirect tax zone' as defined in subsection 195-1 of the GST Act.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a taxi network company, making a financial supply that is input taxed under subsection 40-5(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it provides a credit facility to its customers and levies a surcharge for that facility?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a financial supply that is input taxed under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it provides a credit facility to its customers and levies a surcharge for that facility.
Facts
The entity is a taxi network company in Australia that provides network services to the owners of taxi-cabs who are affiliated with it. The entity also provides a credit facility to customers who hire taxis on account (account holders). The account holders sign account vouchers whenever they use a taxi. The entity collects the vouchers from the taxi-cab owners/drivers who are required to lodge the vouchers by a specified day of the month for payment by the entity, on a specified day of the month. In some cases the entity will immediately pay out the face value of the voucher upon its lodgement, or will credit the amount of the voucher against network fees owed to it by the taxi-cab owner. Upon receipt of the voucher, the entity adds a surcharge, calculated on the value of the taxi service, and charges the account holders the total amount.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply is in the course or furtherance of the entity's enterprise.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act, a financial supply is input taxed. Subsection 40-5(2) of the GST Act provides that a financial supply has the meaning given by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations).
Subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations provides that the provision, acquisition or disposal of an interest mentioned in subregulation (3) or (4) is a financial supply if:

•the provision, acquisition or disposal is:

- for consideration;
- in the course or furtherance of an enterprise;
- connected with Australia; and

•the supplier is:

- registered or required to be registered for GST; and
- a financial supply provider in relation to the supply of the interest.

Firstly, it is necessary to determine whether the entity is providing, acquiring or disposing of an interest in or under an item mentioned in subregulation 40-5.09(3) or (4) of the GST Regulations.
'Interests' are mentioned in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations and Item 2 in the table (Item 2) lists 'a debt, credit arrangement or right to credit, including a letter of credit'. As the entity provides a credit facility, it is providing an interest under a credit arrangement and the surcharge that it levies represents consideration for this interest.
The entity's supply of the interest is in the course or furtherance of the enterprise that it carries on in Australia, the entity is registered for GST and charges a surcharge to its customers for the provision of the credit facility which amounts to consideration.
The final requirement is that the supplier is a financial supply provider in relation to the supply of the interest. 'Financial supply provider' is defined in subregulation 40-5.06(1) of the GST Regulations:

'An entity, in relation to the supply of an interest that was:

(a)immediately before the supply, the property of the entity; or
(b)created by the entity in making the supply;

is the
 financial supply provider
 of the interest.'

As the interest (the credit arrangement) was created by the entity in making the supply, the entity is a financial supply provider in relation to that interest.
Therefore, all the requirements of subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations are satisfied. As such, the entity is making a financial supply that is input taxed under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it provides a credit facility to its customers and levies a surcharge for that facility.
Date of decision:
  15 January 2002

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   subsection 40-5(1)   subsection 40-5(2)
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999   subregulation 40-5.06(1)   subregulation 40-5.09(1)   subregulation 40-5.09(3)   subregulation 40-5.09(3) table item 2   subregulation 40-5.09(4)

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 Input taxed supplies
 GST financial supplies

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  CW252898

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  16 September 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782