ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/254
================================================== Income Tax CGT: amalgamation of incorporated associations - CGT event A1 FOI status: may be released CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Does CGT event A1 in section 104-10 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) happen to the CGT assets of incorporated associations that amalgamate under the Associations Incorporation Act 1981 (Qld) (AIA (Qld))?
Decision
Yes. CGT event A1 in section 104-10 of the ITAA 1997 happens to the CGT assets of incorporated associations that amalgamate under the AIA (Qld) because there is a change of ownership of the assets from those associations to a new association.
Facts
Two related associations are incorporated associations under the AIA (Qld). The two associations amalgamate under Part 9, Division 2 of the AIA (Qld).
Relevant provisions of the AIA (Qld) include: Part 9, Division 2 - Amalgamation of incorporated associations Definitions for Division 79. In this division- "new association" means an incorporated association that is incorporated because of an application to amalgamate made under this division by 2 or more old associations. "old association" means an incorporated association that, with one or more other incorporated associations, applies under this division to form a new association. Modified application of Act 84. The provisions of this Act providing for the incorporation of an association apply to the incorporation of a new association with all necessary changes, all changes made under this division and any changes prescribed under the regulations. Certificate of incorporation 85.(1) On registration of a new association, the chief executive must issue the association with a certificate of incorporation. (2)............... Effect of incorporation 86. On the incorporation of a new association- (a)the assets and liabilities of the old associations become the assets and liabilities of the new association; and
(b)the incorporation of the old associations is cancelled. Duty to notify registrar of titles of land or interest in land etc. 87.(1) The secretary of a new association must ask the registrar of titles, or anyone else who is required to keep a register about dealings in property, (the "registering authority") to record in the appropriate register land or an interest in land gained by the new association because of its incorporation under this division. (2). .................. Amalgamation does not affect certain rights or obligations 88.(1) The amalgamation of old associations into a new association does not- (a)affect a right or obligation of the old associations or anyone else:or
(b)make legal proceedings by or against the old association defective (2) .................. Relevant provisions of the Duties Act 2001 (Qld) include: Chapter 10, Part 4: 427 Exemption - particular instruments and transactions relating to incorporated associations (1) Duty is not imposed on an instrument or transaction for a vesting of property in an incorporated association under the Associations Incorporation Act 1981, because of its incorporation under part 2 or part 9, division 2, of that Act. Reasons for Decision
CGT event A1 in section 104-10 of the ITAA 1997 happens if there is a disposal of a CGT asset. There is a disposal of a CGT asset if a change of ownership occurs from one entity to another entity.
An amalgamation is the merging of two separate things to create a new thing (Butterworths Australian Legal Dictionary, 1997). The legislation under which the amalgamation is effected does not provide for the continuation of the same legal entity. Instead, the legislation refers to 'old associations' being associations that have applied to amalgamate and to a 'new association' being one that is formed under the amalgamation process.
The old associations are separate legal entities incorporated under the AIA (Qld) and the new association is also a separate legal entity. Paragraph 86(b) of the AIA (Qld) provides for the cancellation of the incorporation of the old associations and sections 84 and 85 of the AIA (Qld) provides for the incorporation of the new association.
Paragraph 86(a) of the AIA (Qld) provides that the assets and liabilities of the old associations become the assets and liabilities of the new association. In becoming assets of the new association there is a transfer of assets from the old associations to the new association. Subsection 87(1) of AIA (Qld) indicates a transfer of assets from the old associations to the new association in referring to land or an interest in land gained by the new association and requiring such acquisition to be recorded in the appropriate register of titles. Further indications of a transfer are contained in the stamp duties legislation which provides an express stamp duty exemption for the vesting of property in an incorporated association because of amalgamation under the AIA (Qld) (section 427 of the Duties Act 2001 (Qld)).
As the assets of the old associations have been transferred to a new entity (the new association) there is a change of ownership (that is, a disposal) of assets from the old associations to the new entity. CGT event A1 in section 104-10 of the ITAA 1997 therefore happens to the CGT assets of the old associations when they amalgamate. Note: If an incorporated association that amalgamates with another incorporated association is an exempt entity under Division 50 of the ITAA 1997 any resulting capital gain will be exempt from income tax. Date of decision: 31 January 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2002 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 Division 50 section 104-10
Associations Incorporation Act 1981 (Qld) section 79 section 84 section 85 section 86 section 87
Duties Act 2001 (Qld) Section 427 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2002/808 ATO ID 2004/798 Other References: Butterworths Australian Legal Dictionary, 1997 Keywords Capital gains tax Capital gains Association income Non profit companies Companies Capital Gains Tax CoE CGT event A1-disposal of a CGT asset Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 430853 Business Line: Losses and CGT Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 24 April 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782