ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/626
================================================== Excise Energy Grants Credits Scheme: off-road - marine transport - travel by a vessel to and from bed levelling sites FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the use of diesel fuel in operating a vessel travelling to and from the place where it will undertake bed levelling activities 'use in a vessel in marine transport' for the purposes of subsection 36(2) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. The use of diesel fuel in operating a vessel travelling to and from the place where it will undertake bed levelling activities is 'use in a vessel in marine transport' for the purposes of subsection 36(2) of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity has purchased diesel fuel which it uses in a vessel engaged in bed levelling.
The vessel travels to the site where it is to carry out its bed levelling work. While travelling to the site the vessel carries the 'bed levelling bar' it will use in its bed levelling activity and the crew of the vessel.
'Bed levelling' involves dragging a 'bed levelling bar' across the sea bed to level off the sea bed at the designated site by moving sediment from shallow areas into deeper areas.
While the vessel is travelling to and from the site where it carries out its bed levelling work, it uses diesel fuel to generate electricity that powers air conditioning, heating, lighting for the vessel and to provide crew amenities (such as showers, cooking and entertainment facilities).
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 53(1) of the EGCSA states that an entity is entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase or import into Australia off-road diesel fuel for a use by them that qualifies.
Subsection 53(3) of the EGCSA provides that use in marine transport, in the course of carrying on an enterprise is a use that qualifies. The phrase 'use in marine transport' is defined in section 36 of the EGCSA to mean a number of activities including (per subsection 36(2)) 'use in a vessel in marine transport'.
A first step in determining whether diesel fuel has been used in a vessel in marine transport is to determine the meaning of the term 'marine transport'.
In Re Port of Brisbane Corporation and Deputy Commissioner of Taxation [2004] AATA 222 (Port of Brisbane) the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) considered the meaning of 'marine transport' for the purposes of the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme, which was an immediate precursor to the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme.
In Port of Brisbane, the AAT reasoned at paragraph 31 that: ... the phrase "use in ... marine transport" should be accorded its ordinary and natural meaning. ... And further at paragraph 32 that: .... In the Tribunal's opinion, the key to the meaning of "marine transport" lies in the meaning of the word "transport". The Concise Macquarie Dictionary (3rd edition 1988) lists as the sixth meaning of transport: 6. a means of transporting, as a ship, truck or plane used for transporting soldiers or military stores, or convicts. The first meaning of transport in the Oxford English Dictionary is: 1. the action of carrying or conveying a thing or person from one place to another, conveyance. The use of the word "transport" in the phrase "marine transport" suggests a conveyance - something which does the conveying - a vehicle or vessel or aircraft which moves through its particular medium (land, water, air) carrying a thing or person. The medium in this case is, of course, water. Thus, ... "marine transport" should in this instance be interpreted as meaning the act of conveying a thing...
The Tribunal then applied this definition of 'marine transport' to conclude at paragraph 35 that: ... diesel used by the Corporation in powering the self-propelled trailer suction dredges in travelling to and from dredging operations or dump sites or used in towing cutter suction or grab dredges to and from the dredging operations or dump sites should be considered as being used in marine transport because the diesel is being used to power a vessel conveying dredging machinery or the spoil generated by the dredging activities from one place to another. ... In this case, as in Port of Brisbane, the vessel is conveying equipment from one place to another when it is travelling to and from the bed-levelling site. Therefore, the movement of a vessel to and from the place where it carries out bed levelling activities is 'marine transport'.
Accordingly, the use of diesel fuel in operating a vessel travelling to and from the place where it will undertake bed levelling activities is 'use in a vessel in marine transport' for the purposes of subsection 36(2) of the EGCSA.
Date of decision: 23 July 2004 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 subsection 53(1) subsection 53(3) section 36 subsection 36(2) Case References: Re Port of Brisbane Corporation and Deputy Commissioner of Taxation 55 ATR 1029 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2004/558 Keywords EGCS dredge EGCS in a vessel EGCS marine transport EGCS off-road Energy grants (credits) scheme Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 30 July 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 23 July 2004
Original statement You are here 1 July 2012
Archived