ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/546
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of business income derived by a non-resident
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID has been withdrawn from the database because it contains references to the tax treaty between Australia and South Africa that was amended by the protocol to the tax treaty (Schedule 42A) which entered into force on 12 November 2008. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions up to, and including, 30 June 2009.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the income derived by the taxpayer, a resident of South Africa, from the sale of magazines, assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. Even though the income derived by the South African resident taxpayer from the sale of magazines in Australia is assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997, Article 7 of Schedule 42 to the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act) applies and the income is not assessable in Australia.
Facts
The taxpayer company is a resident of South Africa and a non-resident of Australia for income tax purposes.
The taxpayer produces a magazine mainly for sale in South Africa and surrounding African countries.
The taxpayer also exports the magazines to Australia for sale.
The magazines are delivered to an independent distribution company in Australia for distribution to newsagents and retail outlets in Australia.
The Australian distribution company services a large number of publishers.
The taxpayer has no legal or economic control over the Australian distribution company.
The distribution company has no authority to conclude contracts on behalf of the taxpayer.
The taxpayer is paid by the Australian distribution company according to the number of copies of magazines sold after a particular issue of the magazine has been on sale in Australia for about 2 months and the recall period has passed. The payment is made by electronic transfer directly to the bank account of the taxpayer in South Africa.
The taxpayer does not have any offices, place of business or employees in Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a non- resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all Australian sources.
The income received by the taxpayer from the sale of magazine in Australia is ordinary income under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining the liability to tax on Australian sourced income received by a non-resident taxpayer, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the Agreements Act.
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1997 so that both Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for limited situations).
Schedule 42 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement and the Protocol between Australia and the Republic of South Africa (the South African Agreement).
Under Article 7 of the South African Agreement, the business profits of a South African enterprise shall be taxable only in South Africa unless the enterprise carries on business in Australia through a permanent establishment situated in Australia.
The term 'permanent establishment' is defined in Article 5(1) of the South African Agreement as a fixed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on.
Paragraph 2 of the OECD Commentary on Article 5 of the OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital explains that the definition of permanent establishment contains the following requirements:

•the existence of a place of business such as premises, machinery or equipment;
•fixed place of business which means that the place of business must be established at a distinct place with some degree of permanence even though it may have existed for only a very short time; and
•personnel to conduct the business from that place.

Article 5(2) of the South African agreement contains a list of examples, each of which can be regarded as constituting a permanent establishment, such as a place of management, an office, a branch, a factory or a workshop.
Article 5(5) of the South African Agreement provides that a permanent establishment will be deemed to exist if a South African enterprise carries on business in Australia through a person (other than an independent agent) who has authority to conclude contracts on behalf of the enterprise and habitually exercises that authority in Australia.
Under Article 5(6) of the South African Agreement, an enterprise of South Africa shall not be deemed to have a permanent establishment in Australia merely because it carries on business in Australia through a broker, general commission agent or any other agent of an independent status, and the agent is acting in the ordinary course of business as a broker or agent.
Paragraph 37 of the OECD Commentary on Article 5 of the OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital explains that a person will come within the scope of Article 5(6), only if:

•the person is independent of the enterprise both legally and economically, and
•the person acts in the ordinary course of the business when acting on behalf of the enterprise

The taxpayer has no fixed place of business in Australia for the purpose of Article 5(1) of the South African Agreement.
The taxpayer does not have a place of management, a branch, an office, a factory or a workshop in Australia for the purposes of Article 5(2) of the South African Agreement.
The taxpayer does not have a dependent agent who has the authority to conclude contracts on its behalf in Australia for the purposes of Article 5(5) of the South African Agreement.
The Australian distribution company is an agent of an independent status under Article 5(6) of the South African Agreement, and therefore will not constitute a permanent establishment.
The income received by the taxpayer from the sale of magazines in Australia is not assessable, as the taxpayer's business does not have a permanent establishment in Australia. The income is consequently not taxable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 by virtue of the overriding effect of Article 7 of the South African Agreement.
Date of decision:
  21 May 2004

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2003 Year ending 30 June 2004 Year ending 30 June 2005

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 42   Schedule 42, Article 5   Schedule 42, Article 5(1)   Schedule 42, Article 5(2)   Schedule 42, Article 5(5)   Schedule 42, Article 5(6)   Schedule 42, Article 7

Other References:

OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital

Keywords

Double tax agreements
 Exempt income
 International tax
 Non-resident company
 Permanent establishment
 South Africa

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  2 July 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
21 May 2004
Original statement

You are here
10 December 2010
Archived