ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/991
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and modifications made to doors relating to the disability of a particular person FOI status: may be released This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is an entity, a supplier of building services, making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-45(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it widens a doorway within a home to allow disabled access and attaches a screen door?
Decision
No, the entity is not making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-45(1) of the GST Act when it widens a doorway within a home to allow disabled access and attaches a screen door. The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a supplier of building services. The entity modifies a doorway within a home to allow wheelchair access by widening it and attaches a screen door. The screen door does not have any special characteristics or features.
The entity does not receive any Commonwealth, State or Territory government funding.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 38-45(1) of the GST Act, the supply of a medical aid and appliance is GST-free where the medical aid or appliance: •is covered by Schedule 3 to the GST Act (Schedule 3), or specified in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019(GST Regulations);
•is specifically designed for people with an illness or disability; and
•is not widely used by people without an illness or disability. Item 52 in the table in Schedule 3 (Item 52) lists 'special door fittings relating to the disability of a particular person'.
The phrase 'relating to the disability of a particular person' means that, when supplied, the special door fittings must be customised in such a way that the method of operation of the door relates specifically to the needs or requirements of a particular disabled person.
The entity alters the framework of the doorway by widening it. This is a service provided to alter the existing structure of the building and is not a supply of actual goods, such as a special door fitting. Accordingly, this service is not covered by Item 52.
In addition, the screen door attached to the widened doorway does not have any special characteristics. It is not a door fitting customised in such a way that the method of operation of the door relates specifically to the needs or requirements of a particular disabled person. Therefore, the screen door is not covered by Item 52.
Therefore, the supply of the entity's services to widen the doorway and attach a screen door is not a GST-free supply under subsection 38-45(1) of the GST Act.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it widens a doorway within a home to allow disabled access and attaches a screen door. [Note: If a supplier receives funding from the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory in connection with its supply of care services or receives funding under the Disability Services Act 1986 or a complementary State law or Territory law in respect of its supply of specialist disability services, the supply to the individual may be GST-free under subsection 38-30(4) of the GST Act or section 38-40 of the GST Act respectively. From 1 July 2013, if the supply is made to a participant under the National Disability Insurance Scheme, the supply may be GST-free under section 38-38 of the GST Act.] Amendment History Date of amendment
Part
Comment 20 September 2013
Note
Amended to note possible application of section 38-38 of the GST Act, which came into effect on 1 July 2013 Date of decision: 10 August 2001 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 9-5 subsection 38-30(4) section 38-38 section 38-40 subsection 38-45(1) Division 38 Division 40 Schedule 3 Schedule 3 table item 52
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019 The Regulations Other References: Home and Community Care Act 1985 Keywords Goods & services tax GST free GST health Section 38-45 - medical aids & appliances Taxable supply Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: CW223119 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 30 October 2002 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 10 August 2001
Original statement You are here
20 September 2013
Updated statement