ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/739
================================================== Excise Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road - agriculture - rearing livestock - loading chickens FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the use of a forklift to unload empty modules from a vehicle, move the modules into a shed where they are loaded with livestock, move the full modules back to the vehicle and load the modules onto the vehicle the 'rearing of livestock' for the purposes of paragraph 22(1)(c) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003?
Decision
No. The use of a forklift to unload empty modules from a vehicle, move the modules into a shed where they are loaded with livestock, move the full modules back to the vehicle and load the modules onto the vehicle is not the 'rearing of livestock' for the purposes of paragraph 22(1)(c) of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity operates a transport business.
The entity collects chickens from agricultural properties. Diesel powered forklifts are used to unload empty containers from the prime mover and take the containers to a shed where the chickens are manually placed in the containers.
When the containers are full, forklifts take them out of the shed and load them onto the prime mover.
Once loaded onto the prime mover, the chickens are transported to a plant where they are slaughtered and processed.
The chickens being loaded are 'livestock' for the purposes of section 22 of the EGCSA.
Reasons for Decision
Section 53 of the EGCSA provides that, subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in the regulations, an entity is entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase or import into Australia off-road diesel fuel for a use by them that qualifies, including 'primary production'.
The definition of 'primary production' in section 21 of the EGCSA includes 'agriculture'. 'Agriculture' is defined in section 22 of the EGCSA as meaning, subject to certain conditions, a number of activities, including at paragraph 22(1)(c) 'the rearing of livestock'.
'Rearing of livestock' is not defined in the EGCSA and therefore takes on its common meaning. 'Rear' is defined in the Macquarie Dictionary 2001 rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW as 'to care for and support up to maturity: to rear a child'.
Consequently, the 'rearing of livestock' includes all activities required to breed, raise and care for the animals for the specific purpose for which they are being reared, in accordance with accepted commercial animal husbandry and management practices.
The diesel fuel rebate scheme was the precursor to the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme, and was administered under the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901. The Customs Act allowed a diesel fuel rebate to be paid for the rearing of livestock, and the decisions in the following cases remain relevant.
In Australian National Railways v. Collector of Customs, South Australia (1985) 8 FCR 264 (the Railways Case), Impast Pty Ltd v. Collector of Customs No. W91/290 AAT No. 8355; and Re: French Island Barge Pty Ltd v. Collector of Customs No.V92/255 AAT No 8625, the Federal Court and Administrative Appeals Tribunal concluded that: (a)the rearing of livestock ends when the purpose for which the animals are reared is complete, and
(b)the transport of livestock to an abattoir, a slaughtering point, or to a port for export occurs after the rearing of livestock is over, and does not form part of the 'rearing of livestock'. Notably, in the Railways Case, Davies, J said that: the transportation of livestock by contractors which takes place in the course of rearing livestock, as distinct from transportation which takes place for the purpose of sale or other disposal, is an operation of primary production as defined... In this case, the activities of unloading the empty containers from the prime mover, transferring the containers to a shed where they are loaded with chickens, the transfer of the full containers back to the prime mover and their loading on the prime mover so they can be sent for slaughter and processing are all activities which take place after the rearing of the chickens is complete, and are undertaken as part of the transport of the chickens for slaughter and processing.
In line with the above cases, the transport of livestock to a place of slaughter and processing does not form part of the rearing of the livestock.
Accordingly, the use of a forklift to unload empty modules from a vehicle, move the modules into a shed where they are loaded with livestock, move the full modules back to the vehicle and load the modules onto the vehicle is not the 'rearing of livestock' for the purposes of paragraph 22(1)(c) of the EGCSA.
Date of decision: 24 August 2004 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 section 21 section 22 paragraph 22(1)(c) section 53 Case References: Australian National Railways v. Collector of Customs, South Australia (1985) 8 FCR 264 Impast Pty Ltd v. Collector of Customs No. W91/290 AAT No. 8355 Re French Island Barge Pty Ltd v. Collector of Customs No.V92/255 AAT No 8625 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2004/534 ATO Interpretative Decisions overturned by this decision ATO ID 2004/87 Other References: The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW Keywords EGCS agriculture EGCS rearing of livestock Energy grants (credits) scheme Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 10 September 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 24 August 2004
Original statement You are here 1 July 2012
Archived