ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/538
================================================== Income Tax Capital Gains Tax: small business concessions - small business CGT affiliate - permanently separated spouse FOI status: may be released This ATOID is withdrawn because 'spouse' has been removed from the definition of affiliate as a result of section 152-25 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 being repealed by Act 80 of 2007 as part of the Small Business Alignment measure This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is a person, who is legally married to another person but permanently separated from them, a 'spouse' for the purpose of the definition of small business CGT affiliate in paragraph 152-25(1)(a) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. A person, who is legally married to another person but permanently separated from them, is a 'spouse' and therefore a small business CGT affiliate under paragraph 152-25(1)(a) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
Two legally married people were permanently separated and living independently but not divorced. They were both partners in a partnership, which carried on a business.
A parcel of rural land (an active asset) owned by the partnership was sold and a capital gain realised. Both partners also owned other assets.
Reasons for Decision
Section 152-15 of the ITAA 1997 (maximum net asset value test) sets out one of the basic conditions for small business relief. Under this test, the net value of the CGT assets of certain related entities, including certain assets of any small business CGT affiliates, are taken into account in determining if a taxpayer has exceeded the $5 million limit.
Paragraph 152-25(1)(a) of the ITAA 1997 includes an individual's spouse in the meaning of a small business CGT affiliate.
In relation to the meaning of the word 'spouse', The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW contains the following definitions: •Spouse, '...either member of a married pair in relation to the other; one's husband or wife.'
•Married, '...relating to marriage or married persons.'
•Marriage, '...the legal union of a man with a woman for life; state or condition of being married; the legal relationship of spouses to each other.' As such, the ordinary meaning of the word 'spouse' does not indicate that spouses must be living together. It is enough that they are legally married and that the marriage has not been dissolved.
Certain provisions of the ITAA 1997 specifically exclude a permanently separated spouse. For example, subsection 118-170(1) of the ITAA 1997, in respect of spouses having different main residences, states: If during a period a dwelling is your main residence and...... of your spouse (except a spouse living permanently separately and apart from you), ..... This supports the view that the word 'spouse' would normally be understood to include a person who is legally married to another person but permanently separated from them.
Accordingly, such a person is a small business CGT affiliate under paragraph 152-25(1)(a) of the ITAA 1997. Note 1: The assets of a small business CGT affiliate are only included in a taxpayer's maximum net asset value test if those assets are used, or held ready for use, in a business carried on by the taxpayer or by an entity connected with the taxpayer (not being an entity connected with the taxpayer only because of a small business CGT affiliate). Note 2: There is an additional test where a partnership disposes of an asset. The net value of the CGT assets of the partnership also must not exceed $5 million (paragraph 152-15(b) of the ITAA 1997).
Date of decision: 18 June 2004 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2002 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subsection 118-170(1) section 152-15 paragraph 152-15(b) paragraph 152-25(1)(a) Other References: The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW Keywords Capital gains tax Small Business CGT affiliate CGT assets CGT events Small business CGT small business relief Basic conditions for relief Business Line: Losses and Capital Gains Tax Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 2 July 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 18 June 2004
Original statement You are here
15 January 2010
Archived