ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/436
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants Credits Scheme: off-road - forestry - making and maintaining of roads in an existing plantation
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn because it is superseded by Product Grants and Benefits Ruling PGBR 2005/1.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the making and maintaining of roads which are integral to forestry operations being carried on as primary production in an existing forest or plantation, 'forestry' as defined in section 35 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. The making and maintaining of roads which are integral to forestry operations being carried on as primary production in an existing forest or plantation, is 'forestry' as defined in section 35 of the EGCSA,
Facts
An entity has been contracted to a State Forest organisation to make and maintain roads in a plantation managed by the forestry organisation in accordance with the State Forestry Code for the purposes of timber production.
The road being constructed is primarily and principally for the purpose of providing access to an area to enable trees to be planted or tended in the area, or timber felled in the area to be removed.
Within the plantation trees are planted, tended and standing timber is thinned and felled.
These roads link up with main shire roads to provide for removal of harvested timber, worker access and supply access.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 53(1) of the EGCSA provides that an entity is, subject to certain conditions, entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase diesel fuel for a use by them that qualifies. Subsection 53(2) of the EGCSA states that use in 'primary production' (otherwise than for the purpose of propelling a road vehicle on a public road) is a use that qualifies. The term 'primary production' includes 'forestry'. 'Forestry' is relevantly defined in section 35 of the EGCSA as:

The expression forestry means:

(a)the planting or tending, in a forest or plantation of trees intended for felling; or
(b)the thinning or felling, in a forest or plantation, of standing timber;

and includes:

(c)the transporting, milling or processing, in a forest or plantation, of timber felled in the forest or plantation; or ...
(f)the making and maintaining in a forest or plantation referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) of a road that is integral to the activities referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or (c).

Therefore, the making and maintaining of roads will be 'forestry' as defined in section 35 of the EGCSA if:

(a)The road being constructed is in a forest or plantation:
(i)in which trees intended for felling are planted or tended; or
(ii)in which standing timber is thinned or felled;

and

(b)The road is integral to the activities of:
(i)planting or tending of trees intended for felling; or
(ii)the thinning or felling of standing timber in that forest or plantation; or

to the transporting, milling or processing, in the forest or plantation,
of timber felled in that forest or plantation.
For the purposes of section 35 of the EGCSA, these activities must be carried on in the course of forestry as a primary production activity.
Each test will be considered in turn.
In this instance, the roads are being constructed in a plantation in which trees intended for felling are planted and tended, and in which standing timber is felled. Thus, the first test is met.
The activities will constitute forestry if the road is 'integral' to the activities of:

(i)planting or tending of trees intended for felling; or
(ii)the thinning or felling of standing timber in that forest or plantation; or
(iii)the transporting, milling or processing, in the forest or plantation, of timber felled in that forest or plantation.

'Integral' is not defined in the legislation and therefore takes on its common meaning. It is defined in The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd NSW as:

1.of or relating to a whole; belonging as a part of the whole; constituent or component: the integral parts of the human body
2.necessary to the completeness of the whole
3.made up of parts which together constitute a whole

Therefore, a road will be integral to the activities of:

(i)planting or tending of trees intended for felling; or
(ii)the thinning or felling of standing timber in that forest or plantation; or
(iii)the transporting, milling or processing, in the forest or plantation, of timber felled in that forest or plantation,

where it is necessary to and forms a fundamental part of those activities.
In this instance, the road made and maintained by the entity has been constructed primarily and principally for the purpose of providing access to an area to enable trees to be planted or tended in the area, or timber felled in the area to be removed. Consequently, the roads are integral to the activities of planting, maintaining and harvesting of trees in the existing plantations and to the removal of the harvested timber.
Therefore, the making and maintaining of roads which are integral to forestry operations being carried on as primary production in existing plantations, is 'forestry' as defined in section 35 of the EGCSA.
Date of decision:
  11 May 2004

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   subsection 53(1)   subsection 53(2)   section 35   paragraph 35(f)

Other References:

The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd NSW

Keywords

EGCS forest
 EGCS forestry
 EGCS forestry road making and maintenance
 EGCS off-road
 EGCS plantation
 Energy grants (credits) scheme

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  28 May 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
11 May 2004
Original statement

You are here
 1 April 2010
Archived