ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/38
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and edible chocolate body paint
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a retailer, making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it supplies edible chocolate body paint?
Decision
No, the entity is not making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the GST Act when it supplies edible chocolate body paint. The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a retailer. The entity supplies edible chocolate body paint. The product is packaged with a brush or applicator, or in a plastic bottle designed to be squeezed to apply the contents. The ingredients, which include sugar, glucose syrup, milk solids, vegetable oil, cocoa powder, flavours, vegetable gum and water, are common to a variety of chocolate toppings and sauces. The product is marketed as edible body paint and is supplied as a novelty to be applied to the human body.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
A supply of food is GST-free under section 38-2 of the GST Act if the product satisfies the definition of food in section 38-4 of the GST Act and the supply is not excluded from being GST-free by section 38-3 of the GST Act.
Food is defined in section 38-4 of the GST Act to include food for human consumption, ingredients for food for human consumption, beverages for food for human consumption, ingredients for beverages for food for human consumption, and goods to be mixed with or added to food for human consumption.
Some food products have alternative non-food uses. A product that is indicated to be for a use other than food cannot be a supply of food for the purposes of the GST Act, even if it is identical in substance to a GST-free food product. In determining whether a supply is a supply of a GST-free food, it is not only the physical characteristics of the product that are important but also the nature of the supply.
Some of the ways in which a dual-purpose food product could be considered to be differentiated for non-food use are:

•designation as something other than food
•pre-delivery storage in conditions or containers that are unsuitable for food
•packaging in a non-food type of package or container
•labelling, invoicing or marketing as a non-food product
•delivery in a manner unsuitable for food.

The entity supplies the body paint with a paint brush and other instructions which indicate the product is not being supplied as food. The product is described as edible body paint and is supplied as a novelty to be applied to the human body. Therefore, the body paint has been designated as a novelty and not food. Further, the body paint has been labelled and marketed as body paint which is a non-food product. As such, the entity is supplying a product, the contents of which are normally regarded as food, as something other than food. Therefore, the supply of edible chocolate body paint is not a supply of 'food' as defined.
The nature of this supply is more accurately characterised as a supply of body paint or a novelty product. The fact that this product is edible and consists of ingredients common to various chocolate sauces does not change the nature of the supply.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under any other provision of Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it supplies edible chocolate body paint.
Date of decision:
  27 September 2002

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 9-5   Division 38   section 38-2   section 38-3   section 38-4   Division 40

Keywords

Goods and service tax
 GST food
 Food for human consumption
 GST supply
 Taxable supply

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3896734

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  16 January 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782