ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/918
==================================================

Income Tax
 Foreign Tax Credit: Employee share options - UK tax paid on part of a gain accrued after the taxpayer became a resident of Australia
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn because it contains references to the tax treaty between Australia and the United Kingdom that was replaced with a new tax treaty effective from 17 December 2003. This ATO ID contains a view that does not reflect the position under the current tax treaty. Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions relating to the former treaty.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is a taxpayer entitled to a foreign tax credit under subsection 160AF(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) for United Kingdom (UK) tax paid on a gain arising from the exercise of employee share options where the UK tax was calculated in part on a gain that accrued after the taxpayer became a resident of Australia?
Decision
Yes. The taxpayer is entitled to a foreign tax credit under subsection 160AF(1) of the ITAA 1936 to the extent that Australia and the UK have taxed the same amount.
Facts
While a resident of the UK, the taxpayer was granted employee share options in an Australian public company on the condition that they continue their employment in the company for a period of years before exercising them. The taxpayer satisfied these conditions while working in the UK.
The taxpayer subsequently relocated to Australia, continuing their employment with the Australian public company, and became an Australian resident. The taxpayer then exercised the options and sold the acquired shares on the same day.
The UK taxed a portion of the overall gain realised on the options at exercise that was attributable to the period the taxpayer was employed in the UK.
In Australia, the gain that accrued on the exercise of the options was taken into account in determining the taxable gain arising from the disposal of the acquired shares. Only the gain that accrued after the employee became a resident of Australia was taxable.
The employee share options increased in value to a greater extent after the taxpayer became a resident of Australia. This has led to both the UK and Australia taxing part of the same gain.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 160AF(1) of the ITAA 1936 provides that a resident taxpayer, whose assessable income includes foreign income on which the taxpayer has personally paid foreign tax, is entitled to a credit against the Australian tax payable of the amount of that foreign tax, up to the amount of Australian tax payable on the foreign income.
The issue in this case is whether the part of the gain that was also taxed in the UK has a foreign source and thus whether a credit can be claimed against the Australian tax payable for the UK tax paid on the gain.
In determining whether a credit will be allowed for the UK tax paid, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1936 and the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1936 and ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited situations).
Schedule 1 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and the UK (the UK Agreement). The UK Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and UK residents.
Article 19(2)(a) of the UK Agreement specifies that relief must be provided by Australia where the UK has imposed tax, 'in accordance with this Agreement'. The Article also specifies that Australia's foreign tax credit provisions are to be used to determine this relief.
UK tax was imposed in accordance with Article 12 of the UK Agreement (refer to ATO Interpretative Decision ATO ID 2003/562). The part of the gain also taxed by the UK is thus deemed to have a UK source under Article 12(1) of the UK Agreement.
The taxpayer is entitled to a foreign tax credit calculated in accordance with subsection 160AF(1) of the ITAA 1936. This credit is available under the UK Agreement even though the UK and Australia have taxed gains from the disposal of different assets. A credit will thus be available for the UK tax paid on the gain from the exercise of the options to the extent that the gain was also taxed in Australia on the sale of the acquired shares.
Date of decision:
  28 August 2003

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   subsection 160AF(1)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   Table of Content
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 1   Schedule 1, Article 12   Schedule 1, Article 12(1)   Schedule 1, Article 19(2)(a)

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2003/562

Keywords

Double tax agreements
 Double tax relief
 Employee share schemes & options
 Foreign Tax Credits
 Foreign Income

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  17 October 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
28 August 2003
Original statement

You are here
 9 January 2009
Archived