ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/49
==================================================

Excise
 Excise: assessment of duty liability on imported tobacco products for excise manufacture
 FOI status: may be released

While the view expressed within the ATO ID is technically correct there are no licenced tobacco producers in Australia.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Does section 62 of the Excise Act 1901 enable the Commissioner to take into account the quantity of tobacco leaf received at a manufacturer's factory (and the amount of tobacco leaf on hand) in determining the quantity of excisable goods that should have been manufactured?
Decision
Yes. Section 62 of the Excise Act enables the Commissioner to take into account the quantity of tobacco leaf received at a manufacturer's factory (and the amount of tobacco leaf on hand) in determining the quantity of excisable goods that should have been manufactured.
Facts
An entity imports threshed and unthreshed tobacco leaf.
The threshed tobacco is entered for warehousing and moved to a Customs warehouse.
The unthreshed tobacco leaf is delivered to an excise factory.
The unthreshed tobacco leaf is cleared from Customs control on an entry for home consumption and is classified to subheading 2401.10.00 of Schedule 3 of the Customs Tariff Act 1995 (CTA).
The threshed tobacco leaf is moved, under Customs control, from the warehouse to another premise that is both a Customs warehouse and an excise factory.
The threshed tobacco leaf is then entered for home consumption and thereby delivered from Customs control. It is classified to subheading 2401.20.00 of Schedule 3 of the CTA and quotes Customs By-law No. 0140005.
Once the threshed and unthreshed tobacco leaf arrives at the factory it is taken up into the inventory of the factory and ultimately used to manufacture cigarettes. There may be a short time between the take up into inventory and manufacture but this factory is not generally used for long term storage.
Reasons for Decision
The Excise Act imposes controls over the manufacture of excisable goods.
Section 4 of the Excise Act defines a 'factory' as 'the premises on which any person is licensed to manufacture excisable goods ...'
Subsection 86(1) of the Excise Act provides, among other things, that Tax Officers have access to any excise factory and may take account of all material and excisable goods in the factory. Material includes all the inputs to excise manufacturing. Thus it allows the Tax Office to determine whether the manufacturer has accounted for all of the excisable goods that ought to have been produced from the inputs.
Section 62 of the Excise Act imposes an obligation on a manufacturer to pay the amount of any deficiency in duty if the manufacturer cannot account for the deficiency to the satisfaction of the Tax Office. The obligation is imposed when a Tax Officer takes stock of the materials available for the manufacture of excisable goods and reconciles them against the actual excisable goods that have been produced and it appears to the Tax Officer there is a deficiency between the duty that has been paid and the duty that ought to have been paid.
The imported threshed and unthreshed tobacco leaf is an input to the manufacture of excisable tobacco products. Where a stocktake of the imported tobacco leaf and the manufactured tobacco product reveals a deficiency in the duty that has been paid, section 62 of the Excise Act requires the manufacturer to pay the amount of that deficiency. From the time the imported tobacco leaf arrives at the factory it can be taken into account in any stocktake. Any shortage in the imported tobacco leaf may represent a shortfall in the duty that ought to have been paid.
For example where:

•the manufacturer has received 100 units of imported tobacco leaf at the manufacturer's factory and 100 units would normally produce 1,000 units of excisable tobacco product, and
•a stocktake reveals duty has been paid on 800 units of excisable tobacco products; and
•there is no excisable tobacco product remaining under the CEO's control,
•there is a shortage of 200 units which equates to a deficiency in the duty calculated by multiplying 200 units by the excise rate for that product.

The Commissioner is thus able to take into account the quantity of tobacco leaf received at a manufacturer's factory (and the amount of tobacco leaf on hand) in determining the quantity of excisable goods that should have been manufactured.
Date of decision:
  4 February 2005

Legislative References:

Excise Act 1901   section 4   section 62   subsection 86(1)
Customs Tariff Act 1995   Schedule 3 subheading 2401.10.00   Schedule 3 subheading 2401.20.00
Customs By-law No. 0140005   

Keywords

Excise collections
 Imported unmanufactured tobacco
 Tobacco

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3875961

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  18 February 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 4 February 2005
Original statement

You are here
17 January 2019
Archived