ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/836
==================================================

Fringe Benefits Tax
 Expense payment fringe benefit: reimbursement of legal expenses
 FOI status: may be released

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Does the reimbursement of an individual's legal expenses, incurred in appearing before an enquiry into the activities of the individual's former employer, constitute the provision of an 'expense payment fringe benefit' as defined at subsection 136(1) of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 (FBTAA)?
Decision
Yes. The reimbursement of the individual's legal expenses constitutes the provision of an expense payment fringe benefit.
Facts
An individual was employed by an authority of the State (the authority). The authority was established under a State Act and is an associate of the State pursuant to subsection 159(2) of the FBTAA.
After the individual ceased employment with the authority, a report raised concerns about the activities and management of the authority during the period when the individual was employed by that authority.
Subsequently, an enquiry was formed to enquire into whether there had been any illegal or improper conduct in a number of matters relating to the authority. These matters included activities involving the individual during the period they were employed by the authority.
The individual was subpoenaed to appear before the enquiry as a key witness and a person with an interest in the proceedings. The individual incurred legal costs in relation to this appearance.
The State reimbursed the individual's legal expenses in appearing before the enquiry. This reimbursement was paid subject to the individual having discharged their duties in good faith and not being guilty of misconduct, or not having acted negligently, or not being convicted of an offence in relation to such conduct. The enquiry did not find any wrongdoing by the individual.
The State also reimbursed the legal expenses of other persons who were not employees of the authority.
The reimbursement did not constitute a benefit included within paragraphs (f) to (s) of the definition of 'fringe benefit' in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA.
Reasons for Decision
An 'expense payment fringe benefit' is defined in subsection 136(1) to mean a fringe benefit that is an expense payment benefit.
An 'expense payment benefit' is defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA to mean a benefit referred to in section 20.
Section 20 of the FBTAA provides that where a person reimburses another person (the recipient), in whole or in part, in respect of an amount of expenditure incurred by the recipient; the reimbursement shall be taken to constitute the provision of a benefit by the provider to the recipient. Thus the reimbursement of a person's expenses constitutes the provision of an expense payment benefit to the person.
'Fringe benefit' is defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA and relevantly includes a benefit provided to an employee by their employer (or an associate of the employer) in respect of the employment of the employee, but does not include a benefit included within paragraphs (f) to (s) of the definition.
Consequently, the reimbursement of a person's expenses will constitute the provision of an expense payment fringe benefit where the person is an employee of the employer and the reimbursement is provided to the person by the employer (or an associate of the employer) in respect of the employment of the employee. Subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA defines 'employee' to include a former employee and 'employer' to include a former employer.
Therefore, the reimbursement of a former employee's expenses by an associate of a former employer constitutes the provision of a benefit to an employee by an associate of the employer.
The expression 'in respect of the employment of the employee' was considered by the Full Federal Court in J & G Knowles v FCT [2000] FCA 196; 2000 ATC 4151; (2000) 44 ATR 22. The Full Federal Court said that what must be established is a 'sufficient or material relationship' rather than a 'causal link' between the benefit and the employment. The relevant question to ask is whether the benefit is a product or incident of the person's former employment.
In this case, the enquiry was formed to enquire into whether there had been any illegal or improper conduct in a number of matters relating to the agency, including the activities and involvement of the individual as an employee of the authority.
The State reimbursed the individual's legal expenses in appearing before the enquiry because, as a former employee of the authority, they had an interest in the proceedings, and they considered the individual to have discharged their employment duties in good faith.
These factors indicate that the reimbursement of the legal expenses was a product of the individual's former employment. The reimbursement had the requisite 'sufficient or material relationship' to the individual's former employment such that the reimbursement could be said to have been provided in respect of the employment of that individual.
Thus, the reimbursement of the individual's legal expenses is considered to constitute the provision of an expense payment fringe benefit as defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA.

Amendment History

Date of Amendment
Part
Comment

13 March 2026
Business Line
Updated Business Line and review date

18 December 2015
Facts and Reasons for Decision
Minor change to reference from '(r)' to '(s)' as paragraph (s) was added to the definition of 'fringe benefit' in subsection 136(1) by section 32 of Schedule 1 to the Tax Laws Amendment (2007 Measures No. 3) Act 2007.

Date of decision:
  12 August 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2000 Year ended 30 June 2001 Year ended 30 June 2002

Legislative References:

Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986   section 20   subsection 136(1)   subsection 159(2)

Case References:

J & G Knowles v FCT   [2000] FCA 196   2000 ATC 4151   (2000) 44 ATR 22

Keywords

Benefit
 Expense payment fringe benefits
 Fringe benefits tax
 Legal expenses

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3416838; 1-62U83UR; 1-DJ79NBD

Business Line:
  Superannuation and Employer Obligations

Date of publication:
  19 September 2003

Date reviewed:
  27 February 2026

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
12 August 2003
Original statement

You are here
18 December 2015
Updated statement