ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2001/686
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and services supplied by a government funded residential care provider to disabled persons FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as it is a straight application of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a supplier of residential care, making a GST-free supply under section 38-25 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it supplies government funded residential care services and accommodation to people with intellectual and physical disabilities?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply under section 38-25 of the GST Act when it supplies government funded residential care services and accommodation to people with intellectual and physical disabilities.
Facts
The entity is a supplier of residential care. The entity is supplying care services and accommodation to people with intellectual and physical disabilities. The care recipients are charged a small fee for the care services and accommodation provided to them.
The care services supplied are daily living activities assistance, meals and refreshments, resident social activities, general laundry and cleaning services.
The entity receives funding from the federal government to supply the care services and accommodation to people with intellectual and physical disabilities. The accommodation is supplied in the course of making the supply of care services to the disabled persons. The entity is not subcontracted by the government to perform these services on behalf of the government. Rather, the entity provides the services directly to its physically and intellectually disabled clients.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Section 38-25 of the GST Act deals with supplies of residential care.
Under subsection 38-25(2) of the GST Act, a supply of services is GST-free if: •the services are provided to one or more aged or disabled people; and
•the Aged Care Minister has determined in writing that the services are of a kind covered by Schedule 1 to the Quality of Care Principles; and
•the supplier receives funding from the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory in connection with the supply. The entity is supplying care services to people with intellectual and physical disabilities. That is, the services are provided to one or more disabled people. Therefore, the first requirement of subsection 38-25(2) is satisfied.
In relation to the second requirement, the Aged Care Minister has made a written determination: GST-free Supply (Residential Care - Government-Funded Supplier) Determination 2000 (the Determination). Clause 4 of the Determination provides that all services specified in Schedule 1 to the Determination are of a kind covered by Schedule 1 to the Quality of Care Principles.
The care services that the entity is supplying are daily living activities assistance, meals and refreshments, resident social activities, general laundry and cleaning services. Daily living activities assistance is covered by item 2.1 in the table in Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the Determination. Meals and refreshments are covered by item 1.10 in the table in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Determination (Part 1). Resident social activities, general laundry and cleaning services are covered by items 1.11, 1.8 and 1.6 in Part 1 respectively.
Accordingly the second requirement of subsection 38-25(2) of the GST Act is satisfied.
As the entity receives funding from the government to supply the care services and accommodation to disabled persons, the third requirement of subsection 38-25(2) of the GST Act is also satisfied.
Furthermore, subsection 38-25(4) of the GST Act provides that a supply of accommodation is GST-free if it is made to a person in the course of making a supply of services to that person that is GST-free under subsection 38-25(2) of the GST Act.
The entity is making GST-free supplies to disabled persons under subsection 38-25(2) of the GST Act. In the course of making these supplies, the entity supplies accommodation to these same people. Therefore, the supply of the accommodation is GST-free under subsection 38-25(4) of the GST Act.
In summary, the entity is making GST-free supplies of residential care services and accommodation under subsection 38-25(2) of the GST Act and subsection 38-25(4) of the GST Act, respectively, to the care recipients for which it charges a small fee to the care recipients.
Date of decision: 26 September 2001 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 38-25 subsection 38-25(2) subsection 38-25(4) Other References: GST-free Supply (Residential Care - Government Funded Supplier) Determination 2000 clause 4 Schedule 1 Schedule 1 Part 1 table item 1.6 Schedule 1 Part 1 table item 1.8 Schedule 1 Part 1 table item 1.10 Schedule 1 Part 1 table item 1.11 Schedule 1 Part 2 table item 2.1 Keywords Goods & services tax GST free GST health Section 38-25 - residential care Business Line: GST Date of publication: 30 November 2001 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 26 September 2001
Original statement You are here 4 May 2007
Archived