ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2008/148
==================================================

Excise
 Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road credit - diesel fuel purchased for use (and used) in the construction of a car park and civil works on hospital grounds
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed. Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is diesel fuel purchased for use (and used) in the construction of a car park and civil works on hospital grounds, a qualifying use under paragraph 53(4)(c) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
No. Diesel fuel purchased for use (and used) in the construction of a car park and civil works on hospital grounds is not a use that qualifies under paragraph 53(4)(c) of the EGCSA.
Facts
A hospital entered into a commercial contract with a building construction company (the builder) for the following construction work:

(a)a car park
(b)the addition of a new wing to an existing hospital building; and
(c)a separate (new) building.

All the construction works will be on hospital grounds.
Diesel fuel is purchased by the builder for use (and used) in undertaking the construction work.
Reasons for Decision
Section 53 of the EGCSA provides that, subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Regulations 2003, an entity is entitled to an off-road credit if they purchase or import into Australia off-road diesel fuel for a qualifying use.
Subsection 53(4) of the EGCSA lists a number of uses that qualify. One use, set out in paragraph 53(4)(c) of the EGCSA is:

use at a hospital or nursing home or at any other institution providing medical or nursing care.

In this instance, the diesel fuel is purchased for use (and used) in the construction of a car park and other civil works on hospital grounds.
The Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme, which replaced the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme (DFRS), maintained the entitlements that were available under the DFRS.
The DFRS was introduced under the Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Bill 1982. The Second Reading Speech for the Bill explained that:

The users of diesel fuel in the categories defined in clause 5 of the Bill who use the fuel for 'off road' purposes are eligible for a rebate of the duty paid
 on the diesel fuel used in their operations
 ... The categories I have just referred to relate to the use of diesel fuel in the agriculture, mining, forestry and fishing industries, in domestic premises, hospitals, aged persons homes and nursing homes ... (emphasis added)

Having regard to the above, an entitlement to an energy grant under paragraph 53(4)(c) of the EGCSA will depend on whether the fuel is purchased for use at and for the purposes of a hospital, that is, in its operations.

Used 'at' a hospital

It must be determined whether the diesel fuel is purchased for use 'at' the hospital. The Federal Court in the case of the Collector of Customs, Tasmania v. Flinders Island Community Association (1985) 7 FCR 205 (Flinders Island case) provides guidance in determining whether fuel purchased is for use 'at' relevant premises. In that case an Association operated a generator, which supplied electricity to nearby houses located on a housing estate. The Federal Court found that in order to meet the requirement that the fuel is for use 'at' residential premises, there must be a close connection between the use (that is, where the generator is) and the residential premises and that the generation take place in physical proximity to the premises.
In Collector of Customs v. Rottnest Island Authority (1994) 48 FCR 177 (Rottnest Island case), the Federal Court accepted the view put forward in the Flinders Island case but further determined that the generating plant should be '... in sufficient proximity to the premises to enable it reasonably to be identified with the premises. It must be appurtenant to the premises and coherent with them.'
In Ergon Energy Corporation Limited v. Commissioner of Taxation (2006) 153 FCR 551; (2006) 64 ATR 130, the Federal Court after examining the propositions and findings in the Flinders Island and Rottnest Island cases accepted the view that the legislation provided for locational and purposive tests to be considered by reference to the circumstances of the individual case. The Court also concluded it was wrong to consider separately whether the fuel was used at the relevant premises from the question of the purpose contemplated by the legislative provision.
The Commissioner considers that the determination of what is a sufficiently close connection will depend on the individual facts and circumstances of each case.
As the construction activities are on the hospital grounds, and the car park and other works are in sufficient proximity and identifiable with the hospital, we consider the locational test of 'at' the hospital is met.

Used for the purposes of a hospital

In explaining when diesel is for use in the operations of institutions (such as hospitals) within paragraph 53(4)(c) of the EGCSA, the tribunal member in Rebmik Contactors P/L v. Commissioner of Taxation [2008] AATA 335 (Rebmik) said the following at paragraph 21:

Although the purposes to which those institutions may use the diesel is not limited, nevertheless, to be a qualifying use it must be for activities conducted by those institutions. In other words it must be for purposes of those existing institutions ...

The Commissioner considers that in having regard to the Second Reading Speech in relation to the Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Bill 1982 and the decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in Rebmik that paragraph 53(4)(c) of the EGCSA is limited to diesel fuel for use (and used) in the ongoing day to day purposes and operations of the institution. Where the institution is a hospital, then, for the purposes of paragraph 53(4)(c) of the EGCSA, there will only be an entitlement to an off-road credit (and an energy grant) for diesel fuel purchased for use (and used) in the ongoing day to day purposes and operations of the hospital, for example, in lighting and heating.
As the activities described in the facts are construction activities they are not activities that can be described as being purposes of the hospital. They are more appropriately regarded as preparatory to the establishment or enlargement of a hospital, which, when complete will be available for use in the ongoing day to day and general operations of the hospital.
Therefore, diesel fuel purchased for use (and used) in those construction activities is not purchased for use (and used) for purposes of the hospital.
In summary, though the use of diesel fuel is for the purposes of the construction activities at a hospital, that is, adjacent to or on the grounds of a hospital, it is not purchased for use in the operations of the hospital. On this basis the statutory requirement that diesel fuel be purchased for use at a hospital is not satisfied. Therefore, there is no entitlement under paragraph 53(4)(c) of the EGCSA for an off-road credit (and to an energy grant) for diesel fuel purchased for use (and used) in the construction activities.
Date of decision:
  7 November 2008

Legislative References:

Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003   section 53   subsection 53(4)   paragraph 53(4)(c)
Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Regulations 2003   The Regulations

Case References:

Collector of Customs, Tasmania v. Flinders Island Community Association   (1985) 7 FCR 205   (1985) 60 ALR 717

Collector of Customs v. Rottnest Island Authority   (1994) 48 FCR 177   (1994) 119 ALR 406

Ergon Energy Corporation Limited v. Commissioner of Taxation   (2006) 153 FCR 551   (2006) 64 ATR 130   (2006) 232 ALR 652

Rebmik Contractors Pty Ltd v. Commissioner of Taxation   [2008] AATA 335

Keywords

EGCS general
 EGCS off-road
 EGCS use
 EGCS use at a hospital
 EGCS use of eligible fuel at certain premises
 Energy grants (credits) scheme

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  14 November 2008

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 7 November 2008
Original statement

You are here
 3 July 2015
Archived