ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/201
==================================================

Income Tax
 Penalty tax and voluntary disclosure
 FOI status: may be released

This ATOID is a simple restatement of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. Taxation Ruling TR 94/6 provides guidance on the reduction of penalty tax where there has been voluntary disclosure.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Where the Commissioner has informed the taxpayer of a failure to return income, will the subsequent advice from the taxpayer of the amount of income omitted be treated as a voluntary disclosure for the purposes of making an assessment of additional tax payable under subsection 227(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936)?
Decision
No, where the Commissioner has informed a taxpayer of a failure to return income, the subsequent advice from the taxpayer quantifying the income omitted will not be treated as a voluntary disclosure.
Facts
The taxpayer had an interest in a property that returned rental income until the lease terminated in the income year ended 30 June 2000. A capital gain was made on the sale of the taxpayer's interest in the property in the income year ended 30 June 2000.
The taxpayer objected to the amount of net capital gain included in the taxpayer's assessable income for the income year ended 30 June 2000. In considering the objection, the Commissioner determined that no rental income was returned. The taxpayer was requested to provide the details of the net rental income received from the property, which was subsequently disclosed to the Commissioner.
The taxpayer sought to have the disclosure of income received in these circumstances treated as a voluntary disclosure. The reason provided for the omission of income was that the taxpayer's former tax agent failed to return that income even though that agent had all the necessary information available.
Reasons for Decision
Broadly, a tax shortfall is the difference between the tax properly payable by a taxpayer and the lowest amount of tax that would have been payable by the taxpayer if it were assessed on the basis of the taxpayer's income tax return. Additional tax is calculated under the shortfall provisions contained in Part VII of the ITAA 1936.
The omission of the rental income in the taxpayer's income tax return for the income year ended 30 June 2000 was discovered whilst the Commissioner was considering the taxpayer's objection on a separate issue. The taxpayer accepts that the general interest charge is payable on the omitted income, but considers the advice quantifying the rental income omitted is a voluntary disclosure and should not be subject to a penalty for the resulting shortfall.
In the circumstances where a tax agent was aware that a taxpayer was in receipt of rental income, the omission of that income is considered a failure to exercise reasonable care (paragraphs 14(a), 14(d), 14(e) and 14(k) of Taxation Ruling TR 94/4). Where a tax shortfall or part of it was caused by the failure of the taxpayer or a registered tax agent to take reasonable care to comply with the ITAA 1936 or the regulations, the taxpayer is liable to pay, by way of penalty, additional tax equal to 25% of the amount of the shortfall or part (section 226G of the ITAA 1936).
Voluntary Disclosure
Taxation Ruling TR 94/6 outlines the Commissioner's policy on voluntary disclosures for the purpose of administering penalties in respect of tax shortfalls.
The term 'voluntary' is not defined in the legislation. Its normal meaning implies an act done without prompting, persuasion or compulsion. A disclosure will be treated as having been made voluntarily if it is made without having been prompted by action from the Commissioner.
In this case, the tax shortfall was discovered by the Commissioner in the course of deciding the taxpayer's objection. There was no intention on the part of the Commissioner to conduct an audit to quantify the rental income omitted. The amount of the omitted income was to be determined directly from the taxpayer. Therefore, section 226Z of the ITAA 1936 cannot be applied to reduce the penalty tax.
When advised that no rental income had been returned, the taxpayer expeditiously confirmed that an omission occurred, and in time provided advice quantifying the rental income omitted. As the advice was received after the Commissioner notified the taxpayer of the omission, the receipt of that advice is not considered to be a voluntary disclosure.
However, due to the level of cooperation and assistance by the taxpayer in quantifying the rental income omitted, a 20% reduction in the penalty otherwise attracted is considered appropriate. A significant amount of time and resources that would otherwise be required to determine the amount of the omitted income was saved as a result of the taxpayer's cooperation and assistance. Therefore, the penalty is to be reduced from 25% to 20%.
Date of decision:
  20 March 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2000

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   Section 226G.   Section 226Z.

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling TR 94/4
Taxation Ruling TR 94/6

Keywords

Income tax penalties
 Income tax shortfall
 Rental property income

Business Line:
  Finance and Investment Centre of Expertise

Date of publication:
  4 April 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
20 March 2003
Original statement

You are here
27 October 2006
Archived