ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/311
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessable income: transfer of right to receive trust income
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID has been withdrawn as it is a simple restatement of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
If the right of the taxpayer, a beneficiary of a trust which is being wound up, to receive a share of the net income of the trust is transferred to a third party who is an associate of the taxpayer, is that share of the net income still included in the assessable income of the taxpayer by virtue of subsection 102B(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936)?
Decision
Yes. If the right of the taxpayer, a beneficiary of a trust which is being wound up, to receive a share of the net income of the trust is transferred to a third party who is an associate of the taxpayer, that share of the net income is still included in the assessable income of the taxpayer by virtue of subsection 102B(1) of the ITAA 1936 because the period of transfer will terminate before the 'prescribed date'.
Facts
The taxpayer, a beneficiary of a trust, is presently entitled to a share of the net income of an inter vivos trust.
The taxpayer entered into an agreement with the trustee and a third party, who is an associate of the taxpayer, to transfer the taxpayer's right to their share of the income of the trust to the third party.
The right to the share of the net income was to be transferred for the period from the date of the agreement, to the date all of the assets of the trust had been distributed to the taxpayer.
The trustee had begun to wind up the trust prior to the date of the agreement, and expected all assets of the trust to be sold or distributed within 12 months of the date of the agreement.
The transfer of the right to receive a share of the net income of the trust to the third party is a valid assignment for general law purposes.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 102B(1) of the ITAA 1936 applies where a right to receive income from property is transferred, other than by will or codicil, by a person to an associate of the person for a period that will or may terminate (other than by death of any person or the associate becoming under a legal disability) before the 'prescribed date'.
The 'prescribed date' is defined in subsection 102A(1) of the ITAA 1936 to be the day before the expiration of 7 years from the time the income was first paid to the transferee. In such cases, the income derived by the property is treated as if the transfer had not been made and remains the income of the transferor.
The transfer of the right to receive a share of the net income of the trust to the third party is a valid assignment for general law purposes. However, a valid assignment under general law may not be effective for tax purposes.
As stated above, for a transfer of income to be effective for tax purposes it must not contravene subsection 102B(1) of the ITAA 1936. In order for the transfer, the subject of the agreement between the parties, to be effective for tax purposes, the right to receive the income would have had to be transferred to an associate for at least seven years from the time the income was first paid to the transferee.
The taxpayer's right to a share of the net income of the trust, and therefore the period of the transfer of that income, only existed to the date the trust was wound up. At the date of the agreement, the trustee had already begun to wind up the estate and expected that the process of winding up would take no longer than 12 months. In these circumstances the right to the share of the net trust income would be expected to be extinguished within approximately 12 months and therefore, the period of the transfer of the right to a share of the net trust income would terminate before the passing of seven years.
Accordingly, under these circumstances, subsection 102B(1) of the ITAA 1936 provides that the net income of the trust should be treated as if the transfer had not been made. Therefore, the share of the net income of the trust will remain the assessable income of the taxpayer.

Note: The trust distribution would be assessable income of the taxpayer under subsection 97(1) of the ITAA 1936 as the taxpayer was not under a legal disability and had a present entitlement to the net income distributed by the trust.

Date of decision:
  17 March 2004

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2002

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   subsection 97(1)   subsection 102A(1)   subsection 102B(1)

Keywords

Associate
 Consideration for assignment
 Deceased estates
 Dividend income
 Entities & taxpayer groups
 Equitable interests
 Express trusts
 Franked dividends
 Income alienation
 Inter vivos trusts
 Life interests
 Net income of a trust
 Rights to dividends
 Trust assets
 Trust beneficiaries
 Trust deeds
 Trust distributions
 Trust documentation
 Trust income
 Trustees
 Trusts

Business Line:
  Business and Personal Taxes Centre of Expertise

Date of publication:
  2 April 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
17 March 2004
Original statement

You are here
 8 October 2010
Archived