ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/15
================================================== Excise Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off road - forestry - preservation of generic milled timber FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn because it is unclear from the facts what activities are involved in the preservation treatment. It is therefore unclear how the preservation activities are 'necessarily incidental to the process of milling timber.' For guidance on what is 'milling' see paragraphs 60 to 79 of Fuel Tax Ruling FTR 2006/3. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is subjecting generic milled timber to a preservation treatment, prior to despatch, part of the process of milling timber at a saw mill and therefore 'forestry' as defined in section 35 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. Subjecting generic milled timber to a preservation treatment, prior to despatch, is part of the process of milling timber at a saw mill and therefore is 'forestry' as defined in section 35 of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity operates a saw mill situated outside of a forest from which it is supplied with felled timber.
On arrival at the saw mill, the entity unloads and stockpiles the logs. From the stockpile, the logs are taken to be de-barked using rotary action de-barking machines.
Once de-barked, the logs are air dried before being placed in kilns to complete the drying process. Once dried, the entity saws the logs into standard lengths and sizes (generic timber).
The generic timber is then subjected to a preservation treatment. Once the preservation treatment is complete, the generic timber is deposited in the loading bay ready to be loaded and delivered to the customer.
Reasons for Decision
The term 'forestry' is relevantly defined in section 35 of the EGCSA as including the milling of timber at a sawmill or chipmill that is not situated in the forest or plantation in which the timber was felled; or ... In Re Brymay Forests Pty Ltd v. Collector of Customs Victoria (1985) 9 ALN N177 (Brymay) it was determined, in part, that the use of a diesel powered front-end grab tractor to take logs from the log stack to the production line where they are milled was also milling of timber. The Tribunal reached this conclusion as: ... the front end grab tractor or tractors are used exclusively in relation to the saw milling operations ... Their use is necessarily incidental to the operations. In Brymay, the Tribunal also determined that, while the debarking and sawing of logs into billets constituted the milling of timber, the chopping of veneer sheets did not, as that process was a secondary treatment and not a process of primary production.
It is clear from Brymay that 'milling of timber' is not limited to the actual subjection of the timber to the mill, but includes activities necessarily incidental to the process of milling timber. However, it does not extend so far as to include activities more properly regarded as secondary processing.
The Explanatory Memorandum to the EGCSA states that the energy grants credits scheme is to provide equivalent entitlements to those of the diesel fuel rebate scheme administered under the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901, accordingly the decision in Brymay is still considered relevant and can be applied to the current situation.
In this instance, the operations which are undertaken at the mill do not include secondary processing. The timber leaves the mill in generic forms suitable for a variety of uses. All the operations undertaken at the mill are considered to be undertaken in primary production for the purposes of the off-road grant. Thus the unloading, stockpiling, de-barking, drying and preserving of the timber are all necessary activities incidental to the process of milling the logs. These activities are therefore part of the milling process.
Accordingly, subjecting generic milled timber to a preservation treatment prior to despatch constitutes the 'milling of timber' and falls within the definition of forestry in paragraph 35(d) of the EGCSA.
Date of decision: 3 December 2005 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 section 35 subsection 35(d) Case References: Re Wesfi Pty Ltd and Collector of Customs (WA) No. W84/46 (1984) 7 ALN N8 Re T J Depiazzi & Sons and Collector of Customs Case [1993] AATA 8770 (1993)17 AAR 557 Re Brymay Forests Pty Ltd and Collector of Customs (Vic) Case [1985] AATA 2496 (1985) 9 ALN N177 Keywords EGCS forestry EGCS milling EGCS processing Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 20 January 2006 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 3 December 2005
Original statement You are here
11 March 2010
Archived