ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/651
================================================== Excise Excise - Payments - Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme - What is an emergency vehicle? FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 which was repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
What vehicles are eligible 'emergency vehicles' for the purposes of Part 2 of the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 (the Act)?
Decision
In order to be an eligible emergency vehicle under Part 2 of the Act, the relevant vehicle must have the following attributes: •it must have a gross vehicle mass of 4.5 tonnes or more as required by section 10AD of the Act; and
•it must meet one of the descriptions in Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Regulations 2000 Regulation 3B (Regulation 3B) paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e); and
•it must be registered under section 7 of the Act for entitlement to fuel grants. Facts
The applicant applied under section 7 for registration of a vehicle for entitlement to fuel grants. The registration is a prerequisite to making a claim for a fuel grant.
The vehicle, which the applicant sought to register, has a gross vehicle mass of less than 4.5 tonnes, modified to be used as a fire tender.
The application for registration was refused because the vehicle does not meet the requirement of paragraph 7(2)(c) that its gross vehicle mass is 4.5 tonnes or more.
The applicant contended that recent legislative amendments have extended the Scheme to cover 'all usage of emergency vehicles'.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 10AD(1) of the Act relevantly creates an entitlement to a fuel grant for the use of diesel fuel or alternative fuel in an emergency vehicle that has a gross vehicle mass of 4.5 tonnes or more.
Section 5 of the Act defines the term 'emergency vehicle' to mean a vehicle that is specified in the regulations to be an emergency vehicle, or that is in a class of vehicles that are specified in the regulations to be emergency vehicles.
Regulation 3B states for the purposes of section 5, the following: '...emergency vehicles a)a vehicle operated by an ambulance service that is fitted with a siren and flashing warning lights;
b)a vehicle operated by a firefighting service that: (i)is designed, permanently fitted out and equipped for the purposes of preventing and fighting fires; and
(ii)has external markings that identify the vehicle as a firefighting vehicle; c)a vehicle operated by a police force or service that is fitted with a siren and flashing warning light;
d)a vehicle that: (i)is designed and permanently fitted out for the purposes of emergency response or search and rescue operations; and
(ii)has external markings that identify it as such a vehicle; e)a vehicle, other than a vehicle mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) (c) or (d), operated by the Commonwealth or a State or Territory, or a Commonwealth, State or Territory authority: (i)for a purpose similar to the purposes indicated in those paragraphs; and
(ii)identified as such a vehicle by a siren, flashing warning light, appropriate markings, or similar means. In summary, an eligible emergency vehicle must have the following attributes: (i)it must have a gross vehicle mass of 4.5 tonnes or more, and
(ii)it must meet one of the descriptions in paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of Regulation 3B; and
(iii)it must be registered under section 7 for entitlement to fuel grants. As the applicant's vehicle does not meet these criteria, it is not an eligible emergency vehicle for the purposes of the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme.
Date of decision: 31 May 2002 Legislative References: Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 Part 2 section 5 section 7 section 10AD
Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Regulations 2000 Regulation 3B Keywords Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme DAFGS claims Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 19 June 2002 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 31 May 2002
Original statement You are here
16 April 2010
Archived