ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/42
================================================== Excise Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off road - forestry - preservation of timber FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
In a mill which produces timber decking and pickets, is subjecting the generic milled timber to a preservation treatment, a part of the process of milling timber at a saw mill and therefore 'forestry' as defined in paragraph 35(d) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
No. In a mill which produces timber decking and pickets, subjecting the generic milled timber to a preservation treatment, is not a part of the process of milling timber at a saw mill and therefore is not 'forestry' as defined in paragraph 35(d) of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity operates a saw mill situated outside of a forest from which it is supplied with felled timber.
On arrival at the saw mill, the logs are unloaded and stockpiled by the entity. From the stockpile the logs are taken to be de-barked using rotary action de-barking machines.
Once de-barked the logs are air dried before being placed in kilns to complete the drying process. Once dried the entity saws the logs into standard lengths and sizes (generic timber).
After the generic timber has been milled it is subjected to a preservation treatment. Once the preservation treatment is complete the timber is formed into decking and pickets.
The decking and pickets are then moved to the loading bay ready to be loaded and delivered to the customer.
Reasons for Decision
The term 'forestry' is defined in section 35 of the EGCSA as: The expression forestry means: (a)the planting or tending, in a forest or plantation, of trees intended for felling; or
(b)the thinning or felling, in a forest or plantation, of standing timberand includes:...the milling of timber at a sawmill or chipmill that is not situated in the forest or plantation in which the timber was felled; or... The meaning of the phrase 'milling of timber' has been considered a number of times by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in the context of the diesel fuel rebate scheme. It was first considered in Re Wesfi Pty Ltd v. Collector of Customs (WA) (1984) 7 ALN N8 (Wesfi) where the Tribunal accepted the ordinary meaning of the term 'milling' as follows: The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (Rev. 3rd edn) gives this relevant meaning of 'milling': the action or process of subjecting something to the operation, as corn etc. b. The treatment of a substance to material in any kind of mill; eg the operation of fulling cloth, rolling metals, crushing minerals etc. The approach outlined by the Tribunal was subsequently adopted in Re T J Depiazzi and Sons v. Collector of Customs (1993) 17 AAR 557 (Depiazzi) and again in Re Brymay Forests Pty Ltd v. Collector of Customs Victoria (1985) 9 ALN N177 (Brymay) when it was determined, in part, that the use of a diesel powered front-end grab tractor to take logs from the log stack to the production line where they are milled was also milling of timber. The Tribunal reached this conclusion as: ... the front end grab tractor or tractors are used exclusively in relation to the saw milling operations ... Their use is necessarily incidental to the operations. In Brymay the Tribunal also determined that, while the debarking and sawing of logs into billets constituted the milling of timber, the chopping of veneer sheets did not, as that process was a secondary treatment and not a process of primary production.
It is clear from Brymay that the milling of timber is not limited to the actual subjection of the timber to the mill, but includes activities necessarily incidental to the process of milling timber. However, it does not extend so far as to include activities more properly regarded as secondary processing.
The Explanatory Memorandum to the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Bill 2003 states that the energy grants credits scheme is to provide equivalent entitlements to those of the diesel fuel rebate scheme administered under the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901, accordingly the decisions in Wesfi, Depiazzi and Brymay are still considered relevant and can be applied to the current situation.
In this instance the unloading, stockpiling, de-barking and drying of timber are necessary activities that must occur to enable the logs to be milled into generic timber. These activities are necessary and incidental to the milling of timber and therefore are part of the milling process.
Once the logs have been milled into generic timber they are ready to be subjected to the secondary treatment that will manufacture them into decking and pickets. In preparation for this process the generic timber is first subjected to a preservation treatment, a necessary stage in the manufacture of these particular products. The preservation of the timber therefore occurs after the milling of the timber has been completed and is the commencement of secondary processing.
Accordingly, subjecting generic milled timber to a preservation treatment is not part of the milling process and therefore not forestry as defined in paragraph 35(d) of the EGCSA.
Date of decision: 29 November 2005 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 section 35 paragraph 35(d) Case References: Wesfi Pty Ltd & Collector of Customs (WA), Re (1984) 7 ALN N8 Brymay Forests Pty Ltd & Collector of Customs (Vic), Re (1985) 9 ALN N177 T J Depiazzi & Sons & Collector of Customs, Re (1993) 17 AAR 557 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2006/15 Keywords EGCS forestry EGCS milling Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 17 January 2006 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 20 January 2006
Original statement You are here 1 July 2012
Archived