ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/129
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and psyllium husks
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as the Tax Office position on this issue is contained in the current GST Food Guide (NAT 3338)

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a food supplier, making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it sells psyllium husks?
Decision
No, the entity is not making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the GST Act when it sells psyllium husks. The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a food supplier. The entity sells psyllium husks.
Psyllium husks are a type of bran, similar to oat bran, wheat bran, barley bran and rice bran. They are used to sprinkle onto cereal and are sometimes added to beverages such as water, juice and milk as a means of ingesting them.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply meets the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
A supply of food is GST-free under section 38-2 of the GST Act if it satisfies the definition of food in section 38-4 of the GST Act and it is not excluded from being GST-free by section 38-3 of the GST Act.
Food is defined in section 38-4 of the GST Act. Paragraph 38-4(1)(a) of the GST Act lists 'food for human consumption (whether or not requiring processing or treatment)'. The phrase 'food for human consumption' is not defined in the GST Act. As 'food' has a special meaning as defined in the GST Act, it is considered the phrase 'food for human consumption' takes on the ordinary meaning of the word 'food'.
'Food' is defined in The Macquarie Dictionary (1997) as 'what is eaten, or taken into the body, for nourishment...'
Therefore, it needs to be determined whether a psyllium husk is eaten or taken into the body for nourishment. The official American Nutraceutical Association Guide, 'Nutraceuticals - The Complete Encyclopedia of Supplements, Herbs, Vitamins and Healing Foods', provides that psyllium seed is:

'one of the most popular bulk-producing laxatives. As a supplement or laxative, it is made of the cleaned, dried ripe seed of the Plantago psyllium plant, which is grown mainly in India. The outer covering or husk of the seeds contains a thick, gel-like material-soluble fibre- that is not digested by humans. When this soluble fibre comes in contact with water, it swells, providing both bulk and lubrication to the mass of food as it moves through the intestinal tract'.

It is considered that the essential character of psyllium husks is not that of food for human consumption, but that of a supplement or laxative. Therefore, psyllium husks do not satisfy paragraph 38-4(1)(a) of the GST Act.
Alternatively, it needs to be considered whether psyllium husks satisfy paragraph 38-4(1)(d) of the GST Act which lists 'ingredients for beverages for human consumption'.
Psyllium husks are only added to beverages as a means of taking them. Psyllium husks are not considered to be an ingredient for the beverage itself. As such, the psyllium husks do not satisfy paragraph 38-4(1)(d) of the GST Act. Therefore, psyllium husks do not satisfy the definition of food in section 38-4 of the GST Act. As such the entity is not making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the GST Act.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under any other provisions in Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it sells psyllium husks.
Date of decision:
  02 November 2001

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 9-5   Division 38   section 38-2   section 38-3   section 38-4   paragraph 38-4(1)(a)   paragraph 38-4(1)(d)   Division 40

Other References:

The Macquarie Dictionary, 1997, 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, New South Wales.
 Nutraceuticals - The Complete Encyclopedia of Supplements, Herbs, Vitamins and Healing Foods

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 GST free
 GST food
 Food for human consumption
 Ingredients for beverages

Business Line:
  GST

Date of publication:
  8 February 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 2 November 2001
Original statement

You are here
 5 December 2008
Archived