ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/913
==================================================

Income Tax
 Capital gains tax: Australian source capital gains made by a resident trust for CGT purposes
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of subsection 98(4) of the Income Tax Assessment act 1936 that ceased to apply in relation to income years that commenced on or after 1 July 2006. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for income years that commenced prior to 1 July 2006. For decisions for income years that commenced on or after 1 July 2006, see ATO ID 2010/55 which reflects the same view in respect of the replacement provision (subsection 98(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936).'

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the trustee of a resident trust, for CGT purposes, assessable under paragraph 98(4)(d) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) in relation to that part of the net income of the trust estate attributable to capital gains arising from the sale, in Australia, of shares in Australian companies, to which individual non resident beneficiaries are presently entitled'?
Decision
Yes. The trustee is assessable under paragraph 98(4)(d) of the ITAA 1936 because:

- the beneficiaries are presently entitled to a share of the income of the trust,
- the beneficiaries are individual non-residents; and
- the capital gains from the sale of the shares in Australia are attributable to sources in Australia.

Facts
The taxpayer is the trustee of resident trust for CGT purposes. The Trust owns shares in companies listed on the Australian stock exchange. The trust owns less than 10% of the total value of the shares in each listed company. During the year the trustee disposed of some of these shares and made a capital gain. The trustee made no other capital gains or losses and did not have any net capital losses from earlier years to be carried forward.
The beneficiaries of the trust are individuals. At no time have they been residents of Australia. The beneficiaries were presently entitled to the income of the trust.
Reasons for Decision
A resident trust for CGT purposes must include in the calculation of its net capital gain, capital gains and capital losses from CGT events happening to its worldwide assets. The net capital gain is then included in the net income of the trust in accordance with subsection 95(1) of the ITAA 1936.
Broadly, subsection 98(4) of the ITAA 1936 provides that the trustee of a trust may be assessed where there is an individual beneficiary who is a non-resident at the end of a year of income and that beneficiary is presently entitled to income of the trust. If the beneficiary has not been a resident of Australia at any time during the income year, the trustee is assessed on so much of the share of the net income of the trust estate as is attributable to sources in Australia.
The requirements other than the source of the capital gains forming part of the net income of the trust are clearly satisfied.
There is no statutory source rule for capital gains or net capital gains, for the purposes of Division 6 of Part III of the ITAA 1936. The 'necessary connection with Australia' tests in section 136-25 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 are not relevant for this purpose.
In the absence of such a statutory source rule reliance is appropriately placed on common law source rules as they relate to income.
The leading authority on the source of profits from the sale of shares is Australian Machinery and Investments Company Ltd v. Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation (WA) (1946) 180 CLR 9; 3 AITR 359; (1946) 8 ATD 81, where it was held that where shares are situated outside Australia and sold outside Australia the profit on sale is derived wholly from a source outside Australia. Starke J, held that the relevant source rule is where a business habitually enters into and carries out those contracts with a view to profit.
Because the shares held by the trust were in Australian companies and the disposal of the shares occurred in Australia the capital gains made by the trustee are considered to have a source in Australia.
The trustee is therefore assessed under paragraph 98(4)(d) of the ITAA 1936 in relation to the trust net capital gain as the beneficiaries are presently entitled to a share of the income of the trust, the beneficiaries were non-residents throughout the income year and the gain is attributable to sources in Australia.
It is not relevant for the purposes of Division 6 of Part III of the ITAA 1936 that, had the beneficiaries acquired the shares directly, they would not have made a capital gain because their shares would not have had the necessary connection with Australia.
Date of decision:
  9 September 2002

Year of income:
  Year ending 30 June 2002

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   section 136-25
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936   paragraph 98(4)(d)   subsection 98(4)   subsection 95(1)

Case References:

Australian Machinery & Investment Co Ltd v. Deputy Commissioner of Taxation   (1946) 180 CLR 9   (1946) 3 AITR 359   (1946) 8 ATD 81

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2001/300
 ATO ID 2002/903

Keywords

Capital gains tax
 Trusts
 Shares
 CGT asset with the necessary connection with Australia

Business Line:
  Office of the Chief Tax Counsel

Date of publication:
  26 September 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 9 September 2002
Original statement

You are here
 5 March 2010
Archived