ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/245
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of salary and wages earned by an Australian citizen employed as a locally engaged staff working for an Australian government organisation in France
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as the issue is now dealt with in Taxation Ruling 2005/8.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Are the salary and wages earned by a non-resident taxpayer, who is an Australian citizen employed as a locally engaged staff by an Australian government organisation in France, assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. The salary and wages earned by a non-resident taxpayer, who is an Australian citizen employed as a locally engaged staff by an Australian government organisation in France, are not assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is an Australian citizen but is a non-resident of Australia for income tax purposes.
The taxpayer resides permanently in France.
The taxpayer is employed as a locally engaged staff by an Australian government organisation in France.
The taxpayer receives salary and wages from the Australian government organisation in France.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a non-resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all Australian sources during the income year and other ordinary income that a provision includes as assessable income on some basis other than having an Australian source.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except in some limited situations).
Schedule 11 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and the French Republic (the French Agreement). Schedule 11A of the Agreements Act contains the protocol amending the French Agreement (the French Protocol). The French Agreement and the French Protocol operate to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and French residents.
Paragraph (1) of Article 18 of the French Agreement (amended by the French Protocol) provides that remuneration paid by the Australian government to any individual in respect of services rendered to the Australian government in the discharge of governmental functions will be exempt from French tax unless the services are rendered in France by an individual who is a French national or is permanently resident in France.
Subparagraph (b) of paragraph (1) of Article 3 of the French Agreement provides that for the purposes of French tax a person is a resident of France if the person is domiciled in France. 'French tax' is defined as tax imposed by France which includes income tax and corporation tax (Article 1 and Article 2 of the French Agreement).
As the taxpayer is permanently resident in France, the salary and wages paid by the Australian government organisation in France will not be exempt from French tax.
Accordingly, the salary and wages earned by the non resident taxpayer while working for an Australian government authority in France will not be assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision:
  31 March 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2002

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   subsection 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 11   Schedule 11, Article 1   Schedule 11, Article 2   Schedule 11, Article 3, paragraph (1), subparagraph (b)   Schedule 11, Article 18, paragraph (1)   Schedule 11A

Keywords

Double tax agreements
 Foreign income
 France
 International tax

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  11 April 2003

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
31 March 2003
Original statement

You are here
12 May 2006
Archived