ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/933
================================================== Excise Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme: residential - eligibility of diesel fuel used in electricity generation for detainees at a detention centre FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is diesel fuel eligible for rebate under paragraph 78A(1)(b) of the Excise Act 1901 and corresponding paragraph 164(1)(b) of the Customs Act 1901 to the extent to which it is purchased for use in generating electricity for use in meeting domestic requirements of detainees at a detention centre?
Decision
Yes. Diesel fuel is eligible for rebate under paragraph 78A(1)(b) of the Excise Act and corresponding paragraph 164(1)(b) of the Customs Act to the extent to which it is purchased for use in generating electricity for use in meeting domestic requirements of detainees at a detention centre.
Facts
The detention centre operates 24 hours a day to house and detain young people who have been remanded through the legal system. A government department operates the centre. Staff are present 24 hours a day on 12 hour shifts but do not reside at the detention centre.
The centre includes a number of buildings including accommodation units for the detainees, a medical centre, education facilities, administration blocks, casework facilities, maintenance and cleaning areas, an industrial laundry and a commercial kitchen.
The commercial kitchen and industrial laundry are managed by staff and provide for the needs of residents within the centre and meals for staff on duty. Kitchen and laundry services are not provided to the public. All these facilities are within secure walls and are protected by an electronic security system.
The detention centre has a number of backup systems including a diesel generator, fed by an underground tank, which supplies all power in the event of electrical failure. The diesel fuel is purchased by the government department. The generator is located on the detention centre site, at the edge of the centre on the outside of a security wall for security reasons. The generator is within a distance of approximately 600 - 1000 metres from all accommodation blocks. Apart from instances of electrical failure the generator is operated periodically to test that it is supplying power to all areas. The generator is specifically for the centre's use. When operating, the generator supplies power to all buildings, the security perimeter and lighting, security cameras and internal site lighting.
A total of 65% of diesel fuel purchased is used to generate electricity for the accommodation blocks and kitchen and laundry. Another 20% is used to generate electricity for the administration blocks and other areas, and 15% is used in vehicles operating within the centre.
The detention centre is approved as an organisation that provides residential care services to young people for the purposes of section 20 of A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999 and receives Family Tax Benefit for the residents.
Reasons for Decision
Paragraph 78A(1)(b) of the Excise Act and corresponding paragraph 164(1)(b) of the Customs Act provide that a rebate is payable to a person who purchases diesel fuel for use by him or her at residential premises to generate electricity for use in: •providing food and drink for
•providing lighting, heating, air-conditioning, hot water or similar amenities for; or
•meeting other domestic requirements ofresidents of the premises. Subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act defines residential premises to include premises used as a house or other premises where at least one person resides but excludes premises used: •in the business of a hotel, motel or boarding house or a similar business
•as a hospital or nursing home or as any other institution providing medical or nursing care
•as a home for aged persons; or
•as a boarding school Therefore, to be eligible for rebate: 1. the detention centre needs to be premises used as a house or other premises where at least one person resides, and
2. not excluded premises, and
3. the client needs to purchase diesel fuel for use by them at the detention centre, to generate electricity for use in providing for the domestic requirements of residents of the centre. Are the detention centre premises used as a house or other premises where at least one person resides?
The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW relevantly defines 'house' as 'a building for human habitation'. The accommodation blocks at the detention centre are clearly buildings used for human habitation and can be regarded as premises used as a house. Equally clear, the administration, education and utility buildings are buildings not used for human habitation.
In Perkins Shipping Pty. Ltd. and Australian Customs Service (1988) 9 AAR 36; (1988) 17 ALD 602 the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) considered the meaning of 'reside'. The AAT determined that as a general concept residence includes two elements: physical presence in a particular place and the intention to treat that place as home; at least for the time being not necessarily forever. The detainees are accommodated at the detention centre for indefinite and considerable periods of time and would be considered to be residents at the centre. Accordingly, the detention centre would also be premises where at least one person resides.
Is the detention centre 'excluded premises'?
The detention centre is not a business operating for profit and cannot be considered similar to a hotel, motel or boarding house business. Nor is it an institution in the business of providing medical or nursing care. The medical centre at the premises is of an ancillary nature. It is not a home for aged persons or a boarding school. Accordingly the accommodation blocks at the detention centre are not excluded premises.
Is the detention centre generating electricity for use in providing for the domestic requirements of residents of the centre?
The client purchases diesel fuel which is used for various purposes at the detention centre including the provision of electricity. Only the proportion of diesel fuel used to generate electricity that provides: •food and drink,
•lighting, heating, air-conditioning, hot water or similar amenities for, or
•meeting other domestic requirements for the residents is eligible for rebate.
Electricity supplied to the accommodation blocks and to the kitchen/laundry block meets the above requirements.
Electricity supplied to administration, education and utility blocks and to outside lighting and security does not meet the above requirements.
As the detention centre is considered to be premises used as a house that are not excluded and detainees are considered to be residents at the detention centre, rebate is payable for the proportion of diesel fuel purchased to generate electricity for use in providing for the domestic requirements of residents of the centre.
Date of decision: 2 October 2003 Legislative References: Customs Act 1901 paragraph 164(1)(b) subsection 164(7)
Excise Act 1901 paragraph 78A(1)(b) Case References: Perkins Shipping Pty. Ltd. and Australian Customs Service Case (1988) 9 AAR 36 (1988) 17 ALD 602 Other References: The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW Keywords DFRS generation of electricity DFRS power generation DFRS residential premises Diesel fuel rebate scheme Excise Excise payments Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 17 October 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 2 October 2003
Original statement You are here 8 January 2010
Archived