ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/979
==================================================

GST
 GST and purchase of trailer using funds from an insurance settlement
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn, as it is no longer necessary. The ATO view expressed in this ATO ID is a straight application of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a business operator, entitled to an input tax credit under section 11-20 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it purchases a replacement trailer, before 23 May 2001, using funds from an insurance payout?
Decision
No, the entity is not entitled to an input tax credit under section 11-20 of the GST Act when it purchases a replacement trailer, before 23 May 2001, using funds from an insurance payout.
Facts
The entity is a business operator. The entity was involved in an accident that resulted in the detachable trailer for its prime mover being written off. The entity received a cash payout as settlement for its insurance claim. Using the money from the insurance payout, the entity purchased a new trailer for its prime mover. The entity's purchase occurred before 23 May 2001.
The trailer is designed to be towed by a prime mover and is not designed to be towed by a car. The entity did not purchase it for use as trading stock nor it is not held for hire. The trailer is not second-hand. The acquisition of the trailer would have been subject to sales tax if sales tax had not been ended by the A New Tax System (End of Sales Tax) Act 1999.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Under section 11-20 of the GST Act, an entity is entitled to an input tax credit for any creditable acquisition that it makes. However, section 20 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax Transition) Act 1999 (Transition Act) provides for the phasing in of input tax credits for motor vehicles, detachable trailers and motor vehicle bodies.
Paragraph 20(1)(b) of the GST Act provides that the phasing in provisions apply to the acquisition by way of purchase (including hire purchase) or importation of a detachable trailer designed to be towed by a prime mover of a kind prescribed in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax Transition) Regulations 2000 (Transition Regulations).
Regulation 6 of the Transition Regulations provides that any kind of detachable trailer designed to be towed by a prime mover (except a kind of detachable trailer designed to be towed by a car and commonly used for private or domestic purposes) is a detachable trailer for the purposes of paragraph 20(1)(b) of the Transition Act.
Under subsection 20(2) of the GST Act, an entity is not entitled to an input tax credit on the acquisition or importation if it was made before 23 May 2001.
The entity has acquired a detachable trailer that is designed to be towed using a prime mover, not a car, before 23 May 2001.
However, under subsection 20(4) of the Transition Act, the phasing in of input tax credits does not apply if the detachable trailer:

•is acquired to hold as trading stock (unless it is held for hire);
•is second-hand;
•would have been sales tax exempt, if sales tax had still applied; or
•is acquired by an insurer to replace another trailer under an insurance policy.

The entity did not purchase the trailer for use as trading stock, it is not held for hire, nor is the trailer second-hand. In addition, the trailer would have been subject to sales tax if sales tax still applied.
The final exclusion in subsection 20(4) of the Transition Act is where an insurer acquires a trailer, to replace an insured trailer. In this case, it is the entity, and not the insurer, that acquired the trailer. The insurer settled the entity's insurance claim via a payment of money. The entity then used that money to acquire the trailer.
Accordingly, the acquisition by the entity is not excluded from section 20 of the Transition Act and the phasing in provisions apply to the acquisition of the trailer.
Therefore, the entity is not entitled to an input tax credit under section 11-20 of the GST Act when it purchases a replacement trailer, before 23 May 2001, using funds from an insurance payout.
Date of decision:
  20 March 2002

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 11-20
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax Transition) Act 1999   section 20   subsection 20(1)   paragraph 20(1)(b)   subsection 20(2)   subsection 20(4)
 A New Tax System (End of Sales Tax) Act 1999   1
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax Transition) Regulations 2000   regulation 6

Keywords

Goods & services tax
 GST supplies & acquisitions
 Creditable acquisition
 Insurance settlement under an insurance policy
 GST transitional issues
 Special transitional rules
 Motor vehicles

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  CRS79304; 1-KP3KG4G

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  23 October 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
20 March 2002
Original statement

You are here
 5 May 2022
Archived