ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2013/23
==================================================

Fuel Tax
 Fuel tax: carbon reduction for fuel used in powering auxiliary equipment in, or on, a vehicle

This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2014, the date Subdivision 43-B of the Fuel Tax Act 2006 was repealed. Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of fuel acquired, manufactured or imported during the period the Subdivision was in force, being 1 July 2012 up to and including 30 June 2014.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Does paragraph 43-8(4)(c) of the Fuel Tax Act 2006 (FTA) apply, and hence the carbon reduction is nil, for
 all
 fuel used in a vehicle with a gross vehicle mass (GVM) of more than 4.5 tonnes travelling on a public road, including fuel used in powering auxiliary equipment in or on the vehicle?
Decision
Yes, paragraph 43-8(4)(c) of the FTA applies and the carbon reduction is nil for all fuel used
 in
 a vehicle with a GVM of more than 4.5 tonnes travelling on a public road, including fuel used in powering auxiliary equipment in or on the vehicle.
Facts
The entity acquires fuel which it uses in a vehicle with a GVM of more than 4.5 tonnes travelling on a public road.
Some of the fuel is used in powering auxiliary equipment in the vehicle while the vehicle is travelling on public roads.
Fuel used to power auxiliary equipment is fuel that is not used for propelling the vehicle and for all aspects of the vehicle that are for the purpose of its travel on a public road.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 43-5(1) of the FTA reduces the fuel tax credit an entity may claim by an amount of carbon reduction.
However, in certain circumstances, the amount of carbon reduction will be nil. Paragraph 43-8(4)(c) of the FTA provides that:

The *amount of
 carbon reduction
 that applies to the fuel is nil to the extent that:

...

you acquire, manufacture or import the fuel for use in a vehicle with a gross vehicle mass of more than 4.5 tonnes travelling on a public road; or

...

The wording of paragraph 43-8(4)(c) of the FTA focuses on whether fuel is for use in a vehicle travelling on a public road. This can be contrasted with the wording in subsection 43-10(3) of the FTA which sets out the circumstances when fuel tax credits are reduced by the road user charge. Subsection 43-10(3) of the FTA focuses on whether fuel is to use, in a vehicle,
 for
 travelling on a public road.
The issue of when fuel is used in a vehicle
 for
 travelling on a public road was considered by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) in Linfox Australia Pty Ltd v. Commissioner of Taxation [2012] AATA 517.
The issue decided by the AAT was whether fuel acquired by the applicant for use in a refrigeration unit in a refrigerated vehicle travelling on a public road was 'fuel to use, in a vehicle, for travelling on a public road' for the purposes of subsection 43-10(3) of the FTA. If it was (as the Commissioner contended), the amount of the fuel tax credit to which the applicant was entitled for the fuel would be reduced by the amount of the road user charge.
The AAT found that the punctuation in the phrase 'fuel to use, in a vehicle, for travelling on a public road' in subsection 43-10(3) of the FTA meant that, in order for the provision to apply, fuel must be acquired both:

•to use in a vehicle; and
•to use
 for
 travelling on a public road.

Based on the ordinary meaning of the word 'for', the AAT concluded that the only circumstance in which the second condition would be met is:

...where fuel is acquired to use for the purpose of travelling on a public road

The AAT found that the fuel in question was not acquired for this purpose, but was instead acquired and used for the 'entirely different' purpose of refrigerating cargo inside the refrigerated trailer. It followed that the fuel did not satisfy the second condition of subsection 43 10(3) of the FTA and was not, therefore, subject to the road user charge.
In discussing the statutory context, the AAT referred to the differences in wording between subsection 43-10(3) of the FTA and the similarly worded section 41-20 of the FTA. The AAT noted that:

It is significant, in our view, that the word "for" does not precede the phrase "travelling on a public road" in s 41-20 but it does in s 43-10(3)... That is not the case in s 43-10(3), where the use of the word "for" before the phrase "travelling on a public road" is evidently intended to narrow the reach of the provision, such that the
 RUC on taxable fuel is only imposed where the purpose is to propel the vehicle on a public road
 [our emphasis].

In contrast to the wording in subsection 43-10(3) of the FTA, and its intended narrow focus, the intention and wording of paragraph 43-8(4)(c) of the FTA is similar to the broad intention and wording in section 41-20 of the FTA.
Therefore, for the purposes of paragraph 43-8(4)(c) of the FTA, the amount of the carbon reduction is nil for
 all
 fuel used in a vehicle with a GVM of more than 4.5 tonnes travelling on a public road, including fuel used in powering auxiliary equipment in or on the vehicle. It is not necessary that the fuel is used 'for' travelling on a public road.
Date of decision:
  1 July 2012

Year of income:
  1 July 2012 to 30 June 2014

Legislative References:

Fuel Tax Act 2006   section 41-5   section 41-20   section 43-5   subsection 43-8(4)(c)   subsection 43-10(3)

Case References:

Linfox Australia Pty Ltd v. Commissioner of Taxation   [2012] AATA 517

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

FTR 2008/1

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2013/22

Keywords

Excise
 Excise offsets
 FTC fuel tax
 FTC general
 FTC heavy vehicle
 FTC Partial Credit
 Fuel tax credits

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  1 May 2013

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 1 July 2012
Original statement

You are here
30 July 2014
Archived