ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/477
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and agreement to pay or recoup foreign exchange loss or gain when a forward currency contract is closed out
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID contains references to provisions of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999, which have been replaced by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019. This ATO ID continues to apply in relation to the remade Regulations.

 A comparison table which provides the replacement provisions in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019 for regulations which are referenced in this ATO ID is available.
With effect from 1 July 2015, the term 'Australia' is replaced in nearly all instances within the GST, Luxury Car Tax and Wine Equalisation Tax legislation with the term 'indirect tax zone' by the Treasury Legislation Amendment (Repeal Day) Act 2015. The scope of the new term, however, remains the same as the repealed definition of 'Australia' used in those Acts. For readability and other reasons, where the term 'Australia' is used in this document, it is referring to the 'indirect tax zone' as defined in subsection 195-1 of the GST Act.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a supplier of goods, making an input taxed supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it enters into a binding verbal agreement with a client, whereby the client either pays or recoups any respective foreign exchange loss or gain when a forward currency contract is closed out?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making an input taxed supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it enters into a binding verbal agreement with a client, whereby the client either pays or recoups any respective foreign exchange loss or gain when a forward currency contract is closed out.
Facts
The entity is a supplier of goods. The entity's client forecasts an amount of goods that the client will purchase from the entity in the future.
The entity then enters into a forward currency contract with a bank to cover any materials used in producing the goods that the entity may import, based on the client's forecast. If the client does not meet their forecast the forward currency contract will be closed out. This may result in a loss or gain.
There is also a binding verbal agreement between the entity and the client, whereby the client is bound to pay, or is entitled to receive, the difference arising from the forward currency contract between the entity and the bank. That is, if the forward currency contract between the entity and the bank results in a foreign exchange loss for the entity, the client pays that amount to the entity. If a foreign exchange gain arises, the client is entitled to receive that amount from the entity.
The entity does not charge a fee to the client.
The forward currency contract between the entity and bank is covered by item 11 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations) and is an input taxed supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply is made in the course of the entity's enterprise and is connected with Australia.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act, a financial supply is input taxed.
Subsection 40-5(2) of the GST Act provides that financial supply has the meaning given by the GST Regulations.
Subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations provides that the provision, acquisition, or disposal of an interest mentioned under subregulation 40-5.09(3) or 40-5.09(4) of the GST Regulations is a financial supply if:

(a)the provision, acquisition or disposal of that interest is:

•for consideration
•in the course or furtherance of an enterprise
•connected with Australia, and

(b)the supplier is:

•registered or required to be registered for GST, and
•a financial supply provider in relation to the supply of the interest.

Item 11 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations lists an interest in or under a derivative.
Regulation 3 of the GST Regulations defines derivative as 'an agreement or instrument the value of which depends on, or is derived from, the value of assets or liabilities, an index or a rate'.
Schedule 1 to Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2002/2, further provides that a derivative includes financial instruments such as options, forwards, futures, swaps and whose value is tied to or derived from an underlying security, commodity, currency, liability or index. Entities usually use derivatives to hedge against changes in interest rates and foreign exchange risks or to minimise business risks.
The entity's client forecasts an amount of goods that the client will purchase from the entity in the future. There is a binding verbal agreement between the entity and the client. Under this agreement, the entity's client is bound to pay or is entitled to receive the difference arising from the forward currency contract between the entity and the bank.
If the forward currency contract results in a foreign exchange loss for the entity, the client pays that amount to the entity. If a foreign exchange gain arises, the entity's client is entitled to receive that amount.
The binding verbal agreement between the entity and its client is separate to their agreement for the sale of the goods. The value of this verbal binding agreement depends on, or is derived from, the underlying foreign currency values, as reflected in the forward currency contract between the entity and the bank. The entity creates its own interest in a separate derivative and provides the interest in that derivative to its client. As noted, a derivative is an interest mentioned in item 11 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations and the supply of an interest in a derivative is a financial supply where all of the conditions of subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations are satisfied.
The entity makes this supply in the course of its enterprise and the supply is connected with Australia. The entity is registered for GST. As the entity creates its own interest in a separate derivative, the entity is a financial supply provider in relation to the supply of that interest (regulation 40-5.06 of the GST Regulations).
The remaining requirement under subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations is that the entity supplies the interest in the derivative for consideration. The entity does not charge a fee to its client, however, the entity and the client enter into a binding verbal agreement and exchange their reciprocal rights and obligations to pay or receive an amount when the foreign exchange results in either a loss or a gain. The exchanging of their rights and obligations, although not priced, does constitute consideration for the derivative agreement and the payment of the difference by one party to the other is a consequence of the agreement.
Accordingly, the supply satisfies the requirements of subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations and the entity is making an input taxed supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it enters into a binding verbal agreement with a client whereby the client either pays or recoups any respective foreign exchange loss or gain when a forward currency contract entered into is closed out.
Date of decision:
  23 June 2003

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   subsection 40-5(1)   subsection 40-5(2)
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999   subregulation 40-5.06(1)   subregulation 40-5.09(1)   subregulation 40-5.09(3)   subregulation 40-5.09(4)   subregulation 40-5.09(3) table item 11

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Goods and Services Tax Ruling GSTR 2002/2

Keywords

Goods and services tax
 Input taxed supplies
 GST financial supplies
 GST derivatives
 GST foreign exchange transactions

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3495187

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  11 June 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782