ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/180
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessability of directors fees received from an Australian company by a resident of Thailand
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Are director's fees received by the taxpayer, a Thai resident from services performed in Thailand as a director of an Australian company included in the taxpayer's assessable income under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. The director's fees received by the taxpayer, a Thai resident, from services performed in Thailand as a director of an Australian company, are included in the taxpayer's assessable income under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is a citizen of Australia.
The taxpayer is a resident of Thailand for taxation purposes.
The taxpayer is a non-executive director of an Australian resident company.
The taxpayer receives director's fees from services performed as a director of an Australian resident company.
The taxpayer performs their duties as a director in Thailand.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a non-resident taxpayer includes ordinary income derived directly or indirectly from all Australian sources during the income year and other ordinary income that a provision includes as assessable income on some basis other than having an Australian source.
Director's fees are ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining liability to Australian tax on foreign sourced income, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws, but also any applicable double tax agreements contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 and the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one.
Schedule 30 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and Thailand (the Thai Agreement). The Thai Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and Thai residents.
Article 16 of the Thai Agreement provides that director's fees and similar payments derived by a resident of Thailand, in the capacity as a member of the board of directors of a company which is a resident of Australia, may be taxed in Australia.
Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13 discusses the Commissioner's views on double tax agreements. Paragraph 104 of TR 2001/13 provides that the OECD Model Tax Convention and Commentary will often need to be considered in interpreting double taxation agreements.
The OECD Commentary provides that in relation to Article 16:

Since it might sometimes be difficult to ascertain where the services are performed, the provision treats the services as performed in the State of residence of the company.

The OECD Commentary further provides that Article 16 would not apply to a member of a board of a company exercising their function in the capacity of an ordinary employee, adviser or consultant.
Australia, as the country of residence of the company, being the country of source, has the primary right to tax the director's fees paid by the company to the taxpayer as a member of its board of directors on account of services rendered.
Article 23 of the Thai Agreement also provides that income, derived by a resident of Thailand under Article 16, may be taxed in Australia, and shall, for the purposes of Article 24 and of the income tax law of Australia, be deemed to be income from sources in Australia.

[
 History note:
 Paragraph removed on 25 September 2005]

Accordingly, as the taxpayer's services are treated as being performed in Australia, the director's fees received by the taxpayer from services performed as a non-executive director of the Australian company are included in the taxpayer's assessable income under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision:
  10 June 2005

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2004

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   section 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953   section 4   Schedule 30, Article 16   Schedule 30, Article 23   Schedule 30, Article 24(5)

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13

Other References:

OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital Condensed Version, January 2003

Keywords

Directors fee income
 Double tax agreements
 Foreign income
 International tax
 Non resident individuals
 Thailand

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  4664897

Business Line:
  Public Groups and International

Date of publication:
  24 June 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782