ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/99
==================================================

Excise
 Excise: payments - Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme - agriculture - livestock research
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the keeping of cattle in a feedlot, where cattle are kept for research and commercial reasons, 'agriculture' as defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act 1901 for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme?
Decision
Yes. The keeping of cattle in a feedlot, where cattle are kept for research and commercial reasons, is 'agriculture' as defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme.
Facts
A not for profit research organisation operates a feedlot.
The feedlot operates basically as would any normal feedlot, except that equipment has been set up to monitor the feed consumed by selected cattle.
The organisation undertakes a range of activities that provide research data and standard commercial feedlot services. All clients providing cattle to the feedlot are engaged in the beef cattle raising industry.
The research activities generally relate to the care and controlled feeding of cattle in a way that allows data to be obtained for analysis off site. The organisation also performs research on meat samples taken from selected cattle after slaughter.
The majority of the cattle cared for by the organisation are owned by various pastoral companies. The ownership of the cattle remains with the pastoral companies. The organisation charges the pastoral companies commercial rates for the agistment, feeding and other costs associated with the operation of the feedlot.
The cattle are slaughtered and sold once they have achieved the required weight gain, and the proceeds of the sale are paid to the particular pastoral company in the group that owned the cattle.
The organisation also provides standard feedlot commercial services to clients. These cattle are generally placed in the feedlot to attain specific weights for sale at market that will maximise profit to the commercial client.
The duration of the cattle's stay in the feedlot depends on whether they are being held for experimental or commercial reasons, and can vary between 70 and 300 days.
Reasons for Decision
Under the diesel fuel rebate scheme, a diesel fuel rebate is payable to a person who purchases diesel fuel for use by them in certain defined activities, including 'agriculture'.
For the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme, 'agriculture' is defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act to mean various activities of which the most relevant to the client's circumstances is the rearing of livestock.
The definition of 'agriculture' also imposes an overriding test that requires most of the activities listed in the definition of agriculture, including the rearing of livestock, to be carried out for the purposes of, or for purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain profit for sale.
Given the above requirements, the client's activities will fall within the definition of 'agriculture' in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act if they can be considered:

(a) 'rearing of livestock'; and
(b) are carried out for the purposes of, or for purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.

Are the activities 'rearing of livestock'?
'Rear' is defined in the Australian Oxford Dictionary (1999), Oxford University Press, Melbourne as

a. bring up and educate (children)
b. breed and care for (animals).

The term 'live-stock' is defined in section 164(7) of the Customs Act as including 'any animal reared for the production of food, fibres, skins, fur or feathers or for its use in the farming of land'.
In an agricultural context, we consider that the rearing of livestock means the care and support of the livestock until the purpose for which the animals are reared is fulfilled.
If livestock are reared for sale or slaughter, the relevant case law has consistently taken the view that rearing ends at the point at which the livestock leave the agricultural property (see Re National Australian Railways Commission v. Collector of Customs, South Australia (1985) 8 FCR 264; Impast Pty Ltd and Collector of Customs (1992) No. W91/290 AAT No. 8355; Re French Island Barge Pty Ltd and: Collector of Customs (1993) No.V92/255 AAT No 8625).
Rearing of livestock includes all activities reasonably required to provide this care and support, in accordance with accepted commercial animal management practices. More specifically the Federal Court in Collector of Customs v. Reg Russell and Sons Pty Ltd No. WAG 95 of 1994 FED No. 421/95 has accepted that it includes the care of livestock at feedlots to allow them to gain body weight preparatory to slaughter.
It is accepted that the cattle in the feedlot are livestock, and that feeding and care provided to all the cattle, regardless of whether they are held in part for research purposes, occurs to allow the cattle to gain body weight, usually prior to slaughter. Accordingly, the non-profit body's activities are considered 'rearing of livestock'.
Are the activities carried out for the purposes of, or for purposes that will directly benefit, a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale?
No produce is sold by the non-profit body itself (except as agent for the pastoral companies). Therefore, the non-profit body's activities are not carried on for the purposes of a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
However, the activity may still fall within the definition of 'agriculture' if it is undertaken for purposes that will directly benefit a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale. An activity will directly benefit a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale if there is a close and immediate benefit (that is, a positive effect) to the business arising from the activity in question.
The non-profit body conducts its rearing of livestock activities for a number of reasons, including to obtain data that will allow it to undertake research. However, the legislation does not require that the only purpose of undertaking a particular activity is to directly benefit a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
The animals that are being reared at the feedlot are owned by businesses undertaken to obtain produce for sale. These businesses obtain a close and immediate benefit from the non-profit body's activities. Most commonly this benefit is in the form of the increased sale value of an animal that has been held at the feedlot, but in certain circumstances, it may also include the return of an animal in good condition.
Consequently the rearing of livestock at the feedlot is carried out for the purposes of, or purposes that will directly benefit a business, or businesses, undertaken to obtain produce for sale.
Conclusion
The non-profit body is carrying on activities that constitute the rearing of livestock, and its activities are carried on for purposes that will directly benefit a business undertaken to obtain produce for sale. Therefore the keeping of cattle by the non-profit body in a feedlot amounts to agriculture as defined in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme.
Date of decision:
  23 January 2004

Legislative References:

Customs Act 1901   subsection 164(1)   subsection 164(7)

Case References:

Re National Australian Railways Commission v. Collector of Customs, South Australia   (1985) 8 FCR 264

Collector of Customs v. Reg Russell and Sons Pty Ltd   (1995) No.WAG 95 of 1994 FED No. 421/95

Re: French Island Barge Pty LTD and: Collector of Customs   (1993) No.V92 AAT No. 8625

Impast Pty Ltd and Collector of Customs   (1992) No. 91/290 AAT No. 8355

Other References:

Australian Oxford Dictionary (1999), Oxford University Press, Melbourne

Keywords

DFRS agriculture
 Diesel fuel rebate scheme

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  6 February 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
23 January 2004
Original statement

You are here
 8 January 2010
Archived