ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2006/90
================================================== Excise Excise: other excisable beverages - rate of duty payable FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn due to legislative amendment contained in Excise Tariff Amendment (2009 Measures No. 1) Act 2009 which increased the excise rate of other excisable beverages not exceeding 10% by volume of alcohol to be the same rate as other excisable beverages exceeding 10% by volume of alcohol. This law took effect on 27 April 2008. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Are 'other excisable beverages' with an alcoholic strength greater than 10% by volume at the time of payment of excise duty under an ad hoc entry, but which are subsequently diluted by the end consumer to an alcoholic strength that does not exceed 10% by volume prior to drinking, able to be classified to Item 2 of the Schedule to the Excise Tariff Act 1921 (the Schedule)?
Decision
No. 'Other excisable beverages' with an alcoholic strength greater than 10% by volume at the time of payment of excise duty under an ad hoc entry, but which are subsequently diluted by the end consumer to an alcoholic strength that does not exceed 10% by volume prior to drinking, cannot be classified to Item 2 of the Schedule.
Facts
A client manufactures an other excisable beverage (as defined in the Schedule) in a concentrated form. The alcohol content of the beverage is greater than 10% by volume.
The concentrates are bottled and are entered into home consumption in this form.
The labels on the bottles include mixing instructions, which when followed, result in the mixed product having an alcoholic strength that does not exceed 10% by volume prior to consumption by the end user.
The client holds an excise manufacturer's licence. The licence conditions require the client to enter goods on an ad hoc basis and pay duty at the time of entry (the Tax Office will not pass an entry unless the entry is accompanied by the requisite duty).
Reasons for Decision
Excise is imposed by section 5 of the Excise Tariff Act on goods dutiable under that Act that are manufactured or produced in Australia (excisable goods).
Excisable goods are entered, and duty is paid on those goods under subsection 54(1) of the Excise Act 1901, which states: The licensed manufacturer of excisable goods, or, where the owner of excisable goods enters them for home consumption, the owner of the goods, shall pay to the Collector, in accordance with this Act, the Excise duty on those goods. Section 59 of the Excise Act provides that the rate of duty payable on excisable goods is the rate in force when the goods are delivered into home consumption under subsection 61C(2) of the Excise Act or the rate in force when payment is made, whichever is earlier. Section 61C of the Excise Act relates to the delivery of good without entry pursuant to a permission granted by the Commissioner. As, under the terms of the client's licence, the client is required to enter goods on an ad hoc basis, subsection 61C(2) of the Excise Act is not relevant. Therefore, the rate that is in force when the payment of duty is made will be applicable to the client's situation.
The Schedule sets out different rates of excise duty depending on whether or not the particular other excisable beverage has an alcoholic strength exceeding 10% by volume. Item 2 of the Schedule pertains to other excisable beverages that have an alcoholic strength that does not exceed 10%.
The process of entering goods is set out in section 58 of the Excise Act. That is, an entry is made (lodged) by the owner or manufacturer and passed by an officer for either entry into home consumption or removal to an approved place. The client pays duty at the time of entry as the Tax Office will not pass an entry unless the entry is accompanied by the requisite duty.
As stated earlier, the effect of section 59 of the Excise Act is that in the absence of a weekly settlement permission under section 61C of the Excise Act, the rate of excise duty payable must be determined at the time that payment is made.
In this instance, the client pays excise duty at the time of entry. As the client cannot deliver the beverage into home consumption until the entry is passed, payment of the duty must occur prior to the goods becoming available to customers who dilute the beverage to an alcoholic strength not exceeding 10% by volume. Therefore, the rate of excise duty must be determined when the beverage is still at an alcoholic strength exceeding 10% under subitem 3.2 of the Schedule.
Accordingly, other excisable beverages that have an alcoholic strength of greater than 10% by volume at the time of payment of excise duty under an ad hoc entry, but which are subsequently diluted by the end consumer to an alcoholic strength that does not exceed 10% by volume prior to drinking, cannot be classified to Item 2 of the Schedule.
Amendment History Date of amendment
Part
Comment 22 March 2013
Issue
Amended citation for clarity Reasons for Decision
Amended citation for clarity 21 January 2011 Amended as a consequence of changes to the Schedule to the Excise Tariff Act 1921 that are effective from 1 July 2006. Date of decision: 27 March 2006 Legislative References: Excise Act 1901 subsection 54(1) section 58 section 59 subsection 61C(2)
Excise Tariff Act 1921 section 5 The Schedule The Schedule, Item 2 The Schedule, Subitem 3.2 Keywords Alcohol excise Delivered for home consumption Excise Excise Alcohol Industry Group Excise collections Spirit excise Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 3476682 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 31 March 2006 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 27 March 2006
Original statement 22 March 2013
Updated statement You are here
17 January 2019
Archived