ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/1004
================================================== Excise Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: fishing operations - taking, catching or capturing of fish FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is travelling by boat, to and from a place where fishing will take place in the course of a fishing business, 'fishing operations' as defined in section 34 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA) for the purposes of the energy grants credits scheme?
Decision
Yes. Travelling by boat, to and from a place where fishing will take place in the course of a fishing business, is 'fishing operations' as defined in section 34 of the EGCSA for the purposes of the energy grants credits scheme.
Facts
The client carries on a business of scuba diving for fish for sale.
The client operates a boat powered by a diesel motor in the course of the business.
The client uses the boat to travel to and from the place(s) where the scuba diving takes place and the fish are caught.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 56(1) of the EGCSA states that if a person is entitled to an off-road credit, they are entitled to an energy grant.
Section 53 of the EGCSA provides that a person is entitled to an off-road credit if that person purchases diesel fuel for a use by that person that qualifies. Use 'in primary production (otherwise than for the purpose of propelling a road vehicle on a public road)', is a use that qualifies. Primary production is defined in section 21 of the EGCSA as meaning amongst other things, 'fishing operations'.
'Fishing operations' are defined in subsection 34(1) of the EGCSA as meaning various activities. The activity most relevant to the client's circumstances is: (a) the taking, catching or capturing of fish; ... For activities to constitute fishing operations for the purposes of the EGCSA, they must not be conducted, in whole or in part, otherwise than for the purposes of a business, or for business purposes connected with recreation, sport or tourism.
The client's activities are conducted solely for the purposes of a fishing business, and are not connected with recreation, sport or tourism. Therefore, the exclusionary tests are satisfied, and the client's activities (including the travel by boat to and from fishing sites) will constitute 'fishing operations' provided they form part of 'the taking, catching or capturing of fish'.
As stated above, for an off-road credit to be available, diesel fuel must be purchased for use in primary production. As primary production includes fishing operations, and fishing operations in turn include 'the taking, catching or capturing of fish', it follows that the client's use of diesel fuel will be eligible for an off-road credit provided travelling by boat to and from fishing sites is use 'in' the taking, catching or capturing of fish.
In establishing whether a person has used diesel fuel 'in' the taking, catching or capturing of fish, the meaning of the term 'in' must be determined. The preposition 'in' has been accepted as meaning 'in the course of' (see Chief Executive Officer of Customs v. WMC Resources Ltd (as agent for East Spar Alliance) (1998) 87 FCR 482).
In Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Payne 2001 (2001) 202 CLR 93; (2001) 46 ATR 228, 2001 ATC 4027; Chief Executive Officer of Customs v. WMC Resources Ltd (as agent for East Spar Alliance) (1998) 87 FCR 482; Wandoo Alliance Pty Ltd v. Chief Executive Officer of Customs [2001] AATA 801, it was deemed pertinent to consider whether there was a causal, spatial or temporal link present in determining if an activity takes place 'in the course of' something.
In this instance, a causal link exists as the travel to the place where the taking of fish occurs is functionally integrated with the taking of fish. There is also a spatial link as a professional fisherman often has to traverse large areas of the sea (or other body of water) in order to find a suitable school of fish. Finally, there is a temporal link, as travel to and from the place where the fish are captured takes place in a timely fashion and forms an integral part of the activity.
Accordingly, in this instance, travel by boat to and from a place where fish are taken occurs in the course of 'taking or capturing of fish' and is therefore considered to occur 'in' 'fishing operations' as defined in section 34 of the EGCSA.
Date of decision: 2 October 2003 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 section 21 subsection 56(1) section 53 paragraph 34(1)(a) Case References: Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Payne 2001 (2001) HCA 3 46 ATR 228 2001 ATC 4027 CEO of Customs v. WMC Resources Ltd (as agent for East Spar Alliance) (1998) 158 ALR 241
Wandoo Alliance Pty Ltd v. CEO of Customs No. 1997 270 AATA 801 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2003/1002 ATO ID 2003/1003 Keywords EGCS fishing operations EGCS off-road EGCS taking, catching or capturing of fish Energy grants (credits) scheme Excise Excise payments Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 14 November 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 2 October 2003
Original statement You are here 1 July 2012
Archived