ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/215
================================================== Income Tax Assessability of income received by USA visiting lecturer - present in Australia for 183 days or less FOI status: may be released This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the taxpayer, a resident of the United States of America (USA), assessable on their Australian sourced lecturing fee under subsection 6-5(3) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. The taxpayer, a resident of the USA, is not assessable on their Australian sourced lecturing fee under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 as this income is exempt from tax under Article 14 of Schedule 2 to the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Facts
The taxpayer is a resident of the USA and is a non resident for Australian tax purposes.
The taxpayer is a professor employed by a USA university.
The taxpayer was engaged by a Australian body to give a series of lectures in Australia for which they received a flat fee. The taxpayer performs these services independently of their employment with the USA university.
The taxpayer was present in Australia for a short period of 183 days or less.
The taxpayer has no fixed base in Australia for the purpose of performing their activities.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997 provides that ordinary income derived by a non resident directly or indirectly from Australian sources, as well as other ordinary income included by a provision on a basis other than having an Australian source, is assessable.
The fee for the lecturing services provided by the taxpayer is ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
In determining liability to tax on Australian sourced income received by a non resident, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreements contained in the Agreements Act.
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except for some limited provisions).
Schedule 2 of the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and the USA (USA Convention). The USA Convention operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and USA residents.
Article 14 of the USA Convention deals with independent personal services. The Article provides that if an individual who is a resident of the USA derives income from the performance of services in an independent capacity the income shall be taxable only in the USA.
However, there are two exceptions when services are performed by a USA resident in Australia. The first is where the individual is present in Australia for more than 183 days during the Australian income tax year. The second is where the individual has a fixed base regularly available in Australia for the purpose of performing their activities. In both cases the income is subject to tax in Australia.
The lecturing fee is income received by the taxpayer from the performance of personal services in an independent capacity. Although the services were performed in Australia, the taxpayer was not present in Australia for more than 183 days and did not have a fixed base in Australia. Accordingly, the income is taxable only in the USA and is not assessable under subsection 6-5(3) of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision: 6 November 2001 Year of income: Year ending 30 June 2002 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 6-5(3)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953 section 4 Schedule 2, Article 14 Keywords United States Exempt income Academic staff Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: DW323196 Business Line: Small Business/Individual Taxpayers Date of publication: 28 February 2002 ISSN: 1445-2782