ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2010/107
==================================================

Excise
 Fuel Tax Credits: refrigerated containers - mechanically-driven compressor - marine transport
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn because it contains a view in respect of a provision of the Fuel Tax (Consequential and Transitional Provisions) Act 2006 that does not apply after the 2011-12 income year. Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of decisions for income years up to, and inlcuding, the 2011-12 income year.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is an entity's entitlement to a fuel tax credit under section 41-5 of the Fuel Tax Act 2006 (FTA), for taxable fuel it acquires between 1 July 2006 and 30 June 2012 for use in a refrigerated container (reefer) with an integral mechanically-driven compressor while the reefer is being transported by a vessel, negated or restricted by the operation of items 10 or 11 of Schedule 3 of the Fuel Tax (Consequential and Transitional Provisions) Act 2006 (Fuel Tax Transitional Act)?
Decision
No. An entity's entitlement to a fuel tax credit is not negated or restricted because the fuel is for use in marine transport which is a use that qualified for an off-road credit under the Energy Grants Credit Scheme Act 2003 (Energy Grants Act) and therefore subitems 10(5) and 11(5) of Schedule 3 of the Fuel Tax Transition Act apply.
Facts
An entity operates a marine transport enterprise and is registered for GST.
The entity acquires taxable fuel, between 1 July 2006 and 30 June 2012 for use in a reefer with an integral mechanically-driven compressor.
A reefer is a refrigerated container that ensures the quality of perishable goods during transportation by maintaining the desired temperature of its contents.
The reefer has its own fuel tank.
The reefer is placed on the vessel for transportation to its destination.
The disentitlement rules in Subdivision 41-B of the FTA do not apply.
Reasons for Decision
Section 41-5 of the FTA provides that an entity is entitled to a fuel tax credit for taxable fuel it acquires or manufactures in, or imports into Australia to the extent that it does so for use in carrying on its enterprise.
In this case, the reefer is used by the entity to transport perishable goods to the desired destination using taxable fuel in the reefer with an integral mechanically-driven compressor. Thus, the taxable fuel acquired by the entity is for a use in carrying on its enterprise and therefore a fuel tax credit entitlement exists.
However, items 10 and 11 of Schedule 3 of the Fuel Tax Transitional Act provide restrictions on entitlement to fuel tax credits for fuel acquired, manufactured or imported between 1 July 2006 and 30 June 2012 unless certain conditions are met. In particular, subitems 10(5) and 11(5) of Schedule 3 of the Fuel Tax Transitional Act provide that an entity is entitled to the credit under section 41-5 of the FTA if the entity would have been entitled to an off-road credit under the Energy Grants Act.
Section 53 of the Energy Grants Act provides that an entity is entitled to an off-road credit if that entity purchases fuel for a use by that entity that qualifies. 'Use in marine transport', is a use that qualifies.
Section 36 of the Energy Grants Act sets out the meaning of the expression 'use in marine transport'. The most pertinent provision is subsection 36(6), which states:

Use:

(a)in equipment in or on a vessel; and
(b)while the vessel is in or on the sea or fresh water; and
(c)for air-conditioning, heating, lighting or for any purpose incidental to use of the vessel:

(i)in marine transport; or
(ii)for any of the purposes mentioned in subsection (4); or
(iii)as mentioned in paragraph (5)(c);

is
 use in marine transport.

Therefore, for the fuel that is used in the reefer with an integral mechanically-driven compressor to be accepted as being for 'use in marine transport' the fuel must be for use in equipment in or on a vessel, while the vessel is in or on the sea or fresh water, and for any purpose incidental to use of the vessel in marine transport. Each test will be considered in turn.

Is the use of taxable fuel to power a reefer with an integral mechanically-driven compressor, 'use in equipment in or on a vessel'
 ?
In this instance the reefer is placed onto and transported by the entity's vessel. Whilst on the vessel, the taxable fuel is used in the reefer to maintain the quality of the contents inside the reefer.
The reefer with an integral mechanically driven compressor is equipment 'on' the vessel. Therefore this requirement is satisfied.

Is the taxable fuel used while the vessel is in or on sea or fresh water
 ?
The taxable fuel is used by the reefer while the vessel is at sea. Therefore this requirement is satisfied.

Is the taxable fuel used 'for any purpose incidental to use of the vessel in marine transport'
 ?
The phrase 'incidental to' is not defined in the Energy Grants Act in relation to marine transport and therefore takes its ordinary meaning having regard to the legislative context in which it is used.
The phrase 'incidental to' is defined in The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW as:

5.
 liable to happen in connection with; naturally appertaining to.

In this case the vessel is transporting perishable goods from one place to another requiring the use of a reefer to maintain the desired temperature of the goods during transportation. It is therefore considered that the use of taxable fuel in the reefer is both liable to happen in connection with and naturally appertaining to the transport of perishable goods by the vessel engaged in marine transport.
With the criteria prescribed by subsection 36(6) of the Energy Grants Act satisfied, the entity would have been entitled to an off-road credit for taxable fuel used in marine transport for this activity.
It follows that the entity's entitlement to an off-road credit under the Energy Grants Act for this activity means that subitems 10(5) and 11(5) of Schedule 3 of the Fuel Tax Transitional Act are satisfied.
Accordingly, an entity is entitled to a fuel tax credit under section 41-5 of the FTA for taxable fuel, acquired between 1 July 2006 and 30 June 2012, for use in a reefer with an integral mechanically-driven compressor while being transported by a vessel.

Note: This decision applies to reefers that have either an attached or built-in (fitted) mechanically-driven compressor. This decision does not apply to reefers that operate with electrically-powered compressors.

Date of decision:
  29 April 2010

Legislative References:

Fuel Tax Act 2006   section 41-5   Subdivision 41-B
Fuel Tax (Consequential and Transitional Provisions) Act 2006   item 10 of Schedule 3   subitem 10(5) of Schedule 3   item 11 of Schedule 3   subitem 11(5) of Schedule 3
Energy Grants (Credit) Scheme Act 2003   section 36   subsection 36(6)   section 53   subsection 56(1)

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2004/829

Other References:

The Macquarie Dictionary, 2001, rev. 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW.

Keywords

Excise
 Excise offsets
 FTC Full credit
 FTC marine transport
 FTC marine transport equipment
 Fuel tax credits

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  5957888

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  7 May 2010

ISSN:
 1445 - 2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
29 April 2010
Original statement

You are here
17 January 2019
Archived