ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2009/14
==================================================

Excise
 Wine Equalisation Tax: cider manufacture - the combining of apple juice condensate, apple juice concentrate and water to produced apple juice for fermentation
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as it does not accurately reflect/indicate the ATO view.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is reconstituted apple juice, apple juice for the purposes of the definition of 'cider or perry' as defined in paragraph 31-5(a) of the A New Tax System (Wine Equalisation Tax) Act 1999 (WET Act)?
Decision
Yes. Reconstituted apple juice is apple juice for the purposes of the definition of 'cider or perry' in paragraph 31-5(a) of the WET Act.
Facts
Apple juice is extracted from apples and then subjected to an evaporation process whereby water vapour is removed to produce apple juice concentrate.
As a consequence of the concentration process, volatile aromatic components are also removed from the juice. These aromatic compounds are condensed to liquid and called apple juice condensate.
The apple juice condensate is obtained solely via the concentration process and contains only the natural aromatic compounds of apple juice.
Apple juice condensate is re-introduced to concentrated apple juice to restore the original aroma and flavour of the juice.
The apple juice concentrate, apple juice condensate and water are combined to produce reconstituted apple juice, which is then fermented.
Reasons for Decision
Section 31-5 of the WET Act defines 'cider or perry' to mean a beverage that:

(a)is the product of the complete or partial fermentation of the juice or must of apples or pears; and
(b)has not had added to it, at any time, any ethyl alcohol from any other source, except as specified in the regulations; and
(c)has not had added to it, at any time, any liquor or substance (other than water or the juice or must of apples or pears) that gives colour or flavour, except as specified in the regulations; and
(d)complies with any requirements of the regulations, made for the purposes of section 31-8, relating to cider or perry.

Paragraph 31-5(a) of the WET Act requires the beverage to be the product of the fermentation of the juice of apples. However, it does not preclude the use of reconstituted apple juice to obtain apple juice for fermentation.
Whether the reconstituted apple juice is apple juice is a question of fact.
Apple juice concentrate and apple juice condensate are products derived from apple juice.
The combining of apple juice concentrate and apple juice condensate with water to produce a product that is no more than apple juice would not prevent the product of the combination being apple juice for the purposes of paragraph 31-5(a) of the WET Act.
The addition of apple juice condensate to merely reconstitute apple juice for fermentation is not adding a substance to give flavour to the juice as contemplated by paragraph 31-5(c) of the WET Act. However, adding apple juice condensate in addition to what is required to reconstitute apple juice would result in a product that is not apple juice for the purposes of paragraph 31-5(a) of the WET Act.
Furthermore, adding apple juice condensate to apple juice would amount to adding a substance to give flavour, which is not permitted under paragraph 31-5(c) of the WET Act.
As such, reconstituted apple juice which is the product of combining apple juice concentrate, apple juice condensate and water in the appropriate proportions is the same as apple juice for the purposes of paragraph 31-5(a) of the WET Act.

Note: Apple juice condensate is not always collected in the production of apple juice concentrate. The above does not imply that reconstituted apple juice must include apple juice condensate.

Date of decision:
  12 March 2009

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Wine Equalisation Tax) Act 1999   section 31-5   paragraph 31-5(a)   paragraph 31-5(c)

Keywords

Cider
 Wine equalisation tax

Business Line:
  Excise Centre of Expertise

Date of publication:
  20 March 2009

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
12 March 2009
Original statement

You are here
 5 June 2009
Archived