ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/533
==================================================

Excise
 Diesel fuel rebate scheme: agent entitled to lodge claim on behalf of principal
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is an Australian agent entitled to lodge a diesel fuel rebate application under subsection 78A(1) of the Excise Act 1901 (Excise Act) or subsection 164(1) of the Customs Act 1901 (Customs Act) on behalf of an overseas entity in respect of diesel fuel the entity has purchased for use in an eligible activity?
Decision
Yes, an Australian agent is entitled to lodge a diesel fuel rebate application under subsection 78A(1) of the Excise Act or subsection 164(1) of the Customs Act on behalf of an overseas entity in respect of diesel fuel the entity has purchased for use in an eligible activity provided that:

(a)the agent provides evidence that they have been duly authorised by the principal to make the diesel fuel rebate claim; and
(b)the overseas entity satisfies all the usual prescribed conditions and restrictions that apply to any person entitled to, and making an application for, a diesel fuel rebate.

Facts
A shipping agent wishes to make a claim for diesel fuel rebate on behalf of an overseas entity. The overseas entity has purchased diesel fuel for use by it in an activity that is eligible for a diesel fuel rebate.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 78A(1) of the Excise Act and subsection 164(1) of the Customs Act state:

A rebate is, subject to subsections (2) and (4a) and to such conditions and restrictions as are prescribed ...payable to a person who purchases diesel fuel for use by the person ...

In addition, subsection 78A(1A) of the Excise Act and 164(1A) of the Customs Act make it clear that an application for rebate must be made in the approved form by the person who has entitlement to the rebate, that is, the person who has purchased the diesel fuel for use in one of the defined activities that are eligible for a diesel fuel rebate.
In this instance, the overseas entity (the principal) has purchased the diesel fuel for use by it in an eligible activity, and therefore has an entitlement to a diesel fuel rebate.
The legal concept of agency refers to a relationship that gives a party (the 'agent') capacity to create binding relations between the party giving that capacity or authority (the principal) and third parties (see International Harvester Company of Australia Pty Ltd v. Carrigan's Hazeldene Pastoral Lease Co (1985) 100 CLR 644 at 652).
At general law, the act of an agent authorised by a principal to act on the principal's behalf binds the principal. Therefore, an authorised agent can make an application for a rebate on behalf of the principal who is entitled to the rebate.
However, such ability is limited to the extent that:

(a)the agent is able to demonstrate that they have been duly authorised by the principal to act on their behalf, by providing a written authority from the principal appointing the agent to assess and claim rebate entitlement on behalf of the principal. This would include authority for the ATO to direct rebate payments to the agent's bank account, if this is what the principal wanted to do; and
(b)the principal is able to satisfy all the usual prescribed conditions and restrictions that apply to any person entitled to, and making an application for, a diesel fuel rebate. This would include providing documents as contained in regulation 128D of the Customs Regulations 1926 and regulation 57A of the Excise Regulations 1925 evidencing their identity and address when making diesel fuel rebate claims. A further requirement would include the provision of any additional information requested in accordance with regulation 128DA of the Customs Regulations or regulation 57B of the Excise Regulations.

Date of decision:
  30 April 2004

Legislative References:

Customs Act 1901   subsection 164(1)   subsection 164(1A)
Excise Act 1901   subsection 78A(1)   subsection 78A(1A)
Customs Regulations 1926   regulation 128D   regulation 128DA
Excise Regulations 1925   regulation 57A   regulation 57B

Case References:

International Harvester Company of Australia Pty Ltd v. Carrigan's Hazeldene Pastoral Lease Co   (1985) 100 CLR 644

Related ATO Interpretative Decisions

 ATO ID 2004/454

Keywords

DFRS claims
 Diesel fuel rebate scheme

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  2 July 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
30 April 2004
Original statement

You are here
 8 January 2010
Archived