ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/275
==================================================

Income Tax
 Assessable income: Receipt of an 'early repayment benefit' upon early repayment of a fixed interest rate home loan
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is an 'early repayment benefit', received by the taxpayer upon early repayment of their fixed interest rate home loan, ordinary income and therefore, assessable income under section 6-5 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. An 'early repayment benefit', received by the taxpayer upon early repayment of their fixed interest rate home loan, is not ordinary income and therefore, not assessable income under section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer took out a fixed interest rate home loan to purchase their residence.
Prior to the expiry of the fixed interest rate loan, the property was sold and the loan was repaid in full.
A term of the loan agreement was that in the event of early, full repayment, the lender was able to recoup an early repayment cost, plus an early repayment administration fee.
A calculation was carried out by the lender in order to determine its costs arising out of the early repayment. Such costs arise where the prevailing interest rate at the date of early repayment is less than that which applied to the remainder of the taxpayer's fixed interest rate period, thereby denying the lender the higher level of interest they would have earned during that time.
In the taxpayer's circumstances, the prevailing interest rate at the date of the early repayment was actually higher than that which applied to the remainder of their fixed interest rate period. As such, there was no cost to the lender as the early repayment put the lender in a position to lend the funds at a higher level of interest than that which applied to the taxpayer's borrowings. Accordingly, the lender's calculation of its costs actually resulted in a negative figure.
The loan contract stated that the lender had absolute discretion as to whether or not it would pass on to the taxpayer any benefit it gained through early repayment.
Although not contractually obliged to do so, the lender credited to the taxpayer's loan an 'early repayment benefit' equivalent to the lender's notional saving.
Reasons for Decision
Section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of a resident taxpayer includes income according to ordinary concepts (ordinary income) derived directly or indirectly from all sources.
Whether a profit from an isolated transaction is income according to ordinary concepts, depends very much on the circumstances of the case.
Where a taxpayer not carrying on a business makes a profit, that profit is income if:

(a) the intention or purpose of the taxpayer in entering into the profit-making transaction or operation was to make a profit or gain; and
(b) the transaction or operation was entered into, and the profit was made, in carrying out a business operation or commercial transaction.

In this instance, the receipt of the 'early repayment benefit' was incidental to the early repayment of the taxpayer's home loan. Furthermore, the loan contract made it clear that the lender had absolute discretion as to whether or not it would pass on to the taxpayer any benefit it might gain through early repayment.
An objective consideration of the taxpayer's circumstances leads to a finding that the primary intention or purpose of the taxpayer in repaying the loan early was to sell their residence. Upon entering into the agreement to repay the loan and thereby sell the house, the taxpayer had no certainty that they would receive an 'early repayment benefit'. As such, the profit made from the transaction is not income as the taxpayer did not have sufficient intention to profit from the transaction.
In addition, while interest is considered to be ordinary income, the 'early repayment benefit' cannot be characterised as interest. In FC of T v. Century Yuasa Batteries (1998) 82 FCR 288; 98 ATC 4380; (1998) 38 ATR 442, the Full Federal Court stated (at ATC 4383, ATR 444) that interest

is the return, consideration, or compensation for the use or retention by one person of a sum of money belonging to, or owed to, another, and that interest must be referable to a principal.

The 'early repayment benefit' is not interest as it did not arise out of the investment of a capital sum, that is, the taxpayer was not compensated for having been deprived of the use and enjoyment of a principal sum (see also FC of T v. The Myer Emporium Ltd (1987) 163 CLR 199 at 218; 87 ATC 4363 at 4371; 18 ATR 693 at 702).
Accordingly, the 'early repayment benefit' received by the taxpayer is not ordinary income and is therefore not included in their assessable income under section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision:
  18 February 2004

Year of income:
  Year ending 30 June 2004

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   section 6-5

Case References:

FC of T v. Century Yuasa Batteries   (1998) 82 FCR 288   98 ATC 4380   (1998) 38 ATR 442

FC of T v. The Myer Emporium Ltd   (1987) 163 CLR 199   87 ATC 4363   18 ATR 693

Keywords

Borrowings & loans
 Capital receipts
 Home loan interest expenses
 Income
 Interest income
 Mortgage expenses
 Mortgages
 Payments of a private or domestic nature
 Private living expenses
 Private or domestic expenses
 Windfall gains

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3882243; 1-5RRA4OH; 1-C7EPG01

Business Line:
  Private Groups and High Wealth Individuals

Date of publication:
  26 March 2004

Date reviewed:
  10 August 2017

ISSN:
 1445-2782