ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/1012
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and pawnbroker buy-back arrangements FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn, as it is no longer necessary. The ATO view expressed in this ATO ID is a straight application of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a pawnbroker, making an input taxed financial supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it sells second-hand goods back to the customer from whom the goods were originally purchased under a buy-back arrangement?
Decision
No, the entity is not making an input taxed financial supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act when it sells second-hand goods back to the customer from whom the goods were originally purchased under a buy-back arrangement.
The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a pawnbroker. The entity enters into a buy-back arrangement with a customer.
Under the buy-back arrangement, the entity purchases second-hand goods from a customer and the customer is entitled to buy back the goods for an agreed price during the course of an agreed period.
Under the terms of the arrangement, the entity must hold the second-hand goods for the agreed period to allow the customer to buy back the goods. The entity has taken ownership of the goods and is not holding the goods as security for payment of a debt or the discharge of an obligation.
Where the customer does not buy back the goods within the agreed period, the entity is entitled to sell the goods.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply of the goods satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act, a financial supply is input taxed. Subsection 40-5(2) of the GST Act provides that financial supply has the meaning given by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations).
Subregulation 40-5.09(1) of the GST Regulations, provides that a supply is a financial supply if it is the provision, acquisition or disposal of an interest mentioned in subregulation 40-5.09(3) or 40-5.09(4) of the GST Regulations if: (a) the provision, acquisition or disposal is: • for consideration,
• in the course or furtherance of an enterprise, and
• connected with Australia. (b) The supplier is: • registered or required to be registered for GST, and
• a financial supply provider in relation to the supply of the interest. Items 2 and 3 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations provide that an interest in or under: • a debt, credit arrangement or right to credit, including a letter of credit, and
• a charge or mortgage over real or personal property is a financial interest.
The entity is purchasing second-hand goods under a buy-back arrangement. Under the terms of a buy-back arrangement, the entity purchases the second-hand goods from the customer and holds the goods for an agreed period. In contrast to a loan, in a buy-back arrangement, the entity takes ownership of the goods and does not hold the goods as security for the payment of a debt or the discharge of an obligation.
Therefore, the buy-back arrangement is an arrangement of sale rather than a credit arrangement or an arrangement of a charge or mortgage over real or personal property. The supply under a buy-back arrangement is not covered by item 2 or item 3 in the table in subregulation 40-5.09(3) of the GST Regulations.
As such, the entity is not making an input taxed financial supply under subsection 40-5(1) of the GST Act, when it sells second-hand goods back to the customer from whom the goods were originally purchased under a buy-back arrangement.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under any other provision in Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Date of decision: 28 March 2002 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 9-5 section 11-20 Division 38 Division 40 subsection 40-5(1) subsection 40-5(2) Division 66
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 subregulation 40-5.09(1) subregulation 40-5.09(3) subregulation 40-5.09(3) table item 2 subregulation 40-5.09(3) table item 3 subregulation 40-5.09(4) Keywords Goods and services tax GST second-hand goods GST supplies and acquisitions Creditable acquisition GST supply Taxable supply Input taxed supplies GST financial supplies Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 1256698 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 14 November 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 28 March 2002
Original statement You are here 5 May 2022
Archived