ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/213
================================================== Income Tax Assessable income: workers' compensation payments for loss of Army Reserve income FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as it is a straight forward application of the law. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Are periodic workers' compensation payments received by a taxpayer for their loss of Army Reserve income, but not arising from injury sustained whilst on reservist duty, included in their assessable income under section 6-5 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. Periodic workers' compensation payments received by a taxpayer for their loss of Army Reserve income are assessable income under section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997, as they are not exempt from income tax under section 51-33 of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer was employed as an Army Reserve officer and a state government employee.
The taxpayer received weekly compensation payments from a state government entity as a result of their incapacity for work due to a work related injury.
The taxpayer was not on Army Reserve duty when they sustained the compensable injury. They sustained the injury in the course of their state government employment.
The taxpayer was not required to leave the Army Reserve as a result of their compensable injury.
The weekly compensation payments were not made under the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988.
Part of the weekly compensation payments related to compensation for the taxpayer's loss of Army Reserve income.
The compensation payments were based on the taxpayer's weekly earnings before they sustained the compensable injury.
The purpose of the compensation payments was to provide an income replacement to compensate the taxpayer for their loss of earnings as a result of their incapacity to work.
Reasons for Decision
Division 6 of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of an Australian resident for taxation purposes, includes income according to ordinary concepts (ordinary income) derived directly or indirectly from all sources, unless it is exempt income.
Periodic workers' compensation payments paid to an injured employee to compensate them for their loss of earnings due to their incapacity to work, are considered ordinary income and as such, will be assessable income under section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997, unless they are exempt income under section 6-20 of the ITAA 1997. An amount of ordinary income is exempt income if it is expressly exempted from income tax.
Section 51-33 of the ITAA 1997 provides that a compensation payment for the loss of Reserve Defence Force pay and/or allowance is only exempt from tax if all of the following requirements are met: (a) the payment is made under the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988 in respect of an injury (as defined in that Act) you suffered; and
(b) you suffered your injury while serving as a member of the Naval Reserve, Army Reserve or Air Force Reserve (but not while on continuous full time service); and
(c) your injury was the sole or dominant reason for you stopping being a member of that Reserve; and
(d) your pay and/or allowances were payable for service of a kind described in paragraph (b). The Explanatory Memorandum to Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.2) 2003, which introduced section 51-33 of the ITAA 1997, explains that compensation payments for the loss of Reserve Defence Force pay and/or allowance are not made exempt from income tax by any other provision of income tax legislation. Accordingly, compensation payments for loss of Reserve Defence Force pay and/or allowance that do not satisfy the requirements of section 51-33 of the ITAA 1997 remain subject to income tax.
The compensation payments made to the taxpayer for their loss of Army Reserve income fail to satisfy the conditions set out in section 51-33 of the ITAA 1997 for the following reasons: • the payments to compensate the taxpayer for their loss of Army Reserve income was not made under the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988;
• the taxpayer's compensable injury was not sustained whilst they were actually serving in the Army Reserve; and
• the taxpayer did not resign from the Army Reserve as a result of their compensable injury. Accordingly, the compensation payments made to the taxpayer for their loss of Army Reserve income are not exempt from income tax.
Therefore, the weekly workers' compensation payments the taxpayer received for their loss of Army Reserve income are assessable income under section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision: 25 February 2004 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2001 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 6-5 section 51-33 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2001/550 Other References: Explanatory Memorandum to Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.2) 2003 Keywords Compensation for injury Defence force awards & allowances Defence force reserves Exempt income Business Line: Small Business/Individual Taxpayers Date of publication: 5 March 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 25 February 2004
Original statement You are here 9 September 2016
Archived