ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/936
================================================== Excise Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: off-road entitlements - 'at' residential premises - generator located on a wharf next to a vessel FOI status: may be released This ATO ID should be withdrawn as the fuel tax credits scheme has replaced the energy grants credit scheme for eligible fuel acquired from 1 July 2006 for the purpose of electricity generation.
This decision is applicable to eligible fuel purchased between 1 July 2003 and 30 June 2006 for the purposes of the Energy Grants (Credits Scheme) Act 2003. Entitlement to a credit for eligible fuel acquired from 1 July 2006 for use in generating electricity is dealt with under the Fuel Tax Act 2006 and Fuel Tax (Consequential and Transitional Provisions) Act 2006. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is off-road diesel fuel used in a generator located on a wharf next to a vessel, used 'at' residential premises as required by paragraph 53(4)(b) of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. Off-road diesel fuel used in a generator located on a wharf next to a vessel, is used 'at' residential premises as required by paragraph 53(4)(b) of the EGCSA.
Facts
A vessel visits an Australian port and shuts down its on-board generators while in port. An entity is contracted to provide shore electrical power to the vessel while it is in port to ensure the day to day operation of the vessel.
The generator providing the electrical power is placed on the wharf near the vessel.
The living quarters of the crew on the vessel are 'residential premises' for the purposes of the diesel fuel rebate scheme.
Reasons for Decision
Paragraph 53(4)(b) of the EGCSA provides that a person is entitled to an off-road energy credit for off-road diesel fuel they purchase for use 'at residential premises' to generate electricity for use in meeting the domestic requirements of residents of those premises.
The Federal Court considered the meaning of the word 'at' in this context a number of times under the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme, which was administered under the Excise Act 1901 and the Customs Act 1901 and was the precursor to the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme. The Excise Act and Customs Act contained a similar entitlement provision that allowed payment of a diesel fuel rebate for diesel fuel purchased for use 'at residential premises' to generate electricity for use in meeting the domestic requirements of residents of the premises.
In Re: Collector of Customs, Tasmania v. Flinders Island Community Association (1985) 7 FCR 205 (Flinders Island Case), the Federal Court found that in order to meet the requirement that the fuel is used 'at' residential premises, there must be a close connection between the use (that is, where the generator is) and the residential premises (the vessel) and that the generation take place in physical proximity to the premises.
In Collector of Customs v. Rottnest Island Authority (1994) 48 FCR 177, the Court accepted the view put forward in the Flinders Island Case but further determined that the generating plant should be 'in sufficient proximity to the premises as to enable it reasonably to be identified with the premises. It must be appurtenant to the premises and coherent with them'.
Therefore the use of off-road diesel fuel will be taken to occur 'at' residential premises if: 1. the generator is physically proximate to the premises, and
2. coherent (connected) to them. As the power generators are placed on the wharf near the vessel, there is a close connection between the generator and the vessel. The power generation takes place in sufficient physical proximity to the vessel to allow it to be reasonably identified with the premises. As such, the fuel is used 'at' the residential premises.
Date of decision: 11 July 2003 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 paragraph 53(4)(b) Case References: Collector of Customs Tasmania v. Flinders Island Community Association (1985) 7 FCR 205 Collector of Customs, v. Rottnest Island Authority (1994) 48 FCR 177 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATOID 2003/241 ATOID 2003/242 ATOID 2003/243 Keywords EGCS use of eligible fuel at certain premises EGCS use to generate electricity at residential premises Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 17 October 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 11 July 2003
Original statement You are here
26 March 2010
Archived