ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/444
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and supply of a meat cure
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID contains references to provisions of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999, which have been replaced by the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019. This ATO ID continues to apply in relation to the remade Regulations.

 A comparison table which provides the replacement provisions in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019 for regulations which are referenced in this ATO ID is available.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a food supplier, making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it sells a meat cure?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the GST Act when it sells a meat cure.
Facts
The entity is a food supplier and sells meat cure. The product is supplied for use solely in the manufacture of ham and bacon, of which the curing process is an essential part.
The meat cure consists of measurable amounts of various ingredients including protein, sugar and salt. The product is not packaged and marketed for retail sale at the time of supply.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
A supply of food is GST-free under section 38-2 of the GST Act if the product satisfies the definition of food in section 38-4 of the GST Act and the supply is not excluded from being GST-free by section 38-3 of the GST Act.
Food is defined in section 38-4 of the GST Act to include ingredients for food for human consumption (paragraph 38-4(1)(b) of the GST Act). The meat cure is an ingredient for food for human consumption and therefore satisfies the definition of food in paragraph 38-4(1)(b) of the GST Act.
However, under paragraph 38-3(1)(e) of the GST Act, a supply is not GST-free if it is food of a kind specified in regulations made for the purposes of subsection 38-3(1) of the GST Act.
Regulation 38-3.02 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 (GST Regulations), effective from 1 December 2001, deals with food additives. This regulation gives effect to paragraph 38-3(1)(e) of the GST Act and determines those foods that are not GST-free.
Subregulation 38-3.02(1) of the GST Regulations provides that food additives, other than exempt food additives, will not be GST-free. Although the term 'food additive' is used in the regulation, it is not defined elsewhere in the GST Act. The word 'additive' is defined in The Macquarie Dictionary 1997, 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, New South Wales to mean '...a substance added to a product, usually to preserve or improve its quality'.
The meat cure is a preservative as it comes within the definition of 'additive' and is therefore a food additive for GST purposes.
Subregulation 38-3.02(2) of the GST Regulations provides that some food additives are exempt food additives, the supply of which will be GST-free.
Under paragraph 38-3.02(2)(a) of the GST Regulations, a food additive which, at the time of supply, is packaged and marketed for retail sale is an exempt food additive.
The entity does not package or market the product for retail sale at the time of supply. Therefore, the meat cure is not an exempt food additive under paragraph 38-3.02(2)(a) of the GST Regulations.
To be considered an exempt food additive under paragraph 38-3.02(2)(b) of the GST Regulations, meat cure must:

•have a measurable nutritional value
•be used solely or predominantly in the composition of food, and
•be essential to the composition of that food.

The ingredients in the meat cure include measurable amounts of protein, sugar and salt. Therefore, the meat cure has measurable nutritional value for GST purposes.
The entity supplies the product for use solely in the manufacture of ham and bacon. Therefore, this product is supplied by the entity for use solely or predominantly in the composition of food.
As the curing process is an essential part of the manufacture of ham and bacon, meat cure is an ingredient that is essential to the composition of ham and bacon products.
Accordingly, the entity's product is an exempt food additive under paragraph 38-3.02(b) of the GST Regulations and it is therefore not food of a kind specified for the purposes of paragraph 38-3(1)(e) of the GST Act.
In addition, the supply of the entity's product does not fall within any of the other exclusions in section 38-3 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a GST-free supply under section 38-2 of the GST Act when it sells the meat cure.
Date of decision:
  8 July 2003

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   section 38-2   section 38-3   paragraph 38-3(1)(e)   section 38-4   paragraph 38-4(1)(b)
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999   regulation 38-3.02   subregulation 38-3.02(1)   subregulation 38-3.02(2)   paragraph 38-3.02(2)(a)   paragraph 38-3.02(2)(b)

Other References:

The Macquarie Dictionary, 1997, 3rd edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, New South Wales

Keywords

Goods and services tax
 GST free
 GST food
 Food additives
 Food for human consumption
 Ingredients for food

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  3645261

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  4 June 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782