ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/843
==================================================

Excise
 Excise - Payments - Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme - fuel used in refrigerated trailers transported by contractors
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 which was repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Can a company claim an on-road grant under section 9 of the Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999 (the Act) for fuel used in a refrigerated trailer that is transported by the prime mover of a contractor?
Decision
Yes, a company can claim an on-road grant under section 9 of the Act for fuel used in a refrigerated trailer that is transported by the prime mover of a contractor.
Facts
A company conducts a refrigerated goods transport business using their own prime movers and refrigerated trailers with a gross vehicle mass (GVM) of 20 tonnes or more. Normally the refrigerated trailers are transported by the company's own prime movers. Sometimes the refrigerated trailers are transported by other contractors who supply the fuel in their prime movers. However, the company supplies the fuel used in the refrigerated trailers while they are being transported by the contractors.
Reasons for Decision
Section 9 of the Act relevantly states:

'(1) You are entitled to a fuel grant for the use of diesel fuel or alternative fuel in a vehicle that has a GMV of 20 tonnes or more if you purchased the diesel fuel or alternative fuel, or imported it into Australia.

(2) However, you are only entitled to the grant to the extent that you use the diesel fuel or alternative fuel, in carrying on your enterprise, in operating the vehicle on a public road in Australia.'

Therefore, to be entitled to a fuel grant under the on-road scheme:

•The transport company must purchase and use the diesel fuel in a vehicle with a GVM of 20 tonnes or more; and
•The vehicle must be operated on a public road in Australia as part of the company's enterprise.

As discussed in Excise Bulletin EB 2001/1, a vehicle is not defined in the Act and therefore it takes on the ordinary meaning. The revised third edition of the Macquarie dictionary states:

'A vehicle is any receptacle, or means of transport in which something is carried or conveyed.'

The Act does not restrict the eligibility for an on-road grant to motor vehicles so a refrigerated trailer will qualify as a vehicle. Therefore, the diesel fuel purchased and used to power the refrigeration unit attached to a trailer would satisfy the first requirement above, provided the GVM was 20 tonnes or more.
Enterprise is defined in subsection 5(1) of the Act as having:

'...the meaning given by section 38 of the A New Tax System (Australian Business Number) Act 1999 (ABN Act)'

Section 38 of the ABN Act states in part:

'An enterprise is an activity, or series of activities, done:

(a)in the form of a business; or
(b)in the form of an adventure or concern in the nature of trade ...'

The company's operations are to transport perishable goods on contract using refrigerated trailers. The company normally uses its own prime movers to transport the refrigerated trailers, however, sometimes they use the prime movers of other contract transport operators. In both situations, the company is clearly conducting an enterprise and the refrigerated trailer is being operated on a public road as part of that enterprise.
Accordingly, the diesel fuel purchased and used by the company in the refrigerated trailers that it uses as part of its enterprise is eligible for a diesel fuel grant even when the trailers are transported on a public road by the prime movers of other contractors.
Date of decision:
  23 July 2002

Legislative References:

Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme Act 1999   subsection 5(1)   section 9
A New Tax System (Australian Business Number) 1999   section 38

Other References:

 Excise Bulletin EB 2001/1 Diesel and Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme - Fuel Used By Refrigerated Trailers

Keywords

Diesel & Alternative Fuels Grants Scheme
 Fuel use
 Eligible vehicles
 Refrigerated trailers

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  23 August 2002

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
23 July 2002
Original statement

You are here
16 April 2010
Archived