ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/106
================================================== Excise Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme: mining operations - removal of water FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from 1 July 2012, the date the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 was repealed.
Despite its withdrawal, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential ATO view in respect of the period the Act was in force, 1 July 2003 up to and including 30 June 2012. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the pumping of water from a mine pit to a holding pond and subsequently to surrounding waterways, 'mining operations' as defined in section 11 of the Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 (EGCSA)?
Decision
Yes. The pumping of water from a mine pit to a holding pond and subsequently to surrounding waterways is 'mining operations' as defined in section 11 of the EGCSA.
Facts
An entity operates an open cut mine.
The entity uses diesel fuel to pump water from the mine pit into a holding pond so that ore can be extracted from the mine pit. The pond is situated within the boundaries of the mine.
After treatment, the water is pumped from the holding pond into the surrounding natural waterways where it is taken away from the mine site.
Reasons for Decision
In this instance, the client is pumping the water in a two stage process. Each stage will be examined in turn:
Pumping from the mine pit to the holding pond
The term 'mining operations' is defined in section 11 of the EGCSA. The definition includes two broad categories, a number of specific activities, and a number of specific exclusions.
The two broad categories appear in subsection 11(1) of the EGCSA and cover: (a) exploration or prospecting for minerals, or the removal of overburden and other activities undertaken in the preparation of a site to enable mining for minerals to commence; or
(b) operations for the recovery of minerals, being: (i) mining for those minerals including the recovery of salts by evaporation; or
(ii) the beneficiation of those minerals, or of ores bearing those minerals. As the water occurs naturally in the mine pit, the mining company must remove it before it can mine for the minerals. The pumping of the water from the mine pit to the holding pond would qualify as 'other activities undertaken in the preparation of a site to enable mining for minerals to commence'. Therefore the pumping of the water would qualify as 'mining operations' under paragraph 11(1)(a) of the EGCSA.
Even if the water collected in the pit as a result of 'mining operations', and required continual pumping to remove it, the pumping of the water would constitute part of the 'mining for those minerals' and would therefore qualify as 'mining operations' under paragraph 11(1)(b) of the EGCSA.
Pumping from the holding pond into the waterway
One of the specific activities included within the definition of 'mining operations' is a 'mining waste activity', which is defined in section 16 of the EGCSA. The term 'mining waste activity' is defined as meaning two activities; • the removal of waste products of a mining operation referred to in paragraphs 11(1)(a) or 11(1)(b) of the EGCSA from the place where the mining operation is carried on, or
• the disposal of waste products of a mining operation referred to in paragraphs 11(1)(a) or 11(1)(b) of the EGCSA at the place where the mining operation is carried on. We have already determined that the removal of the water from the pit constituted 'mining operations' for the purposes of paragraphs 11(1)(a) and/or 11(1)(b) of the EGCSA. As the water is unwanted by the mining company, it can be accepted that the water is a waste product from 'mining operations' referred to in paragraphs 11(1)(a) or 11(1)(b) of the EGCSA.
As the waste product of a 'mining operation' contained in paragraphs 11(1)(a) and/or 11(1)(b) of the EGCSA is being removed from the place where the 'mining operation' is carried on, the requirements of the first category of 'mining waste activity' is satisfied.
Summary
The pumping of water from the mine pit to the holding ponds and, subsequently to surrounding waterways which are located away from the 'mining operation' is 'mining operations' as defined in section 11 of the EGCSA.
Date of decision: 15 January 2004 Legislative References: Energy Grants (Credits) Scheme Act 2003 section 11 subsection 11(1) paragraph 11(1)(a) paragraph 11(1)(b) section 16 Keywords EGCS beneficiation EGCS mining operation EGCS pumping of water Energy grants (credits) scheme Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 6 February 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 15 January 2004
Original statement You are here 1 July 2012
Archived