ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/386
================================================== Income Tax Group company loss transfers: loss company no longer in existence FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn because it involves the exercise of a discretion. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Can the Commissioner exercise the discretion pursuant to paragraph 170-50(2)(d) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) to grant further time for the creation of an agreement to transfer an additional amount of tax loss from a loss company to an income company, if the loss company has been de-registered since making the original loss transfer agreement with the income company?
Decision
No. The Commissioner does not have the capacity to exercise the discretion pursuant to paragraph 170-50(2)(d) of the ITAA 1997 in this manner.
Facts
Loss Company incurred a tax loss in an income year. It transferred part of the tax loss to Income Company 1 and the remainder to Income Company 2 in respect of that year. Loss Company was de-registered during the following year.
A determination was subsequently made that the assessable income of Income Company 1 for the income year should be reduced. The effect of the determination was that the tax loss transferred to Income Company 1 exceeded the maximum amount that Income Company 1 could use in the income year. Pursuant to section 170-65 of the ITAA 1997, only that maximum amount would be taken to have been transferred under the agreement between Loss Company and Income Company 1.
As a result, Income Company 2 requested the Commissioner to exercise his discretion under paragraph 170-50(2)(d) of the ITAA 1997 to allow further time for modification of the original agreement between Loss Company and Income Company 2, or the creation of a new agreement, to allow the amount that could not be used by Income Company 1 to be transferred to Income Company 2.
Reasons for Decision
Where section 170-65 of the ITAA 1997 deems the transfer of a lesser amount of tax loss than the amount specified in an agreement between a loss company and income company, it generally will be the case that the excess amount becomes available for utilisation by the loss company. In such circumstances, one option for the loss company may be to make a further transfer to a second income company with which it has already made an agreement for an income year. Taxation Determination TD 2003/23 states that this further transfer necessarily represents a separate, additional agreement rather than a modification of the original agreement. If the second income company has already lodged its income tax return for the income year, a favourable exercise of the Commissioner's discretion pursuant to paragraph 170-50(2)(d) of the ITAA 1997 will be required before the additional agreement can be made.
In this regard, it is relevant to note that paragraph 170-50(2)(d) of the ITAA 1997 only gives power to the Commissioner to allow further time to make a loss transfer. It does not give power to the Commissioner to waive other requirements under the law. These requirements include the existence of a loss company with an available tax loss, the existence of an income company with assessable income, and an agreement by both companies made in writing and signed by the public officer of each company (section 170-50 of the ITAA 1997). Hence, a favourable exercise of the discretion to allow further time pursuant to paragraph 170-50(2)(d) of the ITAA 1997 will be of no benefit where the fundamental conditions for making a valid loss transfer cannot be satisfied.
In the circumstances described above, as Loss Company has been de-registered and is no longer in existence, there is no capacity to enter into an agreement to transfer the amount of tax loss that could not be used by Income Company 1. The conditions for making a valid tax loss transfer cannot be satisfied.
Date of decision: 19 March 2004 Year of income: Period from 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2000 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subdivision 170-A section 170-65 section 170-50 paragraph 170-50(2)(d) Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Determination TD 2003/23 Keywords Group company loss transfers Business Line: Public Groups and International Date of publication: 7 May 2004 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 19 March 2004
Original statement You are here
19 February 2010
Archived