ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/9
==================================================

Income Tax
 Primary Production income: Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payment
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn as the ATO is reconsidering the view expressed in the ATO ID.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Are Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payments (ECRPs) paid to the taxpayer under the Farm Households Support Act 1992 (FHSA) classed as 'assessable primary production income' for the purposes of the calculating the 'averaging' concession available under section 392-80 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
No. ECRPs received by the taxpayer are not classed as assessable primary production income for the purposes of calculating the 'averaging' concession available under section 392-80 of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer is a farmer. The taxpayer receives ECRPs every fortnight from Centrelink. The ECRPs are equivalent to the Newstart Allowance and are paid to assist farmers with their everyday living expenses. In order to qualify for the ECRPs, section 8A of FHSA specifies that the taxpayer must:

• hold a current Exceptional Circumstances certificate, issued by the relevant Rural Adjustment Authority, which identifies the farm enterprise as one that is in an Exceptional Circumstances affected area;
• be a farmer;
• be at least 18 years old;
• be an Australian resident and living in Australia; and
• not be on Newstart Allowance, or another social security benefit or pension, or a service pension from the Department of Veteran Affairs.

For the purposes of the FHSA, 'farmer' is defined as a person who:

• has a right or interest in the land used for the purpose of a farm enterprise; and
• contributes a significant part of his or her labour and capital to the farm enterprise; and
• derives a significant part of his or her income from the farm enterprise.

Reasons for Decision
Subsection 392-80(2) of the ITAA 1997 provides that a taxpayer's 'assessable primary production income' for the current year is the amount of that taxpayer's

* basic assessable income for the current year that was derived from, or resulted from your carrying on a *primary production business.

* denotes a term defined in subsection 995-1(1) of the ITAA 1997

The issue of what constitutes income which has 'derived from, or resulted from carrying on a primary production business' was considered in Taxation Ruling IT 2228 in the context of futures transactions. IT 2228 provides that income derived from futures transactions (where the quantity of goods covered by the futures transaction corresponds by and large to the estimated production, and where there is a subsequent sale of the kind covered by the trading) is primary production income because the futures transaction are considered an integral part of the primary producer's business.
However, if a primary producer were to enter into a futures contract or contracts in respect of a quantity of a commodity that was significantly more than his or her own estimated production, or in respect of a commodity which the taxpayer did not produce, this would be regarded as outside the scope of the primary production business. The resulting profit or loss would not be accepted as arising from the primary production business (see paragraphs 23 and 24 of IT 2228).
Accordingly, for income to be derived from, or to be considered as having 'resulted from' carrying on a primary production business, there must be a congruence between the income received and the income ordinarily derived from or resulting from the primary producer's trade or business.
The ECRPs are equivalent to the Newstart Allowance to assist farmers with their everyday living expenses. Although the ECRPs are payable only if the taxpayer is a farmer as defined, there is no congruence between the ECRP and the income ordinarily derived from or resulting from the primary production trade or business.
Therefore, ECRPs received by the taxpayer, a farmer, from Centrelink are not classed as 'assessable primary production income' for the purposes of calculating the 'averaging' concession available under section 392-80 of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision:
  18 December 2003

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2002

Legislative References:

Income Tax Assessment Act 1997   section 392-80   subsection 392-80(2)
Farm Household Support Act 1992   The Act

Related Public Rulings (including Determinations)

Taxation Ruling IT 2228

Keywords

Abnormal income
 Grants of financial assistance & funding
 Income averaging
 Income support payments
 Primary production income

Business Line:
  Business and Personal Taxes Centre of Expertise

Date of publication:
  9 January 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
18 December 2003
Original statement

You are here
11 November 2005
Archived