ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/30
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and preparation of special export documents FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database as it is superseded by Goods and Services Tax Rulings GSTR 2004/7 and GSTR 2007/2. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is the entity, a supplier of services, making a GST-free supply under Division 38 of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act), when it prepares special export documents for its client who is making a GST-free export of goods?
Decision
No, the entity is not making a GST-free supply under Division 38 of the GST Act when it prepares special export documents for its client who is making a GST-free export of goods.
The entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Facts
The entity is a supplier of services. The entity prepares special export documents for its client.
The entity's client is an Australian resident who exports goods from Australia GST-free. The export documents are a requirement of the Australian Customs Service and the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service. The client is in Australia when the entity prepares the export documents. The entity does not have an interest in the goods that are exported.
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST). The supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act.
Reasons for Decision
Division 38 of the GST Act outlines the supplies that are GST-free. Under section 38-185 of the GST Act, the export of goods, in certain circumstances, is GST-free. Under section 38-190 of the GST Act, certain supplies of things other than goods or real property, for consumption outside of Australia, are also GST-free. In order to determine whether a supply is GST-free under either of these sections, the characteristics of the supply must be examined.
The entity prepares export documents for a client who exports goods GST-free. However, the entity is not exporting the goods and does not have an interest in the goods that are exported. As the supply made by the entity cannot be characterised as the export of goods, section 38-185 of the GST Act is not applicable. The preparation of export documents by the entity is a supply of services.
Section 38-190 of the GST Act provides that in certain circumstances, the supply of things other than goods or real property for consumption outside of Australia is GST-free. The entity is supplying things other than goods or real property. It is supplying its services. Therefore, it is appropriate to consider this provision.
As the entity is making a supply to an Australian resident, item 3 in the table in subsection 38-190(1) of the GST Act (Item 3) is of most relevance. Item 3 provides that a supply is GST-free where: •it is made to a recipient who is not in Australia when the thing supplied is done;
•it is effectively used or enjoyed outside of Australia;
•it is not a supply of work physically performed on goods situated in Australia when the thing supplied is done; and
•it is not a supply directly connected with real property situated in Australia. To satisfy the requirements of Item 3, the supply must be made to a recipient who is not in Australia at the time of the supply. The entity's client is in Australia when the export documents are prepared. In addition, the export documents are a requirement of the Australian Customs Service and the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service and are therefore effectively used in Australia. As such, the supply is not GST-free under Item 3.
The entity is registered for GST and the supply satisfies the other positive limbs of section 9-5 of the GST Act. Furthermore, the supply is neither GST-free under Division 38 of the GST Act nor input taxed under Division 40 of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a taxable supply under section 9-5 of the GST Act when it prepares special export documents for its client who is making a GST-free export of goods.
Date of decision: 25 October 2002 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 section 9-5 Division 38 section 38-185 section 38-190 subsection 38-190(1) table item 3 Division 40 Keywords Goods and services tax Exports Consumption outside Australia GST supplies & acquisitions Taxable supply Business Line: GST Date of publication: 14 February 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 25 October 2002
Original statement You are here
13 June 2008
Archived