ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/244
================================================== Excise Diesel fuel rebate scheme: recovery of feldspar FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database because it contains a view in respect of the diesel fuel rebate provisions of the Excise Act 1901 and or the Customs Act 1901 that were repealed with effect from 1 July 2003. Despite its withdrawal from the database, this ATO ID continues to be a precedential view in respect of decisions for fuel purchased before 1 July 2003. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
For the purposes of the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme, is the recovery of feldspar (or felspar) an eligible activity within the definition of 'mining operations' in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act 1901.
Decision
Yes. Feldspar is within the definition of 'mineral' and mining for minerals is within the definition of 'mining operations' in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act.
Facts
The entity is contracted to a mining company to carry out the recovery of 'feldspar' (also known as 'felspar').
The activities for recovery involve the drilling, blasting, extraction and haulage of ore and ballast material to specific locations on the mining company's leases, including open pit, stockpiling areas and a quarry.
The recovered material is high grade feldspar and is exported for use in the ceramics industry.
Reasons for Decision
The Australian Oxford Dictionary 1999, Oxford University Press, Australia, defines 'feldspar' as: Any of a group of aluminium silicates of potassium, sodium, or calcium which are the most abundant minerals in the earth's crust 'Mining operations' is an eligible activity for the purposes of the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme. Paragraph (b) of the definition of 'mining operations' in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act defines that term as meaning 'operations for the recovery of minerals'.
Subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act defines 'minerals' as meaning: minerals in any form, whether solid, liquid or gaseous and whether organic or inorganic, except: (a)sand, sandstone, soil, slate, clay (other than bentonite or kaolin), basalt, granite, gravel or water; or
(b)limestone (other than agricultural use limestone). The Australian Oxford Dictionary defines 'mineral' as 'a substance obtained by mining'. Therefore a factor to be considered in determining if a substance is a mineral is whether the extraction or recovery process would correspond to the normal understanding of the term 'mining'.
The definition of 'minerals' provided by subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act, therefore, adopts the ordinary meaning of 'minerals'. It then clarifies the meaning in respect of form and chemical qualities - that is, a mineral can be solid, liquid or gaseous and organic or inorganic - and restricts it by excluding certain substances (other than bentonite, kaolin and agricultural use limestone).
The Courts have taken the view that the term 'minerals' has in its ordinary meaning the denotation of substances which can be won by mining (as per the comments of Barwick C J in Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. ICI Australia (1972) 127 CLR 529; 72 ATC 4213; (1972) 3 ATR 321). This denotation is reinforced by the definition of 'mining operations' contained in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act, with its concentration on 'mining for minerals' and the 'recovery' of minerals, of which mining is an essential part.
Feldspar is a 'mineral' within the ordinary meaning of that word and is subject to operations for its recovery and those operations may be characterised as 'mining'. Feldspar is not excluded from the definition of 'minerals' in section 164(7) of the Customs Act.
Consequently, feldspar is a 'mineral' for the purposes of the definition of 'mining operations' in subsection 164(7) of the Customs Act. As recovery of feldspar is an operation for the recovery of a mineral, it falls within the definition 'mining operations' and is therefore an eligible activity for the purposes of the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme. History note: The phrase "other than" has been added to the 5th paragraph of the Reasons for Decision to avoid ambiguity. Date of decision: 8 April 2003 Legislative References: Customs Act 1901 subsection 164(7) Case References: Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. ICI Australia (1972) 127 CLR 529 72 ATC 4213 (1972) 3 ATR 321 Other References: Australian Oxford Dictionary 1999, Oxford University Press, Australia Keywords DFRS mining Diesel fuel rebate scheme Excise Excise payments Business Line: Excise Date of publication: 11 April 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 8 April 2003
Original statement You are here 8 January 2010
Archived