ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/230
================================================== Income tax Assessability of consulting income received by an Australian resident working for a German company in Australia FOI status: may be released This ATO ID contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been re-enacted or remade. The ATO ID is current in relation to the re-enacted or remade provisions.
Australia's tax treaties and other agreements except for the Taipei Agreement are set out in the Australian Treaty Series. The citation for each is in a note to the applicable defined term in sections 3AAA or 3AAB of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is income derived by the taxpayer, a resident of Australia, for consulting in Australia on behalf of German firms, assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. The income derived by the taxpayer from consulting on behalf of German firms in Australia is assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The taxpayer intends to earn income from working as an independent consultant. The taxpayer has been approached by a German based company to represent their interests in Australia for a short period of time.
The taxpayer will be acting on behalf of the German based company in lobbying Australian companies and the Australian Government.
The taxpayer will undertake the independent consultancy work from home. The taxpayer will not have an office in Germany.
Remuneration will be paid by the German based company directly into the taxpayer's German bank account.
The taxpayer will only be paid for the services provided, and will not be paid if the contract is terminated.
Reasons for Decision
Subsection 6-5 (2) of the ITAA 1997 provides that the assessable income of an Australian resident will include ordinary income derived from all sources, whether in or out of Australia, during the income year.
Salary and wages are ordinary income for the purposes of subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997.
However, when income is derived from a foreign source, it is necessary to consider not only the income tax laws but also any applicable double tax agreement contained in the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 (the Agreements Act).
Section 4 of the Agreements Act incorporates that Act with the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) and ITAA 1997 so that those Acts are read as one. The Agreements Act effectively overrides the ITAA 1936 and the ITAA 1997 where there are inconsistent provisions (except in some limited situations).
Schedule 9 to the Agreements Act contains the double tax agreement between Australia and Germany (the German Agreement). The German Agreement operates to avoid the double taxation of income received by Australian and German residents.
Article 13 of the German Agreement provides that income derived by an individual who is a resident of Australia in respect of professional services, or other independent activities of a similar character, shall be taxable only in Australia unless the taxpayer has a fixed base regularly available to them in Germany for the purpose of performing their activities. If the taxpayer has such a fixed base, the income may be taxed in Germany but only so much of it as is attributable to that fixed base.
In Thiel v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1990) 171 CLR 338; 21 ATR 531; 90 ATC 4717 (Thiel), the High Court accepted that the OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital (the OECD Model) may be relevant to the interpretation of Double Tax Agreements based on the OECD Model. The High Court approved recourse to the OECD Model under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention (see paragraph 102 of Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13).
Article 13 of the German Agreement is the same in substance as the former Article 14 of the OECD Model.
Paragraph 2 of 'Commentary on Article 14' in the OECD Model defines the concept of professional services to include professional activities of an 'independent' nature. Thus the provision of consulting services by the taxpayer is considered independent personal services for the purposes of article 13 of the German Agreement.
Paragraph 4 of 'Commentary on Article 14' in the OECD Model suggests that a fixed base is a centre of activity of a fixed or a permanent nature, and would include a physician's consulting room or the office of an architecture or lawyer. The taxpayer will not have an office or any other business premises in Germany.
The taxpayer will derive income from his consultancy. As the taxpayer is a resident of Australia for tax purposes, and does not have a fixed base (such as an office) in Germany, Article 13 of the German Agreement provides that this income will be assessable in Australia, and as a consequence, the consultancy income will not be taxed in Germany.
Therefore, the income the taxpayer receives from consulting in Australia will be assessable under subsection 6-5(2) of the ITAA 1997, as the German Agreement provides that Australia has the right to tax that income.
Date of decision: 28 July 2005 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2006 Year ended 30 June 2007 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 subsection 6-5(2)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 subsection 25(1)
International Tax Agreements Act 1953 section 4 Schedule 9-Article 13 Case References: Thiel v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1990) 171 CLR 338 90 ATC 4717 21 ATR 531 Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Ruling TR 2001/13 Other References: OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital (Published on 23 October 1997) Keywords Double tax agreements Foreign source income Germany Independent Personal Services Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 4425640 Business Line: Public Groups and International Date of publication: 12 August 2005 ISSN: 1445-2782