ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/228
================================================== Goods and Services Tax GST and ability to vary an initial offer for the purpose of arbitration of a long-term non-reviewable contract FOI status: may be released CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Can the entity, a supplier under a long-term non-reviewable contract, vary the terms of an 'initial offer' to extend the initial offer period when it is faced with insufficient time to complete the arbitration process prescribed in section 15L of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax Transition) Act 1999 (GST Transition Act)?
Decision
No, the entity cannot vary the terms of an initial offer once it has been made. However, the entity can make a further initial offer and restart the arbitration process if the further initial offer period lapses without acceptance, or the recipient rejects the further initial offer made.
Facts
The entity is a supplier under a long-term non-reviewable contract. The entity wishes to change the price for the supply it makes under the contract to account for the goods and services tax (GST) payable from 1 July 2005. The entity and the recipient of the supply are unable to agree on a price change. The entity decides to use the arbitration process provided by Subdivision C of Division 2 of the GST Transition Act.
In accordance with section 15K of the GST Transition Act, the entity makes an initial offer to the recipient to change the price of the supply. The recipient fails to accept the offer. In accordance with section 15L of the GST Transition Act, the entity then applies to an arbitrator for appointment of an assessor to determine an appropriate price change.
The entity becomes aware that the assessor will not be able to complete the price determination within the 28 day time period stipulated in paragraph 15L(1)(d) of the GST Transition Act. The entity proposes to get around this difficulty by varying the initial offer to extend the offer period as a way of deferring the start of the 28 day time period.
Reasons for Decision
Under paragraph 15L(1)(d) of the GST Transition Act, an appointed assessor must make a determination of an appropriate change in the consideration for the supply under the contract within 28 days of the end of the offer period.
Paragraph 15K(1)(c) of the GST Transition Act states that the initial offer must state the period (the initial offer period) for which the offer remains open. There is no provision in the legislation that provides that the supplier can amend the terms of an initial offer.
Although as a matter of contract law, offers can be withdrawn, rejected, varied, or revitalised, the initial offer referred to in section 15K of the GST Transition Act is part of a prescribed arbitration process.
Subsection 15L(2) of the GST Transition Act provides that a supplier must not apply to an arbitrator until after the earlier of the end of the initial offer period or the recipient giving the supplier a written rejection of the initial offer. If a supplier could change the originally specified 'initial offer period' after the offer has been given, it would create doubt as to when the supplier would be authorised to apply to an arbitrator.
Accordingly, the entity cannot vary the terms of the initial offer after that offer has been given to the recipient. This includes extending the initial offer period when the entity is faced with insufficient time to complete the arbitration process prescribed in section 15L of the GST Transition Act. Note: If the entity requires more time to complete the arbitration process or wishes to alter the terms of the offer, it may make a further 'initial offer' under section 15K of the GST Transition Act. This would restart the arbitration process if the further initial offer period lapses without acceptance or the recipient rejects the further initial offer made. Date of decision: 19 July 2005 Legislative References: A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax Transition) Act 1999 section 15K paragraph 15K(1)(c) section 15L paragraph 15L(1)(d) subsection 15L(2) Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2005/227 Other References: GST and long-term non-reviewable contracts (NAT 12997) Keywords Goods and services tax GST long term lease GST property & construction GST transitional issues Siebel/TDMS Reference Number: 4708139 Business Line: Indirect Tax Date of publication: 5 August 2005 ISSN: 1445-2782