ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/105
==================================================

Superannuation
 Choice of superannuation fund: choice made before 1 July 2005
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database as subsection 32F(1A) and subsection 32NA(3) of the Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 has been enacted to address the issue.".

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
If an employee chooses a fund before 1 July 2005, will employer contributions to the employee's chosen fund reduce the employer's liability to the superannuation guarantee charge (SGC) and satisfy the choice of fund requirements?
Decision
Yes. If an employee actively chooses a fund before 1 July 2005, employer contributions to the employee's chosen fund will reduce the employer's liability to the SGC and satisfy the choice of fund requirements. The employer will consequently have no need to provide a Standard choice form to the employee by 28 July 2005.
Facts
The employer has always allowed employees to choose the complying superannuation fund into which superannuation guarantee (SG) contributions will be paid. The employer allowed employees to choose any complying superannuation fund and did not restrict their choice to a selection of preferred funds.
An employee chose a fund on 20 January 2005.
The employee is not employed under an Australian workplace agreement, certified agreement, State award or State industrial agreement.
The employee's choice was made in writing and contained all the information required under the law and associated regulations for the choice to be valid.
The employee's chosen fund is an eligible choice fund and is a fund to which the employer can make contributions for the benefit of the employee.
The employer accepts the choice and makes contributions for the benefit of the employee to the employee's chosen fund starting from 20 January 2005.
Reasons for Decision
The choice of fund requirements, which form part of the Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 (SGAA), take effect from 1 July 2005. Section 32C of the SGAA details the types of contributions that will satisfy the requirements. Subsection 32C(1) ensures contributions satisfy the requirements if they are made by an employer to a 'chosen fund' of the employee.
Subsection 32F(1) of the SGAA states that if an employee wants a fund to be their chosen fund, the employee must give the employer written notice to that effect. The chosen fund must be an 'eligible choice fund' and must be a fund to which the employer can make contributions for the benefit of the employee (subsection 32G). An 'eligible choice fund' is defined by section 32D of the SGAA to include complying superannuation funds and retirement savings accounts.
Ordinarily, an employee's choice is facilitated by the employer providing a Standard choice form to the employee.
Section 32N of the SGAA sets out the circumstances in which an employer is required to give their employees a Standard choice form and the timeframes in which to do so. For example, under subsection 32N(1), an employer must provide a Standard choice form to all existing employees by 28 July 2005.
However, subsection 32NA(1) of the SGAA states that an employer is not required to give an employee a Standard choice form if the employee has chosen a fund under section 32F by the times specified in section 32N. For example, for an existing employee, the employer is not required to give that employee a Standard choice form if the employee has chosen a fund by 28 July 2005.
In the circumstances of this case, the employee chose a fund on 20 January 2005. The employee provided all the information required by the law and the associated regulations and the choice was in writing. The fund chosen by the employee is a complying fund to which the employer can make contributions. The employer accepts the choice and starts making contributions to the employee's chosen fund from 20 January 2005.
These contributions satisfy the requirements under subsection 32C(1) of the SGAA as they are made by an employer to a 'chosen fund' of the employee. The contributions to the employee's chosen fund will reduce the employer's liability to the SGC and meet the choice of fund requirements.
The employer will therefore have no need to provide the employee with a Standard choice form in July 2005.

Note 1: An employee can still request a Standard choice form from the employer. Under subsection 32N(3), the employer must provide a Standard choice form to the employee within 28 days of receiving a request to do so from the employee (unless the employee has been given a Standard choice form within the previous 12 months).

Note 2: Employers do not have to wait until 1 July 2005 to provide the Standard choice form to their employees. Employers can start getting ready to meet the choice of fund requirements. The ATO released the Standard choice form on 14 March 2005. This means an employer can provide a Standard choice form to an employee any time from 14 March 2005.

Date of decision:
  13 April 2004

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2005

Legislative References:

Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992   section 32C   subsection 32C(1)   subsection 32D   section 32F   subsection 32F(1)   section 32FA   subsection 32G   section 32N   subsection 32N(1)   subsection 32N(3)   subsection 32NA(1)

Keywords

Superannuation guarantee scheme
 Superannuation policies
 Superannuation portability
 Superannuation contributions for employers

Business Line:
  Superannuation

Date of publication:
  22 April 2005

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
13 April 2004
Original statement

You are here
 7 May 2010
Archived