ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2003/985
================================================== Income Tax Compensation receipts - taxation of further amounts received by Great Central Mines shareholders FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn as it is a simple restatement of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Is compensation paid by a company to the taxpayer, a former Great Central Mines (GCM) shareholder, assessable as either ordinary or statutory income?
Decision
Yes. The compensation paid was made up of three components. The first component of the receipt is included in the calculation of any net capital gain included in the shareholder's 1999 taxation return, as additional capital proceeds received in respect of the takeover of the shares in GCM. The second and third components of the receipt, being pre-judgement and post-judgement interest respectively, are to be included as interest income in the taxpayer's 2003 taxation return.
Facts
The taxpayer owned shares in GCM. Some shares were acquired before 20 September 1985 and some afterwards.
GCM was taken over by Yandal Gold Pty Ltd (Yandal) in early 1999. Due to concerns about the takeover process, Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) contended that the shareholders had accepted a lower amount as the price per share on the takeover than should have been the case.
ASIC took Yandal to court and after a lengthy battle through various levels of courts, judgement was handed down granting former GCM shareholders additional sums (first component) to compensate them for the disadvantage they had suffered as a result of the takeover by Yandal. These amounts were paid to the taxpayer during the year ended 2003. The amount also included pre-judgement and post-judgement interest (second and third components respectively).
Reasons for Decision
Taxation Ruling TR 95/35 deals with the capital gains treatment of compensation receipts. The ruling advocates a look-through approach, which identifies the most relevant asset to which the compensation amount is most directly related. Paragraph 4 of this ruling states that where the amount of compensation is received by a taxpayer wholly in respect of the disposal of an underlying asset, or part of an underlying asset of the taxpayer, the compensation represents additional consideration received for the disposal of that asset.
The most relevant asset in respect of which compensation has been received by the taxpayer is their shares in GCM. The additional money received (first component) will therefore be treated as additional capital proceeds received in respect of the takeover of these shares.
For the shares acquired before 20 September 1985, there will be no CGT consequences. For the shares acquired on or after 20 September 1985, the additional proceeds may lead to an increased capital gain, if the original disposal had resulted in a capital gain, or a reduced capital loss, if the original disposal had resulted in a capital loss.
The adjusted capital gain or capital loss needs to be reflected in the taxpayer's assessable income for the 1999 income tax year. Under subsection 170(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 the Commissioner may amend the taxpayer's assessment (where there has been no fraud or evasion) within a 4 year period which commences on the day after the day the tax became due and payable for the original 1999 assessment (see note 2).
The receipt of pre-judgement interest included in compensation received in respect of non-personal injury, is considered in ATO Interpretative Decision 2003/404 to be ordinary income, and assessable under section 6-5 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997). The receipt of post-judgement interest is considered in paragraph 26 of the Taxation Ruling TR 95/35 and is also assessable income of the taxpayer under section 6-5 of the ITAA 1997. Both pre and post-judgement interest income components of the payment should be included as assessable income of the taxpayer in the 2003 income year.
Note 1: For a taxpayer who has elected for shorter period of review (SPOR) the maximum period of amending the assessment (where there has been no fraud or evasion) is 2 years which commences on the day after the day the tax became due and payable on the original assessment. However this will not affect the amendments to the GCM shareholder's assessments, as the SPOR system was available to taxpayers for assessments to the 2001 income year and later years only.
Note 2: For companies and funds, the four year period commences on the day after the day on which the assessment is deemed by section 166A of the ITAA 1936 to have been made.
Date of decision: 23 October 2003 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 1999 Year ended 30 June 2003 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 section 166A subsection 170(2)
Income Tax Assessment Tax 1997 section 6-5 Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Ruling IT 2444
Taxation Ruling TR 95/35 Related ATO Interpretative Decisions ATO ID 2003/404 Keywords Amendment of assessments Capital gains Capital gains tax CGT assets CGT capital proceeds CGT event A1-disposal of a CGT asset Compensation Income Court judgements Interest in underlying asset Interest income Time of CGT event Business Line: Losses & CGT Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 7 November 2003 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 23 October 2003
Original statement You are here
19 March 2010
Archived