ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2007/79
==================================================

Excise
 Fuel Tax Credits: omitted fuel tax credits - choice between revising the original BAS to claim credits and claiming credits in a later BAS
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn and has been replaced by ATO ID 2014/4. The ATO ID continues to apply to tax periods, and fuel tax return period, ending on or before 30 June 2012, and also in relation to payments and refunds that:

(a) do not relate to any tax periods or fuel tax return periods; and
(b) relate to liabilities or entitlement that arose on or before 30 June 2012.

This ATO ID was amended by replacing the reference to section 105-55 of the Taxation Administration Act 1953 with a reference to section 47-5 of the Fuel Tax Act 2006. Date of amendment 25 January 2013.

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Where an entity did not claim a fuel tax credit entitlement in an earlier activity statement, can the entity choose between revising its earlier activity statement under subsection 65-5(1) of the Fuel Tax Act 2006 (FTA), or including the fuel tax credit in a subsequent activity statement under subsection 65-5(4) of the FTA?
Decision
Yes, the entity has a choice. It can either revise its earlier activity statement to include the fuel tax credit, or include the fuel tax credit in a subsequent activity statement.
Facts
The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
The entity acquired fuel in a tax period.
The entity had an entitlement to an input tax credit for the purposes of GST in relation to the acquisition of the fuel.
The input tax credit was attributable to the same tax period.
The entity is entitled to a fuel tax credit in respect of the acquisition.
The entity realises in a subsequent tax period that it has not claimed the fuel tax credit.
Reasons for Decision
Pursuant to section 41-5 of the FTA, an entity is entitled to a fuel tax credit if it acquires, manufactures, or imports taxable fuel for use in carrying on its enterprise.
Division 65 of the FTA sets out the attribution rules for fuel tax credits and fuel tax adjustments.
Subsection 65-5(1) of the FTA provides that a fuel tax credit is attributable to the same tax period to which the input tax credit for the fuel is attributable under the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act).
The entity's input tax credit was attributable to an earlier tax period, and therefore their fuel tax credit is also attributable to the earlier tax period.
However, subsection 65-5(4) of the FTA provides for the later attribution of a fuel tax credit in certain circumstances and states:

If your return for a *tax period or *fuel tax return period states a *net fuel amount that does not take into account a fuel tax credit that is attributable to the period mentioned in subsection (1), (2) or (3), then the credit:

(a) ceases to be attributable to that period; and
(b) becomes attributable to the first period that does take it into account.

The effect of this subsection is that, if an entity does not claim their fuel tax credit in an activity statement for the tax period to which the fuel tax credit is originally attributable and chooses to claim the fuel tax credit in an activity statement for a subsequent tax period, the fuel tax credit ceases to be attributable to the earlier tax period and instead becomes attributable to the tax period in which the entity ultimately lodges an activity statement that includes the fuel tax credit. Therefore, an entity can choose to include a fuel tax credit in a subsequent activity statement in which case the fuel tax credit will become attributable to that tax period.
However, subsection 65-5(4) of the FTA does not prevent an entity from revising an earlier activity statement to include the fuel tax credit. In that case, the fuel tax credit will have been taken into account for the tax period by virtue of the revised activity statement so it does not cease to be attributable to that period.
Accordingly, where an entity has omitted to claim a fuel tax credit, they can choose to either:

•revise their activity statement for the tax period in which the fuel was originally attributable under subsection 65-5(1) of the FTA, or
•include the fuel tax credit in an activity statement for a subsequent tax period under subsection 65-5(4) of the FTA.

Note: claims for fuel tax credits are subject to time limits set out in section 47-5 of the FTA.

Amendment History

Date of amendment
Part
Comment

25 January 2013
Reasons for Decision
Legislative reference to Note amended to a later, more relevant, provision

Date of decision:
  20 April 2007

Legislative References:

Fuel Tax Act 2006   section 41-5   section 47-5   Division 65   section 65-5(1)   section 65-5(4)

Keywords

Excise
 Fuel tax credits
 FTC fuel tax return period
 FTC attribution rules for fuel tax credit
 Creditable purpose
 GST tax periods
 Required to be registered
 Tax invoices
 GST returns
 GST registration

Business Line:
  Excise

Date of publication:
  4 May 2007

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
20 April 2007
Original statement

 
25 January 2013
Updated statement

You are here
14 February 2014
Archived