ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2002/572
================================================== Income Tax Alienation of Personal Services Income - Losses from rental property FOI status: may be released This ATO ID is withdrawn from the database as it is superseded by Taxation Ruling TR 2003/10. This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Can a company deduct losses from negatively geared rental property against personal services income received by the company, where the personal services income is subject to the Alienation measure contained in Part 2-42 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997).
Decision
No, losses from a negatively geared rental property cannot be offset against personal services income that is subject to the Alienation measure contained in Part 2-42 of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
The company conducts a consultancy business.
The company owns a negatively geared rental property.
The company's income will be derived for the personal services of an individual.
In the past the company has offset the losses from the negatively geared rental property against the other income in the company, including the personal services income of the individual.
The company is not conducting a personal services business.
Reasons for Decision
Personal services income is defined in Section 84-5 of the ITAA 1997 as: 'Your ordinary income or the ordinary income or statutory income of any other entity, is your personal services income if the income is mainly a reward for your personal efforts or skills (or would mainly be such a reward if it was your income).' The income from a negatively geared rental property is not mainly from the personal efforts or skills of an individual. As such, it would not fall into the definition of personal services income in Section 84-5 of the ITAA 1997.
The income from the consultancy business is mainly a reward for an individual's personal efforts or skills and is therefore personal services income.
Section 86-15 of the ITAA 1997 provides that personal services income that is not from conducting a personal services business or promptly paid as salary and wages, is attributed to the individual who provided the services.
Section 86-20 of the ITAA 1997 allows the amount attributed under Section 86-15 of the ITAA 1997 to be reduced by the deductions to which the entity is entitled.
The alienation of personal services income measure clarifies what deductions can be claimed against affected personal services income and limits some deductions.
To reduce the attributed amount under Section 86-15 of the ITAA 1997 the deduction must be one to which the personal services entity is entitled under Section 86-60 of the ITAA 1997.
Firstly for an amount to be deductible it must relate to the gaining or producing of an individual's personal services income. The losses from a negatively geared rental property is not an amount that relates to the gaining or producing of the personal services income of the individual.
Secondly, the outgoing must be an allowable deduction under another provision of the ITAA 1997, such as the general deduction provision in Section 8-1 of the ITAA 1997.
Thirdly, Section 86-60 of the ITAA 1997 operates to determine if the circumstances that apply to the entity were to apply to the individual, whether a deduction would be allowable under Division 85 of the ITAA 1997. A deduction is only available to the personal services entity if, the individual would have been entitled to deduct that same amount incurred, given the same circumstances as the personal services entity.
Losses generated from non personal services income activities, such as negatively geared rental properties, cannot be deducted from personal services income. This is because Step 1 of the method statement in Section 86-20 of the ITAA 1997 only refers to deductions that relate to the personal services income.
Given that the company is not considered to be conducing a personal services business, it can only deduct those amounts stated in the method statement outlined in Section 86-20 of the ITAA 1997 against the personal services income.
However, the losses from negatively geared rental properties can be offset against any other income the company may have in accordance with Division 36 of the ITAA 1997.
Date of decision: 6 February 2002 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2001 Year ending 30 June 2002 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 Section 84-5 Division 85 Section 86-15 Section 86-20 Keywords PSI non employees deductions entitlements PSI attribution Business Line: Alienation Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 31 May 2002 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 6 February 2002
Original statement You are here
25 July 2008
Archived