ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2011/66
================================================== Income Tax Capital Allowances: business related costs - limitation of deduction - return of an equity interest FOI status: may be released This ATO Interpretative Decision is withdrawn because the Reason for Decision requires clarification and may be misleading. It has been replaced by ATO ID 2011/78 This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable. CAUTION: This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection: If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser. Issue
Where the taxpayer's subsidiary issues an equity interest to an entity and the taxpayer incurs expenditure to purchase the equity interest, is the expenditure an amount that, for another entity, is a return of an equity interest for the purpose of subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)?
Decision
Yes. Where the taxpayer's subsidiary issues an equity interest to an entity and the taxpayer incurs expenditure to purchase the equity interest, the expenditure is an amount that, for another entity, is a return of an equity interest for the purpose of subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i) of the ITAA 1997.
Facts
All statutory references are to the ITAA 1997 unless otherwise stated.
The taxpayer is the head company of a consolidated group. The taxpayer, its subsidiary, which was a member of the consolidated group ('the member'), and a third party entered into an agreement whereby the member issued convertible notes to the third party. In a later income year the taxpayer purchased the convertible notes from the third party.
The expenditure incurred by the taxpayer to purchase the convertible notes was less than the amount paid by the third party when the convertible notes were issued.
The convertible notes were an equity interest for the purposes of Division 974.
The expenditure incurred by the taxpayer was capital expenditure incurred in relation to its current business for the purposes of paragraph 40-880(2)(a).
Reason for Decision
Subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i) states that: You cannot deduct anything under this section for an amount of expenditure you incur: (b)to the extent that, for another entity, the amount is a *return on or of: (i)an *equity interest The taxpayer incurred capital expenditure to purchase the equity interest from the third party vendor. The third party vendor is 'another entity' for the purposes of subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i). The convertible notes were an equity interest in the member held by that third party. They are therefore an equity interest of another entity. The expenditure incurred by the taxpayer to acquire the equity interest is an amount incurred by the taxpayer to acquire another entity's equity interest.
The interpretative issue is the meaning of the expression 'return of' in the context of subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i). The specific questions associated with this issue are:
For an amount to be a return of another entity's equity interest: •Can the expenditure be incurred by a taxpayer who is not the issuer of the equity interest?
•Must the expenditure exactly correspond with the amount paid by 'another entity' when it acquired the equity interest? The word 'return' is defined in subsection 995-1(1) to mean: Return on a *debt interest or *equity interest does not include a return of an amount invested in the interest. It is clear that this definition does not resolve the meaning of the expression 'return of' for the purposes of subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i). Recourse must therefore be had to the ordinary meaning of the expression.
The Macquarie Dictionary revised 5th Edition relevantly defines the word 'return' as: 18.the act or fact of returning; a going or coming back; a bringing, sending, or giving back.
20.reciprocation, repayment, or requital: profits in return for outlay The word 'of' is relevantly defined as: 9.objective relation. An amount that, for another entity, is a 'return of an equity interest' is therefore an amount which gives back to that entity a sum for its interest in equity. Here, the amount the taxpayer has given back to the third party is a sum that is a requital for the third party selling its equity interest in the member. In other words, it is a return of the third party's investment in equity.
The ordinary meaning of the expression 'return of' does not introduce a requirement that the issuer of the equity interest must be the party that incurs the amount that is a return of the equity interest. This is particularly so in the context of subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i) which looks at the amount from the perspective of 'another entity'. It focuses on the entity that held the equity interest and is concerned with 'another entity' being given an amount (by the taxpayer) that is a return of its equity interest. Although it is common for an equity interest to be bought back by the entity which issued the interest this does not mean that subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i) is restricted in its application to only that circumstance.
The explanatory memorandum to Tax Laws Amendment (2006 Measures No. 1) Bill 2006 (the EM) provides some guidance as to the meaning of the expression 'return of' for the purpose of subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i). Although the EM gives the example of payments made by a company to buy back its own shares as an expenditure which is excluded by subsection 40-880(9) the EM makes it clear that expenditures excluded by the provision are not limited to the examples given.
The relevant paragraphs of the EM state: Returns of capital 2.79 Some capital amounts are not considered legitimate blackhole expenditures as they comprise the transfer or distribution of funds, repayments, or do not give rise to any income tax consequences. As such, the expenditure does not represent an economic loss to the taxpayer and is not deductible. [Schedule 2, item 30, subsection 40-880(9)] 2.80 Expenditures excluded by this provision include, but are not limited to: •dividends paid by companies;
•distributions by trustees;
•margin calls;
•payments made by a company to buy back its own shares; and
•repayments of loan principal. Similarly, the ordinary meaning of the expression 'return of' does not introduce a requirement that the amount given back to another entity must exactly correspond with the amount paid by that entity when it acquired the equity interest. It is not uncommon, for example, for an entity to incur expenditure to buy back its shares at market value. The market value will usually differ from the issue price. This would not of itself disqualify the expenditure from being an amount that, for another entity, is a return of an equity interest.
Therefore where the taxpayer's subsidiary issues an equity interest to an entity and the taxpayer incurs capital expenditure to purchase the equity interest from the third party which held the equity interest, the expenditure is an amount that, for another entity, is a return of an equity interest for the purpose of subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i).
Date of decision: 2 August 2011 Year of income: Year ended 30 June 2009 Legislative References: Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 section 40-880 paragraph 40-880(2)(a) subsection 40-880(9) paragraph 40-880(9)(b) subparagraph 40-880(9)(b)(i) Division 974 subsection 995-1(1) Related Public Rulings (including Determinations) Taxation Ruling TR 2010/D7 Other References: Explanatory Memorandum to Tax Laws Amendment (2006 Measures No. 1) Bill 2006 The Macquarie Dictionary, 5th Edn, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, NSW, 2009. Keywords Blackhole expenditure Business related costs Capital expenditure Equity Non-share equity interest Business Line: Administration, Business and Personal Taxes Centre of Expertise Date of publication: 19 August 2011 ISSN: 1445-2782 history Date: Version: 2 August 2011
Original statement You are here 2 September 2011
Archived