ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2005/141
==================================================

Superannuation
 Choice of superannuation fund - members of defined benefit funds
 FOI status: may be released

This ATO ID is withdrawn, as it is no longer necessary. The ATO view expressed in this ATO ID is a straight application of the law and does not contain an interpretative decision. Guidance on the view contained in this ATO ID can be found in Employees ( QC 50360).

This document incorporates revisions made since original publication. View its history and amending notices, if applicable.

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Can a fund, selected by an employee who is a member of a defined benefit scheme become a chosen fund for the member under section 32Fof the Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 (SGAA)?
Decision
No. A fund selected by an employee who is a member of a defined benefit scheme cannot become a chosen fund for the member under section 32F of the SGAA by virtue of subsection 32F(3), as none of the powers under the trust deed of the defined benefit scheme are exercised as a result of the member making a choice. The member remains entitled to the same amount of benefit from the scheme.
Facts
The employer makes superannuation contributions to a superannuation scheme for the benefit of its employees.
The scheme is a defined benefit superannuation scheme within the meaning of subsection 6A(1) of the SGAA.
The members of the scheme are defined benefit members within the meaning of subsection 6(1) of the SGAA.
There are a number of provisions available under the trust deed of the defined benefit scheme which can be used to change the amounts of the benefits payable to a member of the scheme in certain circumstances.
However, there are no provisions in the trust deed which result in the benefits of members being altered as a direct result of an employee choosing another fund as their chosen fund.
Reasons for Decision
The choice of superannuation fund requirements, which form part of the SGAA, are effective from 1 July 2005. Section 32C of the SGAA details the types of contributions that will satisfy the requirements. Subsection 32C(1) ensures contributions satisfy the requirements if they are made by an employer to a 'chosen fund' of the employee.
Subsection 32F(1) of the SGAA states that if an employee wants a fund to be their chosen fund, the employee must give the employer written notice to that effect. However, subsection 32F(3) states that a fund (the
 selected fund
) cannot become a chosen fund for the employee under section 32F if:

(a)immediately before the employee gave the notice to the employer, the employee was a defined benefit member of a defined benefit superannuation scheme; and
(b)even if the selected fund were to become a chosen fund for the employee, the employee would be entitled, on the employee's retirement, resignation or retrenchment, to the same amount of benefit from the defined benefit superannuation scheme as the employee would be entitled if the selected fund were not a chosen fund for the employee.

According to the Explanatory Memorandum that accompanied the Bill which inserted the choice of fund requirements into the SGAA, the purpose of subsection 32F(3) is to ensure that an employer will not have to make contributions to a fund chosen by the employee while also being required to finance that employee's right to receive a full retirement, retrenchment or resignation benefit from the defined benefit fund.
In this case, as none of the powers under the trust deed of the scheme are exercised as a result of the member making a choice, and the member remains entitled to the same amount of benefit from the scheme, subsection 32F(3) will apply and the selected fund cannot become a chosen fund of the member.
Date of decision:
  9 May 2005

Year of income:
  Year ended 30 June 2005

Legislative References:

Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992   subsection 6(1)   subsection 6A(1)   section 32C   subsection 32C(1)   subsection 32F(1)   subsection 32F(3)

Keywords

Defined benefit superannuation funds
 Superannuation guarantee charge

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  455379; 1-5TRIEIK; 1-HS38QM7

Business Line:
  Superannuation

Date of publication:
  20 May 2005

Date reviewed:
  27 August 2014

ISSN:
 1445-2782

 history

 

Date:

Version:

 
 9 May 2005
Original statement

You are here
24 June 2019
Archived