ATO Interpretative Decision
ATO ID 2004/501
==================================================

Goods and Services Tax
 GST and speech therapy in a group environment following a detailed one on one assessment of a child
 FOI status: may be released

CAUTION:
 This is an edited and summarised record of a Tax Office decision. This record is not published as a form of advice. It is being made available for your inspection to meet FOI requirements, because it may be used by an officer in making another decision.
This ATOID provides you with the following level of protection:

 If you reasonably apply this decision in good faith to your own circumstances (which are not materially different from those described in the decision), and the decision is later found to be incorrect you will not be liable to pay any penalty or interest. However, you will be required to pay any underpaid tax (or repay any over-claimed credit, grant or benefit), provided the time limits under the law allow it. If you do intend to apply this decision to your own circumstances, you will need to ensure that the relevant provisions referred to in the decision have not been amended or repealed. You may wish to obtain further advice from the Tax Office or from a professional adviser.

Issue
Is the entity, a speech pathologist, making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-10(1) of the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 (GST Act) when, after conducting a detailed one on one assessment of a child, the entity supplies speech therapy to the child in a group environment?
Decision
Yes, the entity is making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act when, after conducting a detailed one on one assessment of the child, the entity supplies speech therapy to the child in a group environment.
Facts
The entity is a speech pathologist. The entity supplies speech therapy to children in a group environment.
The entity undertakes a detailed one on one assessment of a child's language skills prior to the child attending therapy. This assessment is conducted to determine whether speech therapy in a group environment will be beneficial for the child. From the assessment, the entity plans the content of the speech therapy sessions to target the specific needs of the children attending.
Speech therapy conducted in a group environment, under these circumstances, is accepted within the speech pathology profession as an appropriate method of treating a child with speech difficulties.
The entity is a member of the relevant national professional association and is a recognised professional as defined in section 195-1 of the GST Act. The entity is registered for goods and services tax (GST).
Reasons for Decision
Under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act, an entity makes a GST-free supply of other health services if:

•the entity provides a service of a kind specified in the table in subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act, or of a kind specified in the A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019(GST Regulations)
•the entity is a recognised professional in relation to the supply of services of that kind, and
•the supply would generally be accepted, in the profession associated with supplying services of that kind, as being necessary for the appropriate treatment of the recipient of the supply.

Speech pathology services are listed at item 19 in the table in subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act and the entity is a recognised professional in relation to the supply of speech pathology. As such, the first two requirements under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act are satisfied.
The third requirement is that the treatment must be generally accepted in the relevant health profession as being necessary for the appropriate treatment of the recipient.
'Appropriate treatment' will be established where a recognised professional, assesses the recipient's state of health and determines a process to pursue in an attempt to preserve, restore or improve the physical or psychological wellbeing of that recipient, insofar as that professional area of training allows. It will include subsequent supplies for the determined process.
Appropriate treatment includes the principles of preventative medicine. Such treatment must be generally accepted in the profession associated with supplying services of that kind, as being necessary.
The entity undertakes a detailed one on one assessment of a child's language skills prior to the child attending therapy. This assessment is to determine whether speech therapy in a group environment will be beneficial for the child. From the assessment, the entity plans the content of the speech therapy sessions to target the specific needs of the children attending. Therefore, the entity has assessed the child's health to determine the appropriate treatment for the child.
Speech therapy conducted in a group environment, under these circumstances, is accepted within the speech pathology profession as an appropriate method of treating a child with speech difficulties. As such, the third requirement of subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act is satisfied.
The entity's supply of the speech therapy satisfies all of the requirements under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act. Therefore, the entity is making a GST-free supply under subsection 38-10(1) of the GST Act when after conducting a detailed one on one assessment of the child, the entity supplies speech therapy to the child in a group environment.
Amendment History

Date of Amendment
Part
Comment

9 April 2019
Throughout
Updated A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 1999 to A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019.

Date of decision:
  22 July 2002

Legislative References:

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999   subsection 38-10(1)   subsection 38-10(1) table item 19   section 195-1
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Regulations 2019   Table of Content

Keywords

Goods and service tax
 GST free
 GST health
 Section 38-10 - other health services

Siebel/TDMS Reference Number:
  1266234

Business Line:
  Indirect Tax

Date of publication:
  25 June 2004

ISSN:
 1445-2782