IT 101 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 101
Income tax: Australia/United Kingdom Double Taxation Agreement Article 16 - visiting professors and teachers
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1138478
Preamble
In Taxation Ruling IT 100 it was stated that, where the provisions of the United Kingdom tax law grant United Kingdom residents a deduction of 100% of the emoluments derived from an office or employment carried on wholly outside of the United Kingdom, it is not accepted that the remuneration in question is subject to United Kingdom tax so as to confer exemption from Australian tax on that remuneration. The question of liability to Australian tax in cases where a deduction of 25% of foreign emoluments is granted for purposes of United Kingdom tax has now been considered.
Ruling
2. In circumstances where a deduction of 25% of the
foreign emoluments is allowable in determining the amount of such
emoluments subject to United Kingdom tax, it is considered that the
United Kingdom legislation, by design, intends only to tax effectively
75% of the remuneration. Therefore, it has been decided that Article 16
of the United Kingdom/Australia Double Taxation Agreement may be
interpreted as only exempting that portion of the income which is so
taxed, leaving the balance of the remuneration exposed to Australian
tax.
3. Although the legal position that Article 16 may
be so interpreted may not be entirely free from doubt, in all cases
where a deduction of 25% of foreign emoluments is granted, or is
allowable, in calculating the liability to United Kingdom tax of a
visiting professor or teacher, it should consequently, be maintained
that only 75% of the remuneration is subject to tax in the United
Kingdom and that the remaining 25% is liable to Australian tax.
4. A similar view should also be taken where, under
Case II of Schedule E of the United Kingdom legislation, a person in
receipt of emoluments from any office or employment, where the person is
not resident, or if resident, then not ordinarily resident in the United
Kingdom, is allowed a deduction, or a deduction is allowable, of 50% of
the emoluments in respect of duties performed in the United Kingdom. In
these circumstances, where the taxpayer is a resident of Australia, only
50% of the remuneration is considered to be subject to tax in the United
Kingdom leaving the remaining 50% liable to Australian tax.
5. Notwithstanding the ruling in the preceding
paragraph, Article 12(2) of the United Kingdom Double Tax Agreement will
continue to apply, in cases where an Australian resident is employed in
the United Kingdom by a non-resident of that country for a period or
periods not exceeding in the aggregate 183 days in the year of income,
to exempt the remuneration from United Kingdom tax. The whole of the
remuneration, in such cases, will remain liable to Australian
tax.
Commissioner of Taxation
4 August 1975
References
ATO references:
NO J.245/30 P2 F131
Date original memo issued:
04.08.75
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 101W
CITCM 864
IT 100
Subject References:
double tax agreements
double tax - United Kingdom teachers and professors
Legislative References:
UK Agreement - Article 12(2)
Article 16