IT 166 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 166
Interest on money borrowed to acquire an income producing asset
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1101897
PREAMBLE
Consideration has been given to the deductibility of interest on money borrowed to construct an income producing asset, such as a block of flats, where the interest is paid during the construction period during which no revenue is being received from the asset.
RULING
2. Generally speaking, interest incurred in these
circumstances should be allowed as a deduction under section 51 so long
as the case is one in which there is no room for doubt that the asset
under construction is being erected solely and exclusively for the
purpose of producing assessable income.
3. The matter has arisen in cases where oil
companies have sought to treat interest during the construction period
as part of capital costs of oil refineries so as to increase the amount
which may be claimed as an investment allowance under section 62AA. It
was decided that interest incurred in these circumstances is deductible
under section 51 and, accordingly, it should not be taken into account
in calculating the cost of a new asset for investment allowance
purposes.
4. An exception to this general proposition is to be
found in the type of case, of which the decision of the Taxation Board
of Review No.2 in 16 TBRD Case R74; 13 CTBR(NS) Case 4, provides an
example, in which an individual taxpayer not obviously engaged in
business purchases or constructs a building in ambiguous circumstances
which leaves room for doubt as to whether his true intention is -
(i)
to use the property for the purposes of producing assessable
income by way of rents;
(ii)
to use it for his own private purposes; or
(iii)
to use it for the purposes of profit making by
sale.
5. In rejecting the claim for interest, in Case R74,
Case 4 members of the Board made comments which might be thought to
involve acceptance that the interest incurred prior to the production of
assessable income is of a capital nature. However, the decision in the
particular case could equally well have been supported on the basis that
the interest was not incurred in the production of assessable income, in
that the taxpayer held the properties for some years without using them
for income producing purposes.
6. Claims of this nature should be carefully
scrutinised because there is always a temptation for taxpayers who are
building homes with the intention of living in them to claim that it is
their intention to rent them with the object of obtaining the deduction
for interest. If there are reasonable grounds for assuming that the
taxpayer intends to use the property for renting as soon as it is
completed and to continue to do so for an indefinite period, the
interest during the construction period could be treated as deductible
under section 51. Where, however, it is believed that the taxpayer's
dominant intention is to sell the property or use it ultimately as a
private residence, interest should be allowed only to the extent that it
relates to the periods (if any) during which the property is actually
let.
7. Where deductions claimed for interest are
disallowed in such cases, the assessments will be defended primarily on
the ground that the interest has not been incurred in the production of
assessable income and, if the taxpayer objects, efforts should be made
(e.g. by enquiring as to the taxpayer's negotiations with the bank or
other authority from which he borrowed the money) to establish that the
property was not acquired with the dominant intention of being used in
the production of assessable income. Where such cases come before a
Board of Review, the Board's attention could be invited to the decision
in the case referred to in para 4. It should be explained, however,
that the Commissioner does not, in practice, regard that decision as
preventing the allowance of deductions for interest in cases where it is
clear that the taxpayer's intention in erecting property was to use it
exclusively in the production of assessable income.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
14 December 1967
References
ATO references:
NO J.35/702 F243
Date original memo issued:
14.12.67
Subject References:
INTEREST
INCOME PRODUCING ASSET
INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE
Legislative References:
51(1)
62AA