IT 174 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
4 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 174
Plant leasing transactions - residual values
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1100283
PREAMBLE
A review was made of the policy on plant leasing transactions covered in a statement issued on 21 October 1960 (now IT 28), especially as it related to residual values.
2. Accepting that, not only is leasing a legitimate method of providing plant and other equipment for use in a business, it is also a permanent and common factor in capital planning calculations, we are not in a position where drastic alterations to the current guidelines may readily be made. It has, of course, always been recognised that a leasing transaction may be a disguised purchase/sale on terms and the current requirements are aimed at distinguishing between such a transaction and a genuine lease.
3. Careful consideration has been given to the view that the leasing guidelines (now availabe as IT 28), particularly in relation to residual values, do not reflect the current economic realities of the business world. The area causing most concern is that covering the leasing and subsequent re-sale of motor vehicles. However, in view of the introduction of sections 26AAB and 57AF into the Act, it is hoped that the problems in this area might now be controlled. The matter will, of course, be reviewed if experience discloses that they fail to correct the abuses they are intended to overcome.
RULING
4. In relation to plant other than motor vehicles,
it is felt that in the vast majority of cases, the present guidelines
are adequate. It is appreciated that, due to inflation, the market
value of plant upon the termination of a lease may be in excess of the
residual value calculated four years or more earlier in accordance with
the guidelines. But equally, it may be much less which is what is
presently being claimed in respect of, for example, much computer
oriented equipment. Consideration has been given to the view that the
residual value should represent a bona fide estimate of the market value
of the plant on the termination of the lease but this approach would
immediately raise the problem as to how the Taxation Office would
estimate market value in several years' time or check such an estimate,
particularly in relation to specialised plant. Reliance upon expert
opinion (and in most cases the lessees would be such experts) could put
our administration of this area in a much worse position than adherence
to the guidelines would.
5. It is confirmed, therefore, that the current
guidelines should continue to be applied in considering leasing
transactions.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
16 January 1981
References
ATO references:
NO J146/569 P8 F374
Date original memo issued:
16.01.81
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 28
Subject References:
LEASED PROPERTY
RESIDUAL VALUES
DEPRECIATION
PLANT
Legislative References:
26AAB
54
55
56(1B)