IT 139 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
14 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 139
Tax avoidance: incorporation of architects' practice as private company
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1071765
Preamble
Consideration was given to the question of whether the taxation treatment applied in Millard's case (1962) 108 CLR 336 should be extended to architects who incorporate as private companies.
Facts
2. Shortly stated, the professional income returned by the company is treated as being derived by the individual practitioner or partnership. Similar treatment has been extended, in individual cases, to members of other professions and occupations e.g. bookmaking.
3. The official treatment of the income of certain private companies as the income of the individuals concerned has been confirmed by the High Court in the case of the bookmaker Millard and in the case of Dr Peate.
4. In the case of a firm of architects incorporated as a private company, it was established that from a certain date, all the professional activities formerly carried on by the partnership were carried on by the architects for and in the name of the company. In particular, it has been found that, from that date, the following steps have been taken:-
All letterheads, cheques, receipts and accounts have been in the name of the company.
All plans, specifications and contracts have been issued and signed in the name of the company.
In the case of plans in course of preparation the name of the company was inserted.
All advertisements publicly or privately for tenders have been in the name of the company.
The name of the company has been used exclusively by the receptionist in answering inward telephone calls.
Except in the case of twelve firms who already had the full company name on their records, all firms with whom the company has accounts were requested to record the name of the company correctly.
Ruling
5. After full consideration of the circumstances, it
was decided that the income of the architectural business was derived,
in fact, by the company.
6. That factual conclusion could be disregarded, for
income tax purposes, only if the relevant arrangements were to be
treated under section 260 as void against the Commissioner. As a general
proposition, however, section 260 should not be applied to void an
otherwise valid alienation of income, unless it is most clearly
incapable of explanation by reference to ordinary business or family
dealings.
7. For instance, it is considered proper to have
recourse to section 260 to void a business arrangement which, though it
may be legally valid, is so close to being a sham as to be outside the
description of ordinary business dealing. In Millard's Case, for
example, Taylor J. seems to have entertained doubts whether the
agreement purporting to transfer the taxpayer's bookmaking business to a
company was 'valid and effective according to its tenor' although, in
view of section 260, he found it unnecessary to discuss this matter.
Similary, in Peate's Case (1964) 111 CLR 443, Menzies J. described as
'formidable' the argument for the Commissioner that all the fees
purported to be received by the company constituted income derived by
the doctors for the purposes of section 17, although, here again,
recourse to section 260 obviated the necessity of determining the
question of derivation per se.
8. It is relevant to consider also the following
extract from the judgment of Menzies J. in Peate v C. of T. (1964) 111
CLR 443 at page 459, in which Menzies J. set out his reasons why the
happenings in that case did not constitute ordinary business dealing:-
'Lest, however, it should be thought from my emphasis upon the
part played by Raleigh that it is only the interposing of Raleigh
between Dr Peate and Westbank that prevents the arrangement as a whole
being regarded as an ordinary business transaction, I should say that
this is not my view. It is true that I do regard the incorporation of
Raleigh and the seven other doctors' family companies as colouring
everything that was done here but, even without this, I would have
concluded that it was not an ordinary business transaction for a body of
professional men who are entitled to sue for fees for medical services
to transfer their practices, their libraries and their instruments to a
company which would not sue for fees and to become that company's
servants in the conduct of their profession, particularly in the
circumstance that, to the extent to which patients paid fees to the
company, their expenditure was not rebateable under section
82F.'
9. The case of the architects was distinguished from
that of Dr. Peate on at least two grounds, viz.-
(i)
The arrangement consisting of the incorporation of a single
'operating' company was far less artificial than the formation of the
group of family companies in the case of Peate's partnership and,
accordingly, it is more readily explainable as ordinary business
dealing.
(ii)
So far as can be ascertained, the incorporation of the company
did not put the architectural practice to any business disadvantage -
as, for example, in regard to suing for outstanding
fees.
In the circumstances, it was found that, from
the relevant date, there was a prima facie case for accepting the
alienation of professional income from the partnership to the company as
ordinary business dealing. Accordingly, section 260 would not apply to
void the alienation.
10. A similar view may be taken in the case of any
other architectural practice incorporated as a company provided that -
(a)
the parties have taken at least the same steps as were taken by
the above company to ensure that all contracts, receipts,
advertisements, etc., are in the name of the company; and
(b)
the company complies with the requirements of the Council of the
Royal Australian Institute of Architects concerning directors and
controlling shares, as set out in the resolution cited in the Annual
Report presented on 22 May 1963, viz. -
The practice of architecture by limited liability companies
'This subject has been actively considered and discussed
by the Council for a number of years. Investigations in various places
were undertaken, and as a result of further detailed discussion it has
been finally resolved by the Council that it would have no objection to
members practising through limited liability companies provided the
directorate of each such corporation is limited to architects or members
of closely allied professions and provided also that the controlling
shares in each such corporation are held by architects.' (underlining
inserted)
11. It should be clearly understood that the above
ruling applies only to cases where the whole of an architectural
practice has been incorporated as a company. Where, on the other hand,
the arrangement is of a 'service company' character - i.e., where a
partnership or private company has been incorporated to render
secretarial or other services to a firm of architects, claims for the
deduction of service fees should be closely scrutinised in the light of
section 51 and/or section 260.
Commissioner of Taxation
29 October 1963
References
ATO references:
NO J 209/52 P3 F16
Date original memo issued:
29.10.63
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 139H
IT 139W
Subject References:
professional income
architects - private company
tax avoidance
alienation of income
incorporation of professional practice
Legislative References:
260
Case References:
Millard v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth)
(1962) 108 CLR 336
Peate v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth)
(1964) 111 CLR 443