IT 108 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 108
Investment allowance - structural improvements and floor insulation of a freezer complex
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1101099
Preamble
The following advice was given concerning the application of the investment allowance and deprecition provisions to various components of a factory complex of a frozen food processor.
Ruling
2. Subject to compliance with certain conditions
that are specified in the relevant provisions, the investment allowance
is available for units of property of the kind to which income tax
depreciation allowances apply. However, some items of otherwise
eligible plant may fail to qualify for the investment allowance because
they are structural improvements of a kind excluded from the allowance
by section 82AE of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
3. Compliance with the general conditions of the
allowance will depend upon events. The purpose of this advice is to
indicate the various items of capital expenditure that might be regarded
as eligible for the investment allowance, having particular regard to
the operation of section 82AE in relation to the construction of factory
complexes of types presently being constructed for the storage and
handling of frozen foods.
4. The view is taken of section 82AE that, apart
from specified expenditures on the construction of certain structural
and other improvements, such as on - farm buildings or plumbing fixtures
used for purposes specified in the provision, the only capital
expenditures within the scope of the allowance are those that are
incurred in the acquisition of property comprised of depreciable plant,
machinery or other articles.
5. While depreciation allowances may be allowable
for income tax purposes in respect of the capital cost of laying down
foundations or strengthening buildings because the particular structures
are essential for the operation of plant and machinery integrally
attached to them, those expenditures would not also attract the
investment allowance deduction. The relevant provisions are seen as
limiting the investment allowance to expenditures made in respect of the
acquisition, etc. of plant items but not to associated buildings or
structures.
6. At the same time the view is not taken that
section 82AE applies generally to exclude from the investment allowance
expenditures incurred in the construction, etc. of plant constituted
wholly or in part of structures, whether or not those plant structures
are affixed to the land.
7. While a structure performing a wholly plant
function could be treated on this view as a unit of depreciable plant
that is eligible for the investment allowance, buildings and structures
or significant parts of structures whose function is to house or support
plant and machinery or to provide a shelter or setting in which plant
and machinery is operated would not be regarded as eligible for the
investment allowance. Moreover, expenditure on a plant structure
considered eligible for the investment allowance would not, as a general
rule, include the cost of the foundations, footings and floor of such a
structure.
8. On the view taken of section 82AE it appears, as
is indicated in the itemised comments below addressed to the components
of a factory complex, that the major part of expenditures would be
eligible for the investment allowance.
Refrigerated cold store in the raw materials store
Eligible: Insulating wall and ceiling panels and doors,
refrigeration plant and associated piping and ducting. No details are
available concerning internal racking - this would be treated as
eligible if of a type similar to that installed in the
freezer.
Ineligible: Floor and masonry walls.
Interior suspended insulation ceiling over production
area
Eligible: Air-conditioning pipes, ducts and equipment,
extractor fans and other items of plant mounted on top of this
ceiling.
Ineligible: The ceiling would be treated as part of the
building providing support for plant, and therefore
ineligible.
Freezer
Eligible: Outer steel framework, insulating panels forming
walls and ceiling, internal racking, stacker cranes and rails,
insulation and floor coating, underfloor heating and drainage
pipes.
Ineligible: Floor and protective roof (and steel purlins to
which the roof is to be attached), concrete piers and concrete slab of
the foundations and normal flooring.
Steel flour silos
Eligible, except for concrete bases.
Mezzanine platform
Ineligible: The platform would be treated as part of the
building providing support for plant and therefore
ineligible.
9. The items for which the investment allowance was
considered available were accepted as plant for depreciation purposes
and those parts of the freezer complex not specifically covered by ITO
No.1217 were accepted on the basis of an effective life of twenty
years.
Note: This ruling should be read in conjunction with IT
31.
Commissioner of Taxation
31 May 1979
References
ATO references:
NO 77/3689 F67
Date original memo issued:
31.05.79
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 108W
IT 31
Subject References:
investment allowance
depreciation
freezer complex
floor insulation
Legislative References:
ITAA 54
ITAA 55
ITAA 82AE
ITAA 82AA