IT 190 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
4 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 190
Investment allowance - computer used on a time-sharing basis
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102256
PREAMBLE
Representations were made on behalf of a computer service company concerning the application of the investment allowance to computer equipment which is to be used in providing computer services to its customers on a time-sharing basis.
2. Briefly, "time-sharing" refers to a method of use of a computer under which a number of customers may have their work processed on the computer simultaneously. The customer does not have a right to use the computer at any time but has the means to have data processed in the bureau facilities if they are not committed fully already.
3. All computer equipment used by the above company on a time-sharing basis is operated by employees of that company and the customers' employees do not operate the equipment at any time. Data is prepared at the premises of the customer and then, if the computer time is available, it is input into the company's computer equipment at the bureau by means of the customer's terminal at his premises which is connected through the telephone network.
RULING
4. On the understanding that the company's computer
is operated only by the company's employees and, where a customer's
terminal on his premises is involved, only the customer's employees
operate the terminal, the use of the abovementioned company's computer
equipment in the way described would not adversely affect the
availability of an investment allowance deduction in respect of that
equipment. In this regard, it is considered that those arrangements
would not have the effect of the abovementioned company in relation to
its computer equipment or of the customer in relation to its terminal
granting right to use that equipment or that terminal to any other
person. Nor would the company or the customer be regarded as ceasing to
use that computer or that terminal, as the case may be, wholly and
exclusively.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
7 July 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 78/3692 F5
Date original memo issued:
07.07.78
Subject References:
COMPUTER EQUIPMENT
COMPUTER SERVICES
INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE
Legislative References:
82AA
Back to top