IT 124 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 124
Expenses incurred by professional entertainers
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1101180
Preamble
Representations were made concerning the taxation treatment of expenditure incurred by professional entertainers in the course of deriving income.
Ruling
Travelling Expenses
1. It has been established by decisions of the High Court
that expenses incurred by a taxpayer in travelling between his home and
the place at which work is done are not allowable deductions. Deductions
are allowed however, for costs incurred in travelling between one place
of employment and another. Notwithstanding the general rule which
applies to travel from a taxpayer's home, it is not proposed to disturb
the long-standing practice of allowing half the cost of travelling where
a performer is obliged to transport bulky equipment not capable of being
conveniently carried by hand to the place of performance. It has also
been decided to allow deductions for travelling costs in the following
circumstances:-
(i)
where an artist travels inter-state for auditions and
interviews;
(ii)
where an artist accepts a casual engagement which necessitates
absence from home overnight; and
(iii)
where an artist on tour meets the cost of travelling from place
to place while absent from his usual place of
abode.
On Tour Accommodation Expenses
2. Deductions are allowed for living expenses incurred by
an artist who fulfils an engagement which requires him to live away from
home continuously for the duration of the engagement.
Hair Dressing
3. In principle, deductions are allowed for hair dressing
costs which could reasonably be regarded as incidental to the derivation
of income. The practice of allowing female artists a deduction of half
the total cost of hair dressing actually incurred will continue in the
absence of details supporting a larger claim. Male artists will also be
allowed hair dressing costs if distinctive hair styling is essential for
his income producing activities. if this test is satisfied, half the
total cost will be allowed as a deduction in the absence of full
details.
Telephone
4. Half the cost of local telephone calls will be allowed
as a deduction. Other calls (inter-state and intra-state) will be
allowed in full on receipt of satisfactory evidence of the cost incurred
and the purpose for which the calls were made. The cost of telephone
rental will not be allowed.
Professional Journals and Magazines
5. Deductions for these expenses are allowable in full.
If more than small incidental expenditure is claimed, details will be
required. Generally, the cost of newspapers will not be allowed.
Photographs, Publicity, Stationary and Postage
6. These expenses are deductible in full.
Make-Up
7. Make-up used exclusively by males and females for
stage appearances will be allowed in full. In the absence of full
details, the present practice of allowing female artists half the cost
claimed will be continued. The cost of beauty treatment, sauna baths
and the like are not allowable.
Attendances at Stage and Film Performances
8. The cost of the artist's own attendance at a first
night stage performance will be allowed in full in addition to half the
cost of attendance at other shows. No deduction will be allowed in
respect of tickets for members of the artist's family or guests.
Depreciation of Equipment
9. Half depreciation (or half rental) of television sets
will be allowed where the taxpayer concerned is an actor, author,
director or producer and the use of the set is related to his
professional activities. Full depreciation will be allowed on tape
recorders etc. where the same condition is satisfied.
Entertaining
10. Deductions under this heading will be allowed only
where the expenditure is shown to be relevant to the income producing
activities carried on and full details are supplied.
Clothing and Dry Cleaning
11. It is the practice to allow deductions in full for
special clothing which is used exclusively on stage. Deductions are
also allowed to television personalities, public entertainers,
mannequins etc. for part of the extra cost of conventional clothing used
in performances. In some instances in the latter category, it has been
accepted that half the cost of extra clothing should be allowed as a
deduction. Dry cleaning and laundry charges are allowed on the same
footing as clothing.
12. The information set out above is necessarily
expressed in general terms and is intended merely to indicate the broad
basis on which deductions will be allowed. As mentioned earlier, each
case depends upon its own particular facts and it rests with the
individual concerned to establish his entitlement to the multiplicity of
claims usually made by artists against assessable
income.
Commissioner of Taxation
16 April 1974
References
ATO references:
NO 75/3260 F40
Date original memo issued:
16.04.75
Subject References:
professional entertainers
entertainers
travelling expenses
expenditure incurred
Legislative References:
ITAA 51(1)