IT 121 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 121
Section 26AAA - property transactions arising from liquidation
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100682
Preamble
The following advice was forwarded to Branch Offices as a result of specific matters raised concerning the application of section 26AAA in relation to transactions arising from the liquidation of companies.
Ruling
First matter
2. A transfer of investments or other property in
satisfaction of a liquidator's distribution to shareholders is not
within the natural meaning of a "sale" as used in section 26AAA(3) and
such a transfer has not been brought within the extended meaning of the
word for the purposes of the section. Section 26AAA(1)(f) operates to
deem certain transfers of property to constitute a "sale" but only if
made -
(a)
in exchange for other property; or
(b)
without consideration.
Second matter
3. If the liquidator acts to subscribe for a parcel
of new issue shares on behalf of the company under liquidation, section
26AAA(1)(d) will apply so as to deem the parcel of shares to have been
purchased. In the event of the shares being sold within 12 months of
acquisition any profit on the sale would be subject to tax under
sub-section 26AAA(2).
4. On the other hand, if the newly acquired parcel
of shares is transferred in specie to a shareholder by way of a
distribution by the liquidator, that transfer would not constitute a
"sale" of the shares (see para. 2 above) and sub-section (2) could have
no application.
Third matter
5. The sale by a shareholder of rights that have
been issued to him is not caught by the provisions of section 26AAA. In
this regard the legislation does not deem the issue of rights to
constitute a "purchase". However, it should be noted that a person who
buys rights and, within 12 months, sells them on the market would be
assessable on any profit under sub-section (2).
Fourth matter
6. An issue of shares in response to an application
and subscription is specifically deemed to be a purchase of the shares
under section 26AAA(1)(d). It follows that any profit arising from a
sale of the shares inside 12 months will be assessable income under
sub-section (2). As mentioned in paragraph 2, however, a transfer of
the shares in specie in a liquidator's distribution would not be subject
to the new provisions.
Commissioner of Taxation
29 July 1974
References
ATO references:
NO J.153/117/13 P2 F201
Date original memo issued:
29.07.74
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 121H
IT 121W
Subject References:
company in liquidation
property transactions
Legislative References:
ITAA 26AAA
Back to top