IT 1 (Addenda exist) Taxation Ruling
IT 1
Taxation Ruling system: explanation and status
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
View the
Addendum notice
for this document.
View the
Addendum (2) notice
for this document.
View the
Addendum (3) notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1102891
Preamble
The Taxation Ruling system has been introduced as from 1 December 1982 as a method of publishing and disseminating decisions on interpretation of the laws administered by the Commissioner of Taxation.
Ruling
A Taxation Ruling will issue in respect of any decision which satisfies the following criteria;
(a)
provides an interpretation, guideline, precedent, practice or
procedure to be followed in making a decision that affects the rights or
liabilities of taxpayers; and
(b)
establishes a new or revised interpretation of our administration
of the tax laws; and
(c)
affects all taxpayers or a section of the tax-paying community,
i.e., not simply an individual instance.
Taxation Rulings will replace memoranda and other forms of
advice from Head Office relating to new or advised interpretations of
the taxation law. They will enable the Commissioner of Taxation to
fulfil his obligation under the Freedom of Information Act 1982 of
making available for public scrutiny, copies of documents which are used
by his officers in making decisions. Indeed, the need for the Taxation
Ruling system has been brought into focus by the Freedom of Information
Act.
In using Taxation Rulings it should be recognised that
they cannot supplant the terms of the law. It is now well established
that statements or declarations by the Commissioner of Taxation or his
officers do not have the effect of an estoppel against the operation of
the taxation law. While Taxation Rulings are compiled with care and are
intended to assist in the interpretation of taxation law in given
circumstances, they must be overruled by legislative amendment to the
law or by decisions of appellate tribunals. Furthermore, where a Ruling
is given in respect of a particular fact situation it will be operative
in the circumstances of that fact situation. Taxation Rulings are issued
subject to these necessary reservations.
Taxation Rulings will issue at regular intervals and
copies will be made available (subject to any necessary editing in
accordance with subsection 9(4) of the Freedom of Information Act 1982)
for inspection and purchase by members of the public. An index of these
rulings will be published in the Commonwealth Gazette.
Commissioner of Taxation
6 December 1982
References
ATO references:
NO 17 J39/1/7 f55
Date of effect:
01.12.82
Date original memo issued:
24.11.82
Subject References:
Tax rulings
Legislative References:
FOI. 9