IT 151 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 151
Payments to authors under the public lending rights scheme
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1100711
PREAMBLE
The following advice was given in regard to a question concerning the taxation treatment of payments made to authors under the Public Lending Rights Scheme.
RULING
2. Generally, payments made to an author under the
Public Lending Rights Scheme will be assessable income of the author.
However, such payments to an author will fall within the definition of
recurrent earnings in Division 16A of Part III of the Income Tax
Assessment Act and an author may, therefore, depending on the amount he
receives under the scheme in a particular income year and depending on
his income, if any, from other sources in that year, qualify to have his
earnings for that year taxed at concessional rates of tax, i.e., to have
his tax calculated on his taxable income for the year at the average
rate of tax applicable to an income (called the notional income) of a
lower amount than his taxable income.
3. To qualify under Division 16A for concessional
rates of tax to be applied in his assessment for an income year an
author would need to have derived in that year income falling within the
definition of abnormal income in Division 16A, to be a person to whom
the averaging provisions applicable to primary producers do not apply
and to have made an application to the Commissioner of Taxation for a
determination under that Division. Abnormal income is defined in
Division 16A, in effect, meaning:
(a)
lump sum receipts for the sale of rights etc.; and
(b)
so much of the recurrent earnings as exceeds:
(i)
one-third of the sum of the amounts of recurrent earnings derived
over the three income years prior to the year of income; or
(ii)
$1,000,
whichever is the
greater.
4. The proposed surcharge of tax payable on taxable
income from property for the 1974-75 financial year will not apply to
payments made to authors under the scheme, as such income would be
treated, for taxation purposes, as the proceeds of a business carried on
by the taxpayer and would thus fall within the definition of income from
personal exertion.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
22 November 1974
References
ATO references:
NO J.153/118/26 p.2 f.293
Date original memo issued:
22.11.74
Subject References:
AUTHORS
ABNORMAL INCOME
PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT SCHEME
RECURRENT EARNINGS
Legislative References:
DIV 16A
158C