IT 198 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
26 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 198
Gratuitous benefits, value of holidays - assessability
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102332
PREAMBLE
The following comments emerged as a result of the decision of the Federal Court of Australia in FC of T v Cooke and Sherden reported at 80 ATC 4140, 10 ATR 696. The judgment confirmed earlier decisions of the Taxation Board of Review No.2 in 76 ATC Case H54; 21 CTBR(NS) Case 19 and the Supreme Court of Victoria, 78 ATC 4685, 9 ATR 310.
FACTS
2. In FC of T v Cook and Sherden, 80 ATC 4140; 10 ATR 969 husband-and-wife partnerships, separately carried on business as door-to-door distributors of soft drinks under franchise arrangements with the soft drink manufacturers. The manufacturers sponsored incentive schemes under which their distributors each year could win prizes in the form of holiday trips to local or overseas resorts. The trips were not transferable and could not be converted into cash or any other form of property. If the winners did not take the trips they were not entitled to any other reward. The taxpayers had each won holidays to various destinations in a number of years. Amounts equal to the cost of the trips had been treated by the Commissioner as assessable income of the relevant taxpayers. The court unanimously held that no part of the cost or value of the trips was assessable.
3. In support of the assessments, it was argued that the value of the holiday trips was assessable under section 25(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act as income according to ordinary concepts. Alternatively, it was contended that the holiday benefits were given and received as a result of services rendered to the manufacturers by the distributor taxpayers and that section 26(e) operated to treat the value of the holidays as assessable.
RULING
4. In relation to section 25(1), the court held that
gratuitous benefits of the kind in issue, which are not convertible into
cash or other property, are not income according to ordinary concepts.
In the court's view, a benefit or gift of this kind will only be
assessable if it is received in money or is capable of being converted
into money or money's worth. Money's worth is not obtained where, as
here, the goods or services received cannot be converted into money. The
court also held that it was immaterial that the taxpayers were saved the
expense that would have been incurred had they paid for the holidays
themselves; such a saving not being income.
5. The court observed, however, (at p.4148, 80 ATC;
p.704 10 ATR) that "it will not often occur that a benefit to be enjoyed
by a taxpayer cannot be turned to pecuniary account if the benefit be
given up, or if it be employed in the acquisition of some other right or
commodity". It went on to say that it is not necessary that the
pecuniary alternative be available by way of direct conversion of the
benefit received.
6. These observations represent a significant
qualification of the court's reasoning in relation to section 25(1).
Where a benefit is claimed to be non-convertible into cash, careful
examination should be made to determine whether there is any indirect
way in which a benefit in money or money's worth can be obtained. In
this regard the Federal Court, by way of illustration, discussed the
option to purchase shares which was involved in Abbott v Philbin (1961)
A.C. 352. Although the option was not assignable, the right to call for
shares was held to be money's worth because it could be used as a means
of security to borrow money. Similarly, in Heaton v Bell (1970) A.C.
728 it was held that the use of a car under a loan arrangement with the
employer was a "perquisite" of the employment because the employee could
have surrendered the car and become entitled to a higher monetary
wage.
7. Dealing with section 26(e), the court held that
no services, in the relevant sense, were rendered by the taxpayers to
the manufacturers. The taxpayers, in distributing the soft drinks, were
conducting their own businesses on their own behalf and for their own
benefit. The fact that the successful operation of those businesses
resulted in the holiday trips did not alter the basic relationship of
buyer and seller, which the court held existed between the taxpayers and
the manufacturers. Minor activities such as the maintenance of the
round-books supplied by the manufacturers were merely ancilliary to that
relationship.
8. On the facts as they were found, there was
clearly no room for the application of section 26(e). The Federal Court
judgment imposes no restraints on the section. Its application has
really only been ruled out where the essence of the relationship between
donor and donee is that of seller and buyer of goods and no services can
be seen to be involved. Where the benefit is provided to a taxpayer
conducting a business as part of the reward for work and labour done,
application of the section must be considered. In addition, the section
may have application where services are rendered gratuitously, in the
hope of gratuitous reward for them (cf. Supreme Court judgment).
9. Because of the decision on the services point it
was not necessary for the court to enter upon the important question
whether section 26(e) can extend to benefits which are not within the
general conception of income. However, it has been suggested in several
prior decisions that the section only covers receipts of an income
nature - Hayes v FC of T (1956) 98 CLR 47 per Fullagar J. at p.54, Scott
v FC of T (1966) 117 CLR 514 per Windeyer J. at p.525, Donaldson v FC of
T 74 ATC 4192 at 4205, 4 ATR 530. Consequently, it may hereafter be
necessary to meet claims that section 26(e) does not reach beyond the
area covered by section 25. Taxpayers may argue that non-pecuniary
benefits which cannot be converted into money (such as, for example,
meals taken on the job, the use of a motor vehicle, subsidised housing
provided to tenants who have no right to sublet) are not income and
therefore not assessable. It is true that such items sometimes would
either have to be accepted or relinquished and might not be suitable
subjects for conversion. Very often, however, there may be some indirect
means available of turning the benefit to pecuniary account, or it may
be that a higher wage would otherwise be available. Furthermore, even
where the benefits are not income because a pecuniary alternative does
not exist, it may be argued very strongly that they remain assessable
income by reason of the very clear legislative direction in such
provisions as sections 26(e), 26(ea), 26AAAA and sub-sections (4) and
(5) of section 221C. Taxation of such benefits given in the context of
employment or the rendering of services is supported by a number of
decided cases. Accordingly, no change is required to the existing
practice of requiring employees to bring benefits received into
assessable income.
10. Cases may be expected to arise where it is
difficult to determine whether recipients of benefits are employees or
independent contractors. Indeed, at an earlier stage in the present
case, arguments were developed that the taxpayers were employees of the
manufacturer or, at best, agents for sale or sellers on commission who
were involved in rendering services to the manufacturer. In the
particular circumstances of this case, it was recognised that these were
somewhat doubtful propositions and, in the event, they found no favour.
In other cases there may be greater scope to argue that the contract is
one of service (an employment contract) rather than for services; for
instance, where the work done is integrated with the business of the
provider of the benefit or that person can order or require how the work
shall be performed as distinct from merely specifying what work is to be
done; or the contract may be substantially for work and labour, within
the meaning of the definition of salary and wages in section 221A. The
real nature of the relationship between the parties will need to be
examined in each case.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
16 January 1981
References
ATO references:
NO 75/6029 P2 F51
Date original memo issued:
16.01.81
Related Rulings/Determinations:
NOTICE OF ARCHIVAL
Subject References:
GRATUITOUS BENEFITS - ASSESSABILITY
VALUE OF HOLIDAYS
Legislative References:
25(1)
26(e)
Case References:
- Abbott v Philbin
[1961] AC 352
- Case H54
76 ATC 458
- Donaldson v FC of T
74 ATC 4192
4 ATR 530
- FC of T v Cook and Sherden
78 ATC 4685
9 ATR 310
- FC of T v Cooke and Sherden
80 ATC 4140
10 ATR 696
- Hayes v FC of T
(1956) 96 CLR 47
- Heaton v Bell
[1970] AC 728
- Scott v FC of T
(1966) 117 CLR 514