IT 118 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 118
Losses - prior years - company - section 80E
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1071206
Preamble
A question was considered concerning the application of section 80E in the following circumstances.
2. The taxpayer company was incorporated in Australia in 1961 and carried on business as a supplier of petroleum products. Ninety-five per cent of its issued capital was held by an oil company incorporated in the U.S.A. and the remaining five per cent was held by members of the Australian public.
3. The whole of the issued capital of the taxpayer company was acquired early in 1967 by an Australian incorporated oil company which previously had marketed its products through a subsidiary (Q Pty. Ltd.). Q Pty. Ltd. held R.A.A.F. and government contracts and was engaged in export and shipping activities in addition to its other marketing operations.
4. After the take-over the name of the taxpayer company was changed, it ceased marketing its old brand of petroleum products and immediately began marketing the brand associated with its new parent. Q Pty. Ltd. continued with its R.A.A.F. and government contracts and its shipping and export agencies but transferred its other marketing operations to the taxpayer company, which resulted in a considerable expansion of the business of that latter company.
Ruling
5. The view was taken that, both before and after
take-over, the company was a supplier of petroleum products and there
was no cessation in this field of business activity. The fact that
there was a change in the brand of the product distributed was not
considered sufficient of itself to establish that the same business did
not continue to be carried on.
6. The enlargement of the business of the taxpayer
company was considered to be not necessarily decisive for section
80E(1)(c) purposes. Whilst it could be argued that the taxpayer company
lost its identity when its shares were acquired and its name subseqently
changed, the legislation does not specify either of these factors as
having a bearing on the "same business" test. Where the legal
arrangements are such that a company's business structure remains
unchanged - in this instance, the business of supplying petroleum
products to retail outlets - it was considered that it could not
successfully be maintained that the same business is not being
conducted.
7. With regard to section 80E(1)(d) it was noted
that Q Pty Ltd. retained its R.A.A.F. and government contracts, its
shipping and export agencies, and that the segment of the activities
transferred to the taxpayer company involved only the same kind of
operations as those carried on at all times by the taxpayer
company.
8. As both paragraphs (c) and (d) of section 80E(1)
were regarded as being satisfied, it was considered that the taxpayer
company was entitled in principle to the benefits of section
80E.
Commissioner of Taxation
2 October 1980
References
ATO references:
NO J70/35/1 P7 F346
BO ITR 740
Date original memo issued:
03.08.70
Subject References:
prior year losses
companies
same business
Legislative References:
ITAA 80E(1)(c)
ITAA 80E(1)(d)