IT 167 (Addendum exists) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
5 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 167
Treatment for income tax purposes of radio & television competition prizes
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
View the
Addendum notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1101905
PREAMBLE
Representations were received concerning the taxation treatment of prizes won in radio and television competitions.
RULING
2. Because of the varying circumstances under which these
competitions are conducted, it is not practicable to make general
observations which would adequately cover the numerous possibilities
likely to be encountered in practice. Whether or not a prize or an
award won in a particular competition is liable to tax is a matter for
determination in the light of the facts of each case.
3. In the absence of any unusual features, it is
considered that no liability to tax would ordinarily arise where a
member of the general public participates casually in a competition and
wins a prize. A windfall gain of this nature would not have the
character of income.
4. On the other hand, if a taxpayer makes regular
appearances in radio or television programmes (whether as an artist or
as a participant in some form of competition), the reward received for
appearing on the programme would form part of his assessable income. In
this situation, the taxation position would be the same whether the
award for appearing is paid directly in the form of a fee or indirectly
through the opportunity to win valuable prizes, either in cash or in
kind.
5. A prize or an award won in circumstances where it is
an incident of the taxpayer's income producing activities (e.g., a "best
player" award won by a professional footballer in a newspaper
competition) or where it is part of the proceeds of a business conducted
by the taxpayer (e.g., a prize won by an author in a literary
competition) would have the character of income. Where prizes or awards
are received in kind rather than in cash and the circumstances are such
that a liability to tax arises, the value of the goods would be treated
as part of the assessable income of the recipient.
6. It is considered that the value of the prizes won by
farmers competing in the "Farmer of the Year" competition forms part of
the proceeds of their respective businesses and should, therefore, be
brought to account as assessable income in the year in which the prizes
are received or, in the case of the overseas trip, in the year in which
the trip is undertaken.
7. In this connection, it is not practicable to indicate
a formula to determine the precise value to be attributed to a prize.
Section 21 of the Assessment Act provides that, where any consideration
is paid or given otherwise than in cash, the money value of that
consideration shall be deemed to have been paid or given. If there
should be any doubt as to the value of a prize won, a fair and
reasonable value could be settled by negotiation between the taxpayer
concerned and the Taxation Administration.
8. So far as prizes awarded to a competitor's wife are
concerned, the circumstances under which the business operations were
carried on could have a bearing on the overall liability to tax. Where
a business of primary production is conducted by a partnership
consisting of husband and wife, the prize won in the competition would
presumably become the property of the partnership, in which event the
prize would be taken into account in calculating the partnership net
income. However, if the competitor is engaged in business solely on his
own account, the value of prizes awarded to the competitor's wife would
not be regarded as forming part of the assessable income either of the
competitor or of his wife.
9. Where the prize is in the form of goods (i.e.,
fertilizers, fuel or oil) which may be used by the taxpayer in the
course of his business operations, a deduction not exceeding the value
of the prize brought to account as assessable income would be allowable
in the year in which the goods are used.
10. Similarly, a deduction may be allowable against the
amount included in assessable income in respect of the value of the
overseas trip. If the trip were taken by the taxpayer solely for
purposes associated with his business activities, e.g., the inspection
of farming projects and factories manufacturing farm implements etc., a
deduction under section 51 of the Assessment Act would be allowed or an
amount equal to that included in assessable income as representing an
outgoing incurred in carrying on a business. However, if the prize
happened to be simply a pleasure cruise, no offsetting deduction would
be available because of the prohibition contained in section 51 against
the deduction of outgoings of a private nature.
11. Where the prize won takes the form of an asset which
is used by a taxpayer in his business, deductions based on the value of
the plant brought to account as assessable income would be allowed in
accordance with the depreciation provisions of the Assessment
Act.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
30 October 1967
References
ATO references:
NO J149/176 P2 F47
Date original memo issued:
30.10.67
Subject References:
RADIO AND TELEVISION PRIZES
COMPETITION PRIZES
PRIZES
DEPRECIATION OF PRIZES
Business Line:
IAI
Legislative References:
25(1)
21
51(1)