IT 191 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
17 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 191
Home office expenses
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1101477
PREAMBLE
In the memorandum dated 11 October 1974 from Head Office it was stated that an appeal to the Supreme Court of New South Wales would be lodged against the decision of Taxation Board of Review No.1 reported as 74 ATC, Case F53; 19 CTBR(NS) Case 65.
FACTS
2. The taxpayer in that Case was an employee architect who, in addition to the salary from his employment, had derived income of $900 from freelance architectural work carried out at his home. The evidence before the Board established that the taxpayer's home consisted of a two-bedroom flat, one bedroom of which was set aside and used almost wholly for activities associated with his architectural work. He claimed a deduction of $400 being one-quarter of the rent of the flat. The Board allowed a deduction for the rent of $333 representing the proportion of the total rent on a floor area basis referable to the second bedroom.
RULING
3. After further consideration of the arguments
available to the Commissioner in the proposed appeal it was decided to
accept the Board's decision and withdraw the appeal. It will be
recalled that, about the same time, the Commissioner had appealed to the
Supreme Court of New South Wales against another decision of Taxation
Board of Review No.1 relating to home office expenses and reported as 74
ATC, Case F55; 19 CTBR (NS) Case 67. The latter taxpayer was an
employee who had set aside one room of his home as an office in
preference to using the office facilities provided by his employer. In
the result the Commissioner's appeal in the latter case was upheld, FC
of T v McCloy 75 ATC 4079, 5 ATR 315, but it was felt that an adverse
decision in the proposed appeal might have prejudiced the Commissioner's
position in an area in which he was anxious to consolidate the decisions
of the High Court in Thomas v FC of T 72 ATC 4094, 3 ATR 165 and
Faichney V FC of T (1972) 129 CLR 38.
4. At the same time it was recognised that there was
a need to modify slightly the instructions relating to the deductibility
of home office expenses. In the memorandum of 12 November 1973 issued
from Head Office following the decision of Wickham J. in Caffrey v FC of
T 73 ATC 4144, 4 ATR 109, official practice in relation to home office
expenses was stated in paras 12 and 13 in these words:-
"12. In the meantime, it is proposed to continue the policy of
rejecting claims for a proportion of interest, rent insurance or repairs
paid in respect of the domestic establishment of an employee which is
used partly for purposes associated with his employment activities
unless the circumstances are such that you are satisfied that the
taxpayer does far more than bring work home for his personal
convenience. For deductions to be allowable, the taxpayer will need to
show either that he is carrying on an independent business or profession
from a part of the building used as his home (as when a taxpayer,
although an employee, has a significant income from free-lance work).
Deductions should also be allowed, of course, for the kind of
expenditure which Mason J. held to be allowable in Faichney's
Case.
13. In other words, the home office must not only be used wholly
and exclusively for income producing activities, but should be of such a
nature that it would be "suitable only for use as business premises" and
could therefore be looked upon as having ceased to be part of the
taxpayer's domestic establishment. For this purpose, it should not be
accepted that a room is used wholly and exclusively for purposes related
to the taxpayer's income producing activities if it is also used for the
storage of papers, books, furniture, etc., which are unconnected with
those activities, or if the common-sense view is that the taxpayer and
his family probably do use it for their private purposes from time to
time."
5. It has now been decided that, where a taxpayer
derives assessable income from self employed activities carried out at
his home, a deduction may be allowed up to a reasonable amount in
respect of rent, interest, insurance etc. paid in respect of the home.
The class of taxpayer to whom the deduction may be allowed is an
employee who carries on at a room or office in his home an income
producing activity independent from his employment, e.g. the employee
accountant who conducts a tax agent's practice from a room in his home,
the employee architect who does freelance work at a room in his home as
in 74 ATC, Case F53; 19 CTBR(NS) Case 65. The deduction may also be
allowed where the taxpayer's home is the place of business, e.g. the
music teacher who gives lessons at home. Other similar situations will
no doubt be encountered in practice.
6. In one sense it might be said that the barrister,
as in Thomas' case, who studies briefs and prepares opinions in a study
in his home is engaged in self-employed activities at his home. It is
not intended that any deduction for rent, interest, insurance etc. paid
in respect of the home in these circumstances should be allowed. The
income in that sort of situation is really derived from activities
carried on at the barrister's chambers and the study at his home is
nothing more than a study.
7. What is a reasonable amount to be allowed as a
deduction will depend upon the circumstances of each case. In some
instances where a room in the home is used for income producing purposes
for part only of the year, it may be necessary to apportion the expenses
on a floor area plus time basis. In other cases the apportionment on a
floor area basis may be sufficient.
8. Subject to this modification the existing
instructions relating to the deductibility of home office expenses
should continue to be applied.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Withdrawn by TR 93/30
References
ATO references:
NO J35/1051 P2 F163
Date original memo issued:
13.06.75
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 140
IT 192
IT 193
IT 194
Subject References:
HOME OFFICE EXPENSES
Legislative References:
51
Case References:
- Caffrey v FC of T 73
73 ATC 4144
4 ATR 109
- Case F53
74 ATC 294
- Case F55
74 ATC 308
- Faichney V FC of T
(1972) 129 CLR 38
- FC of T v McCloy
75 ATC 4079
5 ATR 315
- Thomas v FC of T
72 ATC 4094
3 ATR 165