IT 185 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
7 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 185
Section 26aaa - sale of rights or sale of shares allotted on taking up of rights
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102190
IT 185 NOTICE OF ARCHIVAL - 9th DECEMBER 1993
PREAMBLE
The advice below was given concerning the identification of shares sold and the assessability of profit arising from the sale of shares within 12 months of purchase following an enquiry on these matters.
RULING
2. With regard to the identification of shares sold,
share numbers allocated to individual shares or parcels of shares
represent the accepted form of identification for the purposes of
determining a profit assessable under section 26AAA. Where
identification by this means is not possible and in the absence of other
indicative factors such as distinctive rights or obligations attached to
the shares, a first-in-first-out basis of identification would be
accepted as reasonable.
3. A taxpayer is not assessable under section 26AAA
upon any profit arising from the sale within 12 months of rights issued
to him by virtue of an existing holding of shares in that or another
company. Rights accruing to the taxpayer in these circumstances are not
regarded as having been 'purchased' by him in terms of section 26AAA.
That is not to say, of course, that such a profit could not be
assessable in appropriate circumstances in accordance with section 25 or
26(a).
4. Shares allotted to the taxpayer in consequence of
the taking up of such rights are deemed to have been purchased by the
taxpayer by virtue of section 26AAA(1)(d). The date of purchase of such
shares is the date of the taxpayer's acceptance of the company's
unconditional offer. In determining the amount of any profit assessable
under section 26AAA to the taxpayer on the subsequent sale of the
shares, the cost of his acquisition of the shares will, of course,
comprise the value of the consideration given for them. That cost will
include the market value of the saleable rights taken up to acquire the
shares as at the day on which the taxpayer accepted the company's
unconditional offer. However, the position may be different in the case
where the existing holding of shares giving rise to the rights in the
new issue had been acquired by the taxpayer for the purpose of
profit-making by sale or in the course of a profit-making undertaking or
scheme or a share-trading business.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
7 December 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 78/3872
Date original memo issued:
07.12.78
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 185 NOTICE OF ARCHIVAL
IT 185W
Subject References:
SHARES SOLD WITHIN 12 MONTHS
SALE OF RIGHTS
DEEMED PURCHASE OF SHARES
IDENTIFICATION OF SHARES
Legislative References:
26AAA
26(a)