IT 177 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 177
Onus of proof - profit making scheme
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102101
PREAMBLE
The decision of the Full High Court in McCormack v FC of T (1978) 143 CLR 284 contains important statements concerning onus of proof (section 190(b)), particularly in relation to section 26(a) cases. Three Judges (Gibbs, Stephen and Murphy JJ) expressed disagreement with the majority view of Barwick CJ and Jacobs J in a previous case concerning section 190(b), viz Gauci & Ors v FC of T (1975) 135 CLR 81. The three Judges specifically adopted as correct the reasons advanced by Mason J in his dissenting judgment in Gauci's case insofar as they relate to section 190(b). Relevant extracts from that judgment (at page 4261) are set out hereunder:
'Section 190(b) of the Act imposed on the appellants the burden of proving that the assessments were excessive. The appellants relied on their evidence and that of Graham in order to show that the assessments were excessive. Once that evidence was rejected, the appellants' case necessarily failed.
The Act does not place any onus on the Commissioner to show that the assessments were correctly made. Nor is there any statutory requirement that the assessments should be sustained or supported by evidence. The implication of such a requirement would be inconsistent with sec. 190(b) for it is a consequence of that provision that unless the appellant shows by evidence that the assessment is incorrect, it will prevail.
I am unable to discern any basis for declining to give effect to sec. 190(b), according to its terms. Nor, for that matter, does it seem to me that the provision, understood according to its terms, operates unjustly in cases which turn on sec. 26(a). There is nothing inherently unfair in a provision which places the onus on a taxpayer to prove his case when the purpose for which an asset was acquired depends so much on his intentions and on circumstances of which he, rather than the Commissioner, has comprehensive knowledge.'
RULING
2. The crux of the matter is that when in a sec.
26(a) case an appellant seeks to overcome the onus created by sec.
190(b) by adducing evidence as to his intentions with a view to
establishing the purpose of the acquisition was not a sec. 26(a) purpose
and that evidence is not accepted, he has not discharged the onus which
he bears. At best, from the appellant's viewpoint, the evidence stands
in a situation in which it is equivocal, neither establishing a sec.
26(a) purpose nor denying the existence of such a purpose. At worst,
the judge may, in the circumstances, be able to infer the existence of
the sec. 26(a) purpose. In either event the appellant fails to
discharge the onus and his appeal fails.
3. The following extract from the judgment of Gibbs
J. in McCormack's Case is also relevant (at page 4121):
'The taxpayer bears the burden of proving that the assessment was
excessive. To discharge that burden in a case such as the present he
must prove affirmatively, on the balance of probabilities, that the
property was not acquired for the purpose of profit-making by sale. The
burden may be discharged by drawing inferences from the evidence. In
some cases in which all the relevant facts are known, and there is no
material upon which it might properly be concluded that the property was
acquired for the relevant purpose, the inference may properly be drawn
that the property was not acquired for the relevant purpose. But it is
not enough, even when all the facts are known, that there is no material
upon which it may be concluded that the property was acquired for the
purpose mentioned in s.26(a). If a taxpayer can succeed, simply because
there is no evidence from which it can be concluded that the relevant
purpose existed, that must mean that the burden of proving the existence
of that purpose lies on the Commissioner. That in my respectful opinion
would be to invert the onus of proof. The taxpayer will succeed if the
proper inference from the evidence is that the property was not acquired
for the relevant purpose, but if there is no evidence as to the purpose
for which the taxpayer acquired the property the appeal must
fail.'
4. McCormack's Case also considered the question of
whether section 190(b) applied in an appeal to a Court from a Board of
Review decision. In a previous hearing of the McCormack Case before the
Federal Court (77 ATC 4543; 8 ATR 227), Bowen CJ and Brennan J said that
s. 190(b) applies only to the reference or appeal provided for in s. 187
and s. 188 of the Act, and not to the Appeal to the Supreme Court from a
Board of Review decision as provided for in s. 196(1). Therefore, they
concluded, a judge who is finding the facts on the evidence before him
in an appeal from a Board of Review, may not rely upon s. 190(b), for
that section has no application to the issues before him. The High
Court has now overruled this view. Gibbs J held that although the
introductory words of s. 190, literally understood, suggest that the 2
limbs of that section apply only on a reference or an appeal under s.
187, that was not, in his opinion, the intention of the Parliament. He
went on to state that there can be no doubt that on an appeal from the
Supreme Court to the Federal Court or to the High Court (s. 200), the
appellate Court is required to apply the same rule as to the burden of
proof as that which governed the decision of the Court from which the
appeal was brought. This was so also in the case of an appeal to the
Supreme Court from a decision of a Board of Review.
5. Murphy J agreed with Gibbs J. He held that the
legislative scheme, although not expressly stated, is that the
provisions of s. 190 are applicable on appeal to the Supreme Court, the
Federal Court, and the High Court. Further, the provisions of s. 190
applied to an appeal whether or not the Board of Review had varied the
disputed assessment.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
22 May 1980
References
ATO references:
NO 75/5848 P3 F107
Date original memo issued:
22.05.80
Subject References:
ONUS OF PROOF
PROFIT MAKING SCHEMES
APPEALS TO SUPERIOR COURTS
Legislative References:
190 (b)
26 (a)
Case References:
- Gauci & Ors v FC of T
(1975) 135 CLR 81
- McCormack v FC of T
77 ATC 4543
8 ATR 227
- McCormack v FC of T
79 ATC 4111
143 CLR 284
(1979) 9 ATR 610