IT 150 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
4 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 150
Authors - payments under the Commonwealth Literary Fund
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1101881
PREAMBLE
The taxation treatment of payments under the fellowships awarded from the Commonwealth Literary Fund has been considered.
2. Fellowships are awarded to enable authors to spend a certain period writing, the result of which the Board hopes will be a work of literature. Apparently most of the current awards are for a period of one year and carry a grant of $6,000 but it is possible that some may be given for longer periods in future.
RULING
3. Payments under the awards do not meet the terms
of the definition of "lump sum earnings" in section 158C(2) because,
apart from other reasons, a fellowship holder does not receive an amount
in a lump sum. Payments are made each month on a calendar year
basis.
4. It has been decided, however, that the payments
may be treated as "recurrent earnings" as defined in section 158C(2).
Accordingly, the payments may be brought to account in determining
whether the assessable income of a fellowship holder for a particular
year of income includes "abnormal income" within the meaning of that
expression as laid down in section 158C(1).
5. In arriving at this decision, the conclusion was
reached that the provision of the definition of "recurrent earnings"
which excludes "remuneration ... for services rendered" from the
qualifying classes of income does not operate to exclude payments under
Commonwealth Literary Fund Fellowships.
6. The conditions of the awards require fellowship
holders to submit regular reports on the progress of their work and
permit the Fund's Advisory Board to examine material at any time and to
terminate payments if the work is considered to be unsatisfactory.
However, no benefit whatever passes to the Fund as consideration for the
payments and they would not, in the circumstances, be classifiable as
remuneration for services rendered. They are merely gratuities, the
payment of which is dependent on the satisfactory performance by the
recipient of work for his own benefit. Nevertheless, it is arguable
that the payments fall literally within the terms of the definition of
"recurrent earnings" as being amounts received by the taxpayer "in
respect of ... a literary ... work of which the taxpayer is the author". As this interpretation gives a result that is consistent with the
policy underlying Division 16A, it has been decided to adopt it.
7. Payments from the Fund are subjected to tax
instalment deductions and group certificates showing the Prime
Minister's Department as employer, without any indication that the
income is a fellowship grant, are issued to the fellowship
holders.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
1 September 1983
References
ATO references:
NO J130/73 P1 F246
Date original memo issued:
17.01.68
Subject References:
ABNORMAL INCOME
AUTHORS
COMMONWEALTH LITERARY FUND
RECURRENT EARNINGS
Legislative References:
DIVISION 16A
158C(2)
221A