IT 147 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
11 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 147
Wheat as trading stock
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
This ruling contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been rewritten. The ruling still has effect. Paragraph 32 in
TR 2006/10
provides further guidance on the status and binding effect of public rulings where the law has been repealed or repealed and rewritten. The legislative references at the end of the ruling indicate the repealed provisions and, where applicable, the rewritten provisions.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1101855
PREAMBLE
The income tax position of a farmer who produces more wheat than he is entitled to deliver to the Australian Wheat Board during the coming harvest has been considered.
RULING
2. Growers have been allotted a quota which they may
deliver to the Board for selling under the normal marketing
arrangements. In law, the property in the wheat vests in the Board when
it leaves the grower's property. Accordingly, this wheat is not trading
stock (cf. Farnsworth v FCT (1949), 78 CLR 504) and does not have to be
brought to account for income tax purposes even though the grower will
eventually receive a series of progress payments from the Board.
3. The result is the same if the Board is prepared
to accept delivery of over-quota wheat. If storage capacity is
available later, growers may be advised to deliver some of their excess.
 If they do this, it will be deducted from the following year's quota
and they will not receive payment. However, it will cease to be trading
stock and so will not have to be brought to account for income tax
purposes.
4. Any wheat retained on the property for use as
feed or seed will also fall outside the definition of trading stock and
may be ignored for income tax purposes.
5. Surplus wheat held for resale at the end of the
year of income constitutes trading stock and is required to be brought
to account for assessment purposes. If cost is the basis of valuation,
cost could be quite low as only cash outlays need be taken into account.
 On the other hand, the trading stock could be brought to account at
market selling value but it is difficult to envisage any reasonable
hypothesis for assuming that this basis would give a lower figure than
cost.
6. In this connection, it is doubtful whether the
discretionary provisions of section 31(2) could be invoked. However,
irrespective of whether section 31(1) or section 31(2) is applied in
determining the value of such wheat on hand, it is the value at the end
of the year of income - 30 June 1970 - that has to be determined and
such a value cannot be determined at this stage. All available wheat
may be sold or accepted by the Board, in which case there will be no
problem; alternatively, the value of wheat at 30 June 1970 may have a
value which renders any value other than cost wholly unacceptable to the
taxpayer.
7. It has been decided by the Commissioner that
enquirers should be reassured that wheat does not have to be brought to
account as trading stock if -
(a)
it is delivered to the Wheat Board; or
(b)
it is retained for the farmer's own use as feed or
seed.
8. As to surplus wheat held for re-sale, enquirers
should merely be advised that the law requires it to be brought to
account as trading stock but it can be returned at cost (which could be
quite low as only cash outlays need be taken into account), at market
selling value or at the price at which it can be replaced. A market
selling value less than cost will be accepted if the taxpayer can show
that, as at the last day of the year of income, market selling value was
less than cost.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
15 October 1969
References
ATO references:
NO J96/1 P8 F460
Date original memo issued:
15.10.69
Subject References:
WHEAT STOCKS
TRADING STOCKS
Legislative References:
28
29
31
Case References:
- Farnsworth v FCT
(1949) 78 CLR 504
Back to top