IT 122 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 122
Section 26AAA - disposal of property under matrimonial settlement
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100698
Facts
Consideration has been given to the possible application of Section 26AAA to any profit arising from the sale of property in the following circumstances.
2. Two taxpayers, a husband and his wife, had jointly owned two properties for a number of years. One property was the matrimonial home and the other was a holiday house at the seaside.
3. Following dissolution of their marriage, a Deed of Settlement was executed whereby, inter alia, the wife agreed to transfer to her husband all of her right, title and interest in the matrimonial home. Contemporaneously, the husband agreed to transfer to her all of his right, title and interest in the seaside house. In addition, the wife agreed to pay a cash settlement to him within 14 days of approval of the Deed by the Family Court.
4. For personal and financial reasons, the wife wished to dispose of the seaside house within twelve months of the above transfer and an opinion was sought as to whether the profit, if any, on disposal would be treated as assessable income.
Ruling
5. It was considered that the wife did not
"purchase" her former husband's interest in the property as ordinarily
understood or in terms of the deeming provisions of Section 26AAA(1)(f). The effect of the marriage settlement approved by the court under
Section 87 of the Family Law Act 1975 was a division of property rather
than an exchange.
6. In the circumstances it was considered that if
the wife were to sell the property within twelve months from the date on
which she acquired her former husband's interest, any profit arising
from the sale would not be assessable income under Section
26AAA.
Commissioner of Taxation
13 November 1980
References
ATO references:
NO J.153/117/113 P3 F224
Date original memo issued:
13.11.80
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 122H
IT 122W
IT 183
Subject References:
property sold in 12 months
transfer of property
marriage settlement
Legislative References:
ITAA 26AAA(1)(f)