IT 106 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
7 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 106
Compensation and insurance recoveries, Darwin cyclone
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1070734
Facts
Consideration has been given to the assessability of compensation payments and insurance recoveries paid in respect of damage caused by Cyclone Tracy to real property used in the production of assessable income.
2. The nature of the payments under the Darwin Cyclone Damage Compensation Act 1975 emerges from the following extract of the Second Reading Speech.
"The compensation proposals have been very carefully considered by an inter-departmental committee and by the Government. They are a departure from previous Australian Government initiatives in response to natural disasters. Unlike previous disasters, Darwin is in a unique situation. It is situated in an Australian Territory for which the Australian Government is responsible. Geographically it is isolated with no near lying city of any size from which its residents could receive support, nor to which they could be relocated after the disaster. Thousands had to be evacuated from the city, some without choice, many of whom have as yet been unable to return. The almost total destruction caused by the cyclone was of a kind unknown in Australia. It was in every sense a major disaster even by international standards. As such the situation calls for unique measures."
3. The extract illustrates that payments were to be made to all persons affected by "Cyclone Tracy" regardless of their income producing activities.
Ruling
4. It is now considered that payments under the
Darwin Cyclone Damage Compensation Act 1975 cannot be correctly
characterised as income and should not be taken into account for any
purposes of the Income Tax Assessment Act. Payments under the Act are
essentially gifts from the Commonwealth Government by way of relief from
the havoc caused by the cyclone.
5. Nor is it considered that the payments are
indemnities within the meaning of section 26(j) even though that term
has been given a wide meaning, cf. FC of T v Wade (1951) 84 CLR 105 and
Goldsborough Mort & Co. Ltd. v FC of T 76 ATC 4343, 6 ATR 580. Whatever
the limits of the meaning of the term "indemnity" there is inherent in
the concept of it that, at some time prior to making the payment, an
undertaking had been given by the payer or some other person that the
recipient of the payment would be kept secured against or compensated
for, possible loss and that the payment was made in satisfaction of the
undertaking. These elements are lacking from payments made under the
Act.
Insurance Recoveries
6. To the extent that an insurance recovery related
to repairs to income producing property it may well be that section
26(j) would authorise its inclusion in assessable income. A firm
decision on this question could only be made, however, in the light of
all the relevant facts.
7. Assuming that an amount is to be included in
assessable income under section 26(j) the question arises in which year
it is to be included, particularly in a situation where the relevant
repairs are not carried out until some time after receipt of the
insurance recovery. The terms of section 26(j) make it clear that any
amount to which the section applies is to be included in the assessable
income of the year of receipt. The section does not enable an insurance
recovery to be set-off against the cost of repairs in a year subsequent
to the receipt of the insurance recovery.
Commissioner of Taxation
1 August 1980
References
ATO references:
NO 79/4229 F80
Date original memo issued:
01.08.80
Subject References:
compensation payments
insurance recoveries
cyclone damage payments
Legislative References:
ITAA 25(1)
ITAA 26(j)
Case References:
FC of T v Wade
(1951) 84 CLR 105
Goldsborough Mort & Co Ltd v FC of T
76 ATC 4343
6 ATR 580
Back to top