IT 149 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
8 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 149
Legal expenses incurred for fines and/or breaches of the law in the course of carrying on a business
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1101876
PREAMBLE
These guidelines have issued as a result of several decisions concerning the deductibility of legal expenses, to assist in the treatment of such expenses.
2. As a result of a number of decisions which are conveniently set out in paragraphs 512 and 513 of Challoner & Greenwood's "Income Tax Law and Practice", it has become a fairly well established principle that deductions are not allowed for fines incurred for breaches of the law committed in the course of carrying on a business. In normal circumstances, the legal expenses incurred by a taxpayer in defending himself or his employees from prosecutions of this nature would also fail to qualify for deduction. The principle no doubt has its justification in an assumption that if a taxpayer chooses to operate in breach of the law, the expenditure is not incurred in the furtherance of his business but rather in connection with the imposition of penalties for unlawful acts.
3. Notwithstanding these principles there is a marginal type of case in which a taxpayer who is carrying on a business in good faith and in a reputable manner necessarily exposes himself to some risk of occasional prosecution because, in the day to day conduct of his business, he must operate through employees and there is always a risk that more or less inadvertently he may fall into a breach of the law.
4. This situation arose in a case where a dairy company of good repute was prosecuted for a minor breach of cleanliness involving the work of one employee. There was no indication that the company had adopted a practice of ignoring its responsibilities under the law or taking a calculated risk with prosecutions. It rather appeared that the company, quite by accident, had been held responsible for the casual negligence of one person. This was recognised by the Court is not imposing a pecuniary penalty for the offence.
RULING
5. In these circumstances the decision was taken that it
would be consistent with the decision of the High Court in Herald &
Weekly Times Ltd v FCT (1932) 48 CLR 113 to regard the expenditure as
normal incident to which the taxpayer had been exposed in the day to day
conduct of its business and which satisfied the tests for deductibility
under section 51.
6. The decision may be followed in other cases of a
similar nature as, for example, where a reputable restaurant proprietor
finds it necessary to incur legal expenses in connection with action
taken against him for an accidental breach of the Government regulations
relating to hygiene and cleanliness. It will not, however, extend to
expenditure incurred in meeting fines imposed on the taxpayer or his
employees or to legal expenses incurred by taxpayers such as transport
operators who, as calculated risk, persistently take liberties with the
law and incur fines regularly in the interests of the efficient
operation of their business. There are a number of such cases which are
waiting decision by the Board of Review and further rulings will be
given in the light of the outcome in these cases.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
30 October 1968
References
ATO references:
NO J35/127 P2 F842
Date original memo issued:
30.10.68
Subject References:
LEGAL EXPENSES
ILLEGAL ACTS
FINES
PENALTIES
Legislative References:
51(1)
Case References:
- Herald & Weekly Times Ltd v FCT
(1932) 48 CLR 113