IT 183 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
4 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 183
Section 26AAA - sale of matrimonial home within 12 months of death of spouse
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102164
PREAMBLE
Representations were received from a firm of solicitors seeking clarification of the application of section 26AAA where the matrimonial home is sold within 12 months of the death of the husband.
RULING
2. The first situation concerns a sale of the
matrimonial home by a widow within 12 months of the death of her
husband, with whom she had jointly owned the home. In this situation,
section 26AAA(1)(f) does not extend to deem an interest in jointly owned
property that passes to the surviving co-owner to have been sold by the
deceased or purchased by the survivor.
3. Section 26AAA does not apply in relation to
property owned by a taxpayer at the time of his death which becomes
vested in the executor or administrator of his estate (e.g. on the grant
of probate). Accordingly, where such property is realised by the
deceased's executor or administrator in the course of administering the
estate, section 26AAA itself would have no application to any profit
arising on the sale. Whether any amount would be assessable under other
and more general provisions of the law would, of course, depend upon the
circumstances of the particular case.
4. The section also has no application where a
person receives property or an interest in property as a beneficiary
under a will or intestacy even though the beneficiary disposes of that
property or interest within 12 months of receiving it.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
6 September 1974
References
ATO references:
NO J.153/117/13 P3 F20
Date original memo issued:
06.09.74
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 122
IT 183W
Subject References:
PROPERTY SOLD WITHIN 12 MONTHS
DECEASED ESTATE
MATRIMONIAL HOME
SALE BY EXECUTOR
RECEIPT BY BENEFICIARY
Legislative References:
26AAA(1)(f)