IT 27 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 27
Decision of Board of Review re apportionment of investment allowance and power to increase assessment
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100278
Preamble
The following issues emerged from the Board of Review's decision in 80ATC Case M49, 24 CTBR (NS) Case 22.
Ruling
2. The question for decision by the Board was
whether the taxpayer was entitled to a deduction under section 82AB in
respect of a computer and other office equipment purchased by it and
installed and used wholly and exclusively in its business as a credit
union. The major part of the taxpayer's income arose from loans to its
members and was therefore exempt in terms of section 23G. Upon
assessment, a deduction was allowed, based upon an apportionment of the
deduction between exempt and assessable income.
3. Before the Board, however, the Commissioner
contended that no deduction should have been allowed because the
eligible property was not used wholly and exclusively for the purpose of
producing assessable income as required by section 82AA(a). The
majority of the Board, Messrs Stevens and Harrowell, found no difficulty
in accepting this submission. However, Mr Fairleigh QC considered that
the apportionment adopted in the assessment was correct. In this view
each use of the said equipment, either to produce assessable income or
non-assessable income, was incidental to the other use and inseparable
therefrom; apportionment was appropriate.
4. An interesting aspect of the decision is the
Board's consideration of whether it should increase the assessment by
disallowing the amount allowed by the Commissioner. Mr Stevens said
there were no new facts before the Board. As the Commissioner had made
a mistake of law and could not himself have amended the assessment the
Board did not have a greater power of review. He concluded that even if
he was of a different view as to the Board's powers he would not have
considered the case before the Board to be a suitable one to exercise
those powers to increase the taxpayer's assessment. Mr Fairleigh
considered that the Board had no power to confirm an assessment which
the Board is convinced is wrong; in his view, however, the subject
assessment was correct. Mr Harrowell took a different view again. He
considered that the Commissioner had erred in law. The question of law
formed part of the taxpayer's objection and was properly before the
Board. He found that the Board had power to increase the assessment and
that it should exercise that power. In the result, the Commissioner's
decision on the objection was confirmed.
Commissioner of Taxation
13 November 1980
References
ATO references:
NO 79/6364 F40
Date original memo issued:
13.11.80
Subject References:
investment allowance - apportionment
board of review - powers
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AA
ITAA 193(1)
ITAA 195(1)