IT 248 Taxation Ruling
IT 248
Deceased employees : payments in respect of furlough and recreation leave
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
This ruling contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been rewritten. The ruling still has effect. Paragraph 32 in
TR 2006/10
provides further guidance on the status and binding effect of public rulings where the law has been repealed or repealed and rewritten. The legislative references at the end of the ruling indicate the repealed provisions and, where applicable, the rewritten provisions.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102030
PREAMBLE
Consideration has been given to the appropriate income tax treatment of lump sum payments in respect of untaken furlough and recreation leave paid to dependants or the legal personal representative of a deceased employee generally.
RULING
2. It seems clear enough that s.26(d) was not
intended to have application to these payments, and this is so, whether
the deceased employee had been a member of the Commonwealth public
service or employed by a private employer, State government or other
body. It has been the practice of this Office in the past to apply the
section only where the recipient of the lump sum is the particular
taxpayer who has retired or terminated his office or employment. On
this basis, neither a payment to the dependants nor to the personal
representative would be assessable under s.26(d).
3. Nor, it is thought, does s.101A operate in
conjunction with s.26(d) to bring in 5 per cent of any amount paid to
the deceased employee's estate. To do this, the section would have to
refer to the receipt of an amount, a proportion of which would have been
assessable in the hands of the deceased. Of course it does not say this
and, in its literal terms, cannot operate to bring 5 per cent of the
amount received into the net income of the trust arising on the death of
the deceased employee.
4. Having reached this conclusion, it remains to
consider whether s.101A, standing alone, applies to bring to tax the
full amount received in a lump sum. Again, it is considered that the
answer is in the negative.
5. In the general run of cases, a continuing
employee would not have received the payment except in respect of a
period of furlough or leave actually taken, and only in such a case
would it ordinarily be assessable in full. If paid in lieu of leave,
say on retirement, it would be not the amount paid, but only 5 per cent
of it, that would be assessable, and then only by virtue of s.26(d)
which, as mentioned above, has no application.
6. In these circumstances, it does not seem possible
to say that the amount, if received by the deceased employee during his
lifetime, would have been assessable income since, to do so, it would be
necessary to assume that the payment had been made in respect of leave
actually taken by the employee and that assumption would be contrary to
the facts. Unless it is established that the amount would have been
assessable in full in the hands of the deceased employee if it had been
received by him during his lifetime, s.101A cannot apply to bring the
payment in as income of a trust estate.
7. Accordingly, no part of a lump sum paid in
respect of untaken furlough or recreation leave of a deceased employee,
whether received by his dependants or legal personal representative,
should be treated as assessable income.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
10 August 1978
References
ATO references:
NO J78/238 F230
Date original memo issued:
10.08.78
Subject References:
FURLOUGH LEAVE
RECREATION LEAVE
DECEASED EMPLOYEES
LUMP SUM PAYMENTS
Legislative References:
26(d)
101A