IT 255 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 255
Calculation of separate net income of dependants
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070427
FACTS
1. The question has been raised whether and/or the extent to which lump sum payments received by a taxpayer on retirement in lieu of accrued annual leave, sick leave or long service leave form part of separate net income for the purposes of the concessional rebate for dependants.
RULING
2. Lump sum payments of these kinds are considered
to be of an income nature and should be taken into account in
determining the separate net income of a dependant in a year. Clearly
lump sum payments in lieu of annual leave, sick leave or long service
leave received by an employee during the course of the employment would
constitute the receipt of income - the payments would be part and parcel
of the rewards of the employment.
3. The fact that such payments may be made on
retirement is not considered to alter their essential character as
income. There is no commutation or capitalisation involved. The amounts
paid are simply a straightforward aggregation of the employee's
entitlements. In essence they are no different to arrears of salary
paid in a lump sum, to arrears of workers compensation paid in a lump
sum, etc. all of which represent receipts of income and would form part
of the separate net income of a dependant.
4. This is not to say that all lump sum payments
made to an employee in consequence of retirement from or termination of
an office or employment are to be taken into account in calculating the
separate net income of a dependant in a year. Many lump sum payments
made in consequence of retirement from or termination of an office or
employment are of a capital nature, e.g. a lump sum payment from a
provident or superannuation fund, a payment to which section 78(1)(c)
applies, compensation for loss of office, etc. Notwithstanding that
section 26(d) might operate to include 5% of such lump sums in the
recipient's assessable income, no part of a lump sum receipt of a
capital nature is to be taken into account for separate net income
purposes. It will be a question in each case of deciding the character
of the receipt in question, i.e. whether it is a receipt of income or of
capital.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
2 November 1981
References
ATO references:
NO J345/48 P1 F69
Date original memo issued:
03.11.81
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
SEPARATE NET INCOME
LUMP SUM PAYMENTS ON RETIREMENT
Legislative References:
159J