IT 262 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 262
Education expenses - excursions by school children
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070028
FACTS
Consideration has been given to the treatment of claims for expenses incurred by parents in meeting the costs of school excursions.
RULING
2. In the interpretation of a provision such as
section 82J, borderline cases inevitably arise. Questions of degree
have to be determined by going back to the words used by the legislature
in the section, and considering them in the context in which they appear
in the Income Tax Assessment Act and in the light of the precedents
established by the decided cases. It is not practicable to substitute,
for this approach, the automatic application of tests not provided for
in the Act such as whether the trip took place in term or whether it was
to an overseas country. These are not determining factors but rather
straws in the wind which have to be taken into account, along with all
the surrounding circumstances of the particular case, in deciding
whether it falls on one side of the borderline or the other.
3. The concept of expenditure that is necessarily
incurred in connection with full-time education is broadly expressed but
it gives the Commissioner an opportunity to allow claims which are
really part of the cost of sending a child to school while refusing to
allow those claims which, in the Commissioner's judgment, fall on the
other side of the line - expenses which, although having some
relationship to school, are really part of the private expenses of
maintaining a family. Thus we have no trouble in accepting that
prescribed textbooks are deductible, and even non-prescribed books if
they are directly and specifically bought to assist the child with his
studies . On the other hand, the cost of major encyclopaedias, while
they may also help the child at times with his school work, is not
deductible because the connection with the child's full-time studies is
too remote. The process of deciding what is in and what is out is
necessarily somewhat arbitrary at times but, generally speaking, the
rulings that have been laid down produce fair results and have been
accepted.
4. Similar questions of degree arise in connection
with school excursions. If children are asked (and expected) to bring a
bus fare to school to pay for a class visit to a museum or to a site
which illustrates geological features, there would be no hesitation in
accepting that this expenditure, if made by a parent, is necessarily
incurred in connection with the child's full-time education. The words
"necessarily incurred" in section 82J do not mean that expenditure must
be unavoidable - they have the same meaning as in section 51. All that
is necessary is that the expenditure should be of a kind that it is
reasonably appropriate for the parent to expend in connection with his
child's full-time education at a school, college or university.
5. These guidelines were applied in considering
three cases where reference to a Taxation Board of Review was sought. In
one case the excursion by the child was confined to Victoria and the
Murray River area, the visits were to places related to the geography
curriculum of the child's classes, the excursion took place during term
and was approved by the Education Department. There was no doubt at all
that the Board of Review would have allowed the expenditure under
section 82J. The other two cases were clearly borderline. The children
were taken much further than would have been necessary to merely
illustrate or complement school instruction. These trips had some of
the elements of a grand tour and a holiday. If, in addition to all the
surrounding circumstances, they had taken place in vacation time, it was
felt that the expenditure should be disallowed. The disallowance would
have been defended before the Board on the ground that, when all the
surrounding circumstances of the case were taken into account, the
connection between the trip and the child's full-time education at a
school was too remote.
6. It follows that claims in respect of overseas
trips should generally be disallowed. Generally speaking, claims for
expenditure on interstate trips should also be disallowed if they occur
outside school term. If a trip is taken within term, the fact that the
Education Department has permitted the children to suspend their studies
would, in itself, raise at least a presumption that the trip was
undertaken for school purposes. On the other hand, if it emerged that
the impetus for the trip came from an enthusiastic parents' association
rather than from the teachers, this would tend to support the contrary
conclusion.
7. Where the trips take place during vacation but
teachers supervise and the children visit places relevant to their
education, on an overall view, it would seem reasonable to assume that
the aim was to assist the children with their studies rather than to
give them a holiday. It may therefore be accepted that section 82J
applies in these circumstances.
8. These are only general guidelines, of course. The
over-riding consideration is whether, on balance, it appears that the
dominant purpose of the excursion was to help the child with his
full-time studies or to give him a holiday with his class which might
have some incidentally beneficial effects in relation to his education,
but which would be too remote to satisfy section 82J.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
24 December 1968
References
ATO references:
NO 68/5089 F53
Date original memo issued:
24.12.68
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 264
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
EDUCATIONAL EXPENSES
SCHOOL EXCURSIONS
Legislative References:
82J
159T