IT 232 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 232
Compulsory destruction of livestock
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
View the
Addendum notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
This ruling contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been rewritten. The ruling still has effect. Paragraph 32 in
TR 2006/10
provides further guidance on the status and binding effect of public rulings where the law has been repealed or repealed and rewritten. The legislative references at the end of the ruling indicate the repealed provisions and, where applicable, the rewritten provisions.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102681
PREAMBLE
Consideration has been given to the manner in which section 36AA was being applied in circumstances where a primary producer, in complying with an order to de-stock his property as part of the programme for the eradication of certain diseases, e.g., brucellosis and tuberculosis, sells livestock by auction or private sale to an abattoir or meatworks for destruction.
RULING
2. In some cases the section was not applied in these
circumstances on the grounds that the livestock would not form part of
the business of primary production at the time of destruction as is
required by the section - the sale to the abattoir or meatworks would
carry with it the consequence that the property in the livestock would
have passed to the purchaser prior to the time of destruction.
Furthermore, it could hardly be said that the proceeds of the cattle to
an abattoir or meatworks in these circumstances represented proceeds
from the sale of the carcasses or part of the carcasses as is required
in subsection (7) of section 36AA.
3. While the matter may not be free from doubt it has
been decided that section 36AA does not require that the livestock
should form part of the assets of a business of primary production at
the date of destruction. State legislation relating to the control of
disease in livestock provides measures for the seizure of diseased
livestock. It is accepted that compensation payable in respect of
diseased stock destroyed after seizure would attract the operation of
section 36AA. It is similarly accepted that the sale of livestock to an
abattoir or meatworks pursuant to an order for the destruction of the
livestock for the purpose of eradicating disease is a situation to which
section 36AA applies. As an order for the destruction of diseased
livestock invariably carries with it the requirement that the livestock
be slaughtered immediately it is also accepted that the payment for the
livestock is in reality a payment for the carcasses within the meaning
of subsection (7).
4. In general terms this decision means that section 36AA
will apply where livestock forming part of the assets of a business of
primary production are the subject of an order for their destruction
made in pursuance of a law of the Commonwealth, of a State or of a
Territory relating to the destruction of livestock for the purposes of
controlling or eradicating a disease, are destroyed in pursuance of that
order, and a profit in terms of the section arises from their
destruction.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
8 May 1980
References
ATO references:
NO J85/122 P4 F353
Date original memo issued:
08.05.80
Subject References:
FORCED DISPOSAL OF LIVESTOCK
COMPULSORY DESTRUCTION OF LIVESTOCK
DESTOCKING OF PROPERTY
Legislative References:
36AA
Back to top