IT 264 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 264
Education expenses - overseas excursions by school children
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be ReleasedFOI number:
I 1070054
FACTS
Taxation Ruling IT 262, in dealing with excursions by school children, stated that claims in respect of overseas trips should generally be disallowed.
2. The question of deductibility of the cost of an overseas trip by school children where the purpose of the trip involved language study was subsequently raised by a branch office.
RULING
3. The view is held that the dominant purpose of the
tour which was undertaken by students of Japanese at the Churchlands
High School, organised and supervised by a teacher and approved by the
School's headmaster and by the State Education Department, was
assistance in the study of the Japanese language. As such, that part of
the cost of the tour, which related to the trip to Japan and the time
spent there would represent expenses necessarily incurred in connection
with full-time education within the meaning of section 82J. To be
"necessarily incurred" within the terms of section 82J, all that is
necessary is that the expenditure should be of a kind that it is
reasonably appropriate for the parent to expend in connection with his
child's full-time education at a school, college or university.
4. In considering cases such as this, it should be
borne in mind that, so far as any language study is concerned, periods
spent in the country where that language is habitually spoken are of the
utmost value, particularly if the student spends considerable time with
native speakers and is compelled to converse in the language for most of
that time.
5. This argument applies even more strongly to a
difficult language, such as Japanese and indeed the information
furnished in the case under review and which would be adduced before a
Taxation Board of Review, indicates that the students were obliged to
make use of the Japanese language to a considerable extent during the
course of the period spent in Japan and did, in fact, spend
approximately one week with Japanese families, where little but Japanese
was spoken.
6. There is also the added argument that, in
studying any language at any depth at all, it is necessary that more
than the language itself be studied. In other words (and this is widely
recognised in secondary schools) considerable attention must also be
paid to the history, geography, culture, etc. of the people whose
language is the subject of study and again these factors assume even
greater importance where languages of a more alien type, such as
Oriental languages, are concerned. In such case it is clear that there
can be no adequate substitute for a stay in the country itself.
7. These points acquire even greater emphasis when
one bears in mind the often repeated argument that the teaching of
Japanese and other Asian languages should be more widespread in
Australia. Adequate instruction in these languages cannot be
dissociated from frequent contact with native speakers and this can
scarcely be brought about to any great effect without spending some
time, however brief, in the country concerned.
8. It is also unlikely that many of the parents of
these high school students would have been prepared to incur the not
inconsiderable cost of the tour, had they not been of opinion that it
would be of benefit to their children in their studies. There is little
doubt that they would be able to argue a very strong case before a Board
and it is considered that they would have every chance of
success.
9. Accordingly, claims made by parents in respect of
this particular tour may be allowed, up to the extent permitted by
section 82J, provided that the children were students of
Japanese.
10. Claims in respect of other tours where the facts
are similar may also be allowed but, where there is any marked
difference and difficulties arise in dealing with the claims, the matter
is to be referred to Head Office for decision.
11. It should be noted, however, that, although the
wording of section 82J may not support an apportionment of expenditure,
as does that of section 51, care should be taken that, where a
dissection of expenditure is possible, no deduction is allowed for
expenses which may not have the requisite connection "with full-time
education at a school, college or university". This consideration
would, for instance, apply to the South-East Asian part of the tour
organised by the Churchlands High School.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
11 January 1972
References
ATO references:
NO J 345/42 P7 F48
Date original memo issued:
11.01.72
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 262
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
EDUCATION EXPENSES
OVERSEAS SCHOOL EXCURSIONS
Legislative References:
82J
159T
Back to top