IT 214 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 214
Income tax: dissolution of partnership and disposal of property - application of sections 59(2A) and 59(2D)
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1102844
PREAMBLE
Following the decision of Taxation Board of Review No.2 in 22 CTBR(NS) Case 61; 78 ATC Case K1, a question arose concerning the application of section 59(2A) in circumstances where a partnership is dissolved, property of the partnership is disposed of and the former partners individually acquire in their own rights property to replace that disposed of by the partnership.
2. In the particular case a partnership, comprising a private company and three individuals, disposed of a fishing vessel for an amount which produced an adjustment of depreciation under section 59(2) of a substantial amount. One member of the former partnership, the private company, acquired another fishing vessel in its own right and sought to have its share of the depreciation adjustment treated as a balancing charge under section 59(2A) to reduce the cost of the new vessel acquired by it.
3. Consideration of the question was complicated by the additional fact that the other members of the former partnership, after acquiring with others varying interests in a new fishing vessel, intended to make requests in terms of section 59(2D) that their shares of the depreciation adjustment be treated as a balancing charge and applied against the cost of the new vessel. However, the Board decision referred to above put an end to their intentions.
RULING
4. As a matter of interpretation it must be accepted
that section 59 has application in a partnership situation. The Acts
Interpretation Act would require that the term "taxpayer" appearing in
section 59 to be also understood as "taxpayers". This would mean that
where partnership property is sold section 59, standing alone, would
operate to include in the assessable income of each partner his share of
the depreciation adjustment. In this event there is no question that
the terms of section 59(2A) would operate in the case under
review.
5. The only question that arises is - does section
90 require any different conclusion to the operation of section 59?
There is no reason to suggest that it does. Section 90 is in the nature
of a machinery provision. Its effect, insofar as section 59 is
concerned, is simply to deal with the depreciation adjustments in the
one return, i.e. the partnership return. In all the circumstances of
this case and other conditions being satisfied, the view has been
reached that the private company which acquired a fishing vessel in its
own right to replace that formerly owned by the partnership would be
entitled to the benefit of section 59(2A). It is not accepted, however,
that section 59(2D) has application in the circumstances represented by
the other former members of the partnership who acquired an interest in
property as distinct from the property itself.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
21 November 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 78/3784 F17
Date original memo issued:
21.11.78
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 214W
Subject References:
DISPOSAL OF UNIT OF PROPERTY
BALANCING CHARGE
PARTNERSHIPS
Legislative References:
59(2A)
59(2D)
Case References:
Case K1
78 ATC 1