IT 261 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
8 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 261
Fees paid to nursing homes - whether payments to a hospital
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
View the
Addendum notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070012
FACTS
Consideration has been given to whether fees paid by a taxpayer to a nursing home, either in respect of himself or herself or of a dependant inmate, represent payments to a hospital within the meaning of section 159P(4) of the Income Tax Assessment Act and thus qualify as rebatable amounts.
RULING
2. The circumstances in which a nursing home may
qualify as a hospital do not readily permit the formulation of one
general rule. The Income Tax Assessment Act uses general terms when it
refers in section 159P(4) to payments made to public or private
hospitals in respect of an illness or operation. The Shorter Oxford
Dictionary gives the current meaning of the term "hospital" as an
institution for the care of the sick or wounded or of those who require
medical attention.
3. A home for mentally retarded children is regarded
as a hospital. Further, a person who is mentally retarded is accepted
as suffering from an illness. The fact that the illness may be
incurable is not a debarring factor since, if this were the case, claims
for payments to hospitals in respect of other more conventional
illnesses which may also be incurable would also be debarred.
4. Essentially the same situation exists in relation
to patients in nursing homes. They are there because they suffer from
some continuing illness or infirmity for which nursing attention is
required.
5. In past years consideration has been given to the
allowance of a deduction, under former section 82F, for fees paid by a
taxpayer to a nursing home in respect of a dependant inmate for whom
Commonwealth intensive care benefits were payable. Enquiries made at
the Department of Health revealed that there were two classes of
benefits for persons in approved nursing homes. Ordinary nursing home
care benefits were payable where the patient was in need of minimum
care. Intensive home care nursing benefits were payable where the
patient who, by reason of an infirmity or illness, disease, incapacity
or disability, was bedridden or vitually bedridden and was wholly or
substantially dependent upon nursing care and, only then, when the
nursing home was adequately fitted, furnished and staffed to provide the
intensive care necessary.
6. In the circumstances, it was decided that a
nursing home which was capable of providing the intensive care necessary
to attract the rate of Commonwealth benefits for intensive care should
be accepted as a hospital. On the other hand it was not generally
accepted that a nursing home which attracted only the ordinary
Commonwealth benefit was a hospital for the purposes of the Act.
7. However, on further review of the matter it has
been decided that all nursing homes which are approved for the purposes
of the National Health Act 1953 should be accepted as hospitals.
8. A nursing home is defined in the National Health
Act as premises -
(a)
that are fitted, furnished and staffed for the purpose of
providing accommodation and nursing care for patients who, by reason of
infirmity or illness, disease, incapacity or disability, have a
continuing need for nursing care; and
(b)
in which patients of that kind are received and lodged
exclusively for the purpose of providing them with accommodation and
nursing care.
The term 'nursing care' is defined to
mean nursing care given by or under the supervision of a registered
nurse.
9. Section 40AA of the National Health Act provides
that the proprietor of a nursing home may make application to the
Permanent Head of the Department of Health for approval of the premises
as an approved nursing home. Section 40AB requires a person who wishes
to be admitted to an approved nursing home to seek the approval of the
Permanent Head. Sub-section (2) of the section requires the applicant
to furnish a certificate from a medical practitioner that the applicant,
by reason of infirmity or illness, disease, incapacity or disability,
has a continuing need for nursing care. Where the Permanent Head is
satisfied that the applicant requires such nursing care as would warrant
his or her admission to a private nursing home sub-section (3)
authorises him to approve the application.
10. It is clear, therefore, that a person can only
be admitted to a nursing home approved under the National Health Act
where he or she is suffering from some illness, etc. Payments to
approved nursing homes may be generally accepted, therefore, as payments
to a hospital within the meaning of section 159P(4).
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
3 November 1980
References
ATO references:
NO J.345/7 P6 F195
Date original memo issued:
03.11.80
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 261W
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
MEDICAL EXPENSES
NURSING HOME CARE
Legislative References:
159P(4)
Back to top