IT 252 (Addendum exists) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
5 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 252
Deduction for cost of electricity extension
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
View the
Addendum notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070398
FACTS
Consideration has been given to whether the cost of an electricity extension for the purposes of operating plant used for the purpose of conserving or conveying water on a primary production property would be eligible for deduction under Section 75B of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936.
RULING
Under section 75B, immediate deductibility is conferred on
capital expenditure incurred by a taxpayer carrying on a business of
primary production on land in Australia, on the acquisition,
construction or installation of plant or a structural improvement, or an
extension thereto, for the purpose of conserving or conveying water for
use in that business. Expenditures of this kind qualify for immediate
deductibility where they are incurred on or after 14 April 1980 under a
contract entered into on or after that date or where construction or
installation by the taxpayer commenced on or after that date.
The concession would extend to the cost of constructing a
power line from an existing mains electricity connection on a primary
production property to plant used for the purpose of conserving or
conveying water. For example, capital expenditure incurred by a primary
producer in running power lines from an existing switchboard to an
electric irrigation pump would qualify for immediate
deductibility.
However, the concession conferred by section 75B does not
extend to capital costs incurred in connecting mains electricity to a
primary production property, even where the connection was related to
water conservation or conveyance. This would be the case whether the
expenditure related to the initial connection of mains electricity to
the property, to upgrading an existing connection or to the provision of
a secondary connection to the property. Such expenditure may now be
deductible under section 70A if incurred on or after 1 October 1980
where the connection or upgrading is to a property upon which a business
is carried on.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
15 July 1981
References
ATO references:
NO 81/890 F5
Date original memo issued:
15.07.81
Subject References:
ELECTRICITY EXTENSION
MAINS ELECTRICITY CONNECTION
WATER CONSERVATION
PRIMARY PRODUCER
Legislative References:
75B
70A