IT 25 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
8 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 25
Incorporation of medical practices
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1071744
Preamble
The following advice issued to branch offices concerning the approach to be taken in relation to the incorporation of medical practices.
Ruling
2. Where a company is incorporated in accordance
with the by-laws of the N.S.W. Branch of the AMA, and the effect of
incorporation is to do nothing more than reduce the amount of income a
doctor might earn by the amount of an appropriate superannuation cover,
incorporation of medical practices should be accepted for income tax
purposes.
Medical practitioners who are not members of the AMA
3. One of the problems which had to be faced in the
consideration of the question of incorporation of medical practices was
the ability of patients to obtain reimbursement under the Health
Insurance Act in respect of fees paid to medical practice companies.
Following advice from the Attorney-General's Department in the context
of the AMA proposals the Department of Health advised that there was
nothing in the Health Insurance Act which would prevent the payment of
medical benefits in respect of services provided by a medical practice
company where, amongst other things, the personal responsibility of the
medical practitioner to decide that medical services are reasonably
necessary for the adequate medical care of patients is
maintained.
4. The Department of Health has recently advised
that the same principles would apply to the incorporation of medical
practices by practitioners who are not members of the AMA. For income
tax purposes, incorporation of medical practices by practitioners who
are not members of the AMA will be permitted where the constituent
documents accord with the by-laws of the AMA approved for these purposes
and maintain the personal responsibility of the medical practitioner or
practitioners involved.
Shareholders in practice companies
5. One of the requirements for the acceptance of
incorporation is that only registered medical practitioners can hold
shares in the practice company. In some cases where sole practitioners
are seeking to incorporate it has been said that other medical
practitioners are unwilling to accept the responsibility of shareholding
in the practice company and approval is being sought for other persons
including relatives of the medical practitioner, whether qualified or
not, to hold shares for the benefit of the practitioner.
6. It is understandable that a medical practitioner
may not wish to be a shareholder in a medical practice company where he
plays no part in the professional services provided by the company. For
this reason no objection will be taken to incorporation where the
medical practitioner concerned is unable to obtain the consent of
another medical practitioner to be a shareholder and another person
holds shares for the benefit of the practitioner involved. This is
subject, of course, to there being no diversion of income to the other
person as a result of the shareholding.
Date of effect
7. As a general rule acceptance of incorporated
practices will apply only to incorporations effected subsequent to the
advice to the solicitors acting for the AMA giving approval to the
proposed arrangements, i.e. 6 November 1980. There may be some isolated
cases where incorporation carried out prior to that date conforms to the
basis upon which incorporation is now accepted and there are objections
or appeals outstanding. These cases may be decided in the light of
their own facts.
Basis of accounting
8. Because medical practitioners who incorporate
their practices will retain personal accountability for medical services
provided by the company, the personal nature of the services rendered by
the medical practitioners will not differ in incorporation from that
extended by them in partnership or in sole practice. Accordingly
returns for practice companies should be lodged on a cash basis.
9. The situation is markedly different from the
radiologist company where many staff are employed and the annual
turnover is usually substantial. The radiologist company is more akin
to the Henderson situation and the earnings basis of determing
assessable income is clearly appropriate.
10. There is a question of the treatment of amounts
collected subsequent to incorporation in respect of accounts sent out
prior to incorporation. Strictly speaking it would seem that these
amounts should be included in the assessable income of the medical
practitioner concerned. No objection need be taken, however, if they
are returned in the practice company.
Superannuation benefits
11. The question arises as to the expression
"appropriate superannuation cover". This refer to cover provided by
both pension and lump sum funds. Provided the particular superannuation
arrangements otherwise conform to the requirements of this office the
benefits on retirement may be payable either as a lump sum or by way of
pension.
Existence of service companies
12. In a considerable number of cases service
arrangements have been entered into by medical practitioners per medium
of companies and trusts. The arrangements generally comply with the
official guidelines in this area and have been approved in branch
offices for income tax purposes.
13. The existence of an acceptable service
arrangement, whether entered into prior to or subsequent to
incorporation, will not preclude approval to the incorporation of a
medical practice company in accordance with the established
principles.
Other professional taxpayers
14. Should any approach for approval of
incorporation be made by other professional taxpayers who, up to now,
have not been given approval for incorporation, e.g. dentists,
physiotherapists, etc. the matter should be referred to this office for
consideration.
Commissioner of Taxation
7 August 1981
References
ATO references:
NO J174/197/1 P2 F210
Date original memo issued:
07.08.81
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 119
Subject References:
medical practices - incorporation
medical practices - AMA non-members
medical practices - shareholders
medical practices - accounting
medical practices - superannuation
concessional rebate - medical
Legislative References:
ITAA 159P