IT 219 Taxation Ruling
IT 219
Primary production - artificial breeding services - cattle industry
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102941
PREAMBLE
Consideration has been given to the question of whether the sale of semen for artificial breeding services in the cattle industry falls within the definition of primary production.
RULING
2. It may be accepted that a business conducted for
the purpose of providing artificial breeding services for the beef
cattle industry by way of the sale of semen collection from bulls owned
and maintained in the business is one of "primary production" as defined
in section 6(1) of the Act.
3. It is agreed that the income from the sale of
semen will form part of the vendor's assessable income in the normal way
and that a purchaser who acquires the semen for the purpose of gaining
or producing assessable income will be entitled to a deduction. However,
the value of stock on hand at the end of the year of income need not be
brought to account only on the basis of cost. At the option of the
taxpayer, any of the methods of valuation specified in section 31 of the
Act may be adopted.
4. In the course of these practices, cases may arise
of purported sales of notional shares in a bull in the form of a right
to receive a certain number of ampoules of semen from the bull and the
agreement to re-transfer that share automatically at a specified time,
or on the occurrence of a specified event, possibly in order to comply
with progeny registration requirements of some breeding
societies.
5. In these circumstances, it has been decided that
the only practical way to account for live stock from an assessing
viewpoint is to ignore the transaction dealing with a notional share of
the bull in returns of both the "vendor" and the "purchaser". Thus, the
transaction should not be brought to account in the live stock schedules
of the so-called vendor or purchaser.
6. The reality of this situation is that the nominal
vendor remains at all times the sole owner of the bull. The transaction
apparently transferring a share of the bull is purely a mask and the
actual consideration which form the basis of the agreement are the sale
and purchase of semen.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
24 September 1969
References
ATO references:
NO J315/1
Date original memo issued:
24.09.69
Subject References:
ARTIFICIAL BREEDING SERVICES
CATTLE INDUSTRY
PRIMARY PRODUCTION - DEFINITION
Business Line:
SB
Legislative References:
6(1)