IT 295 Taxation Ruling
IT 295
Conditional gifts to the australiana fund, public libraries, museums, art galleries
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103854
FACTS
The following advice was given in reply to a request for guidelines as to the basis upon which the value of a conditional gift to the Australiana Fund might be reduced because of an arrangement under which custody of the gifted property is to remain with the donor for an agreed period after the gifting. The advice given applies equally to gifts made to, and accepted by, a public library, public museum or public art gallery for inclusion in a collection maintained or being established by the donee institution (section 78(1)(aa)).
RULING
2. This is a matter not without its difficulties
and one which will depend largely upon the kinds of conditions that are
attached to particular gifts and the weight that may reasonably be given
to the effect of those conditions upon the donee institution acquiring
through the gift unfettered possession and legal title to the gifted
property.
3. Factors that would have a bearing on this would
include the effect of a life or fixed period interest of the donor in
the gifted property, a joint life or survivorship interest of the donor
and his or her spouse, life expectancy of the relevant parties as well
as undetermined factors such as the periods during which the donee
institution may, if so agreed, require possession of the gifted property
for display or study purposes.
4. The end result is not one that could be arrived
at by a simple arithmetical formula. In principle, the amount of the
deduction for a conditional gift would be the amount which a purchaser
could be expected to pay on the date of the gift to acquire the property
concerned from the donee, if the purchaser were to be buying the
property on the same terms as the donee is receiving it. As mentioned
previously, this would depend on an assessment of all the surrounding
circumstances.
5. However to illustrate the basic method that
would be applied, assume a simple case in which property worth $10,000
has been given to the Australiana Fund or to a public library, art
gallery or museum, subject to the donor retaining full rights of
possession and enjoyment for the ensuing 10 years. Using what would seem
to be an appropriate discounting factor of 10%, the present value of the
gift of $10,000 would be $3,885 and that would be the amount of the
deduction allowed.
6. From an assessing viewpoint where, for deduction
purposes, the value of a gift to the Australiana Fund or to a public
library, public museum or public art gallery is to be reduced because of
the operation of section 78(6F), it would be preferable to call upon the
expertise of the Valuation Branch of the Australian Taxation Office to
calculate the discounting factor necessary to arrive at the reduced
value of a conditional gift.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
3 August 1978
References
ATO references:
NO J 153/126/3 P3 F191
Date original memo issued:
03.08.78
Subject References:
GIFTS
CONDITIONAL GIFTS
Business Line:
IAI
Legislative References:
78(1)(aa)
78(6F)