IT 275 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 275
Overseas allowances paid to public servants
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102445
PREAMBLE
The taxation treatment of overseas allowances paid to Commonwealth Public Servants based abroad has been reviewed.
FACTS
2. The allowances are paid to public servants serving overseas in recognition of the higher cost of living abroad and are designed to place the recipients on a basis comparable to that of officials serving within Australia. The allowances which are paid in accordance with the Public Service Determinations Relating to Overseas Service (DROS) are generally described as follows:-
Local Allowance
Special Local Allowance
Supplementary Local Allowance
Child Allowance
Residential Accommodation Allowance
RULING
3. Because the various allowances are based on
elements of the additional cost of living incurred by public servants in
living abroad it is accepted that they represent in total a
living-away-from-home allowance as defined in section 51A.
4. It is also accepted that other allowances based
on the DROS allowances paid to other Australian residents employed
overseas by State Governments and other statutory authorities fall
within the scope of the definition.
5. In the light of this decision the question arose
whether the long-standing practice of the Commonwealth in meeting the
tax liability on these allowances by way of a waiver of tax should be
continued. From a practical point of view, the effect of accepting the
allowances as living-away-from-home allowances means that the employee
would be relieved of tax by way of a section 51A deduction on the
greater part or whole of the allowance and would generally be assessed
on the aggregate of the allowances received to the extent of $2 per week
only.
6. Advice has now been received that the Minister
for Finance has decided to discontinue, with effect from 1 July 1980,
the arrangement whereby the income tax on certain overseas allowances
paid to Commonwealth, State and Statutory Authority employees is
waived.
7. The effect of these decisions is that from 1 July
1980 the allowances mentioned above paid to Australian residents
employed overseas should be treated as a living-away-from-home allowance
for assessment purposes. Other allowances based on the DROS allowances
paid to other Australian residents employed overseas should be similarly
treated.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
1 August 1984
References
ATO references:
NO J109/2 P14 F69
Date original memo issued:
01.08.80
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 275W
Subject References:
OVERSEAS ALLOWANCE
PUBLIC SERVANTS
Legislative References:
51A