IT 297 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
14 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 297
Deductions - expenditure incurred by employee taxpayers in providing and/or maintaining clothing worn in the course of employment.
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103379
FACTS
The instructions in CITCM 812 on the above subject were re-examined in the light of decisions handed down by Taxation Boards of Review.
RULING
2. It is clear, from a careful examination of the
decision of the Full High Court in the case of FC of T v Finn (1961) 106
CLR 60, that any test based on particular clothing being worn as a
condition of employment is no longer tenable. Boards of Review have
observed on several occasions that the expenditure incurred by Finn was
'in carrying out activities beyond any which had been or could lawfully
have been specifically required of him' by his employer - per Kitto
J.
3. In a number of decisions, Boards of Review have
decided the question of allowing deductions of the cost of employees'
clothing by applying the test whether this clothing was necessary and
peculiar to the taxpayer's occupation. On this test, 'conventional
clothing' in the sense of clothing of a type usually worn by men (or
women) in the taxpayer's station in life regardless of their occupation
is, apart from the exceptional circumstances noted in paragraph 10
below, not deductible - cf 13 TBRD Case N60; 11 CTBR(NS) Case 26. The
business suit of a bank manager and the normal working clothes of a
labourer are equally conventional clothing in this sense.
4. To be accepted as necessary and peculiar to a
taxpayer's occupation, it is considered that clothing should satisfy one
or more of the following conditions:-
(a)
that it is in the nature of a uniform prescribed by his
employer;
(b)
that it assists the taxpayer in some way in performing the duties
for which he is paid;
(c)
that it protects the taxpayer from the risk of personal injury in
performing those duties; or
(d)
that, as a matter of common acceptance and universal experience,
it is of a character generally worn by persons following the taxpayer's
occupation in protection of conventional
clothing.
5. Clothing falling within Class A of the Circular
Memorandum (uniforms) clearly satisfies the above conditions, as also do
the safety helmets, etc., mentioned under Class B, paragraph 15. With
regard to other items under Classes B and C, the circumstance that the
employer does not provide either the clothing or a cash allowance is no
longer a valid ground for denying a deduction. The allowance of a
deduction is to be determined rather by the nature of the clothing and
the circumstances in which it is worn and used. For example, as a
general rule the overalls, aprons, coats, wrap-ons, protective gloves
and caps, and fishermen's boots, listed under Class C will now qualify
for deduction, but other types of footwear, singlets, etc., would
generally not so qualify. To this extent the rulings in the Circular
Memorandum are modified.
6. The modified rulings should be applied only
where the claim in the taxpayer's return is sufficiently descriptive to
positively identify the clothing as being necessary and peculiar to the
occupation - as, for example, a claim for 'Overalls' by a painter.
Claims under such vague general headings as 'Working Clothes' should be
disallowed.
7. A type of clothing calling for special
consideration is the mess dress worn by officers of the armed forces.
Naval officers are provided with the initial issue of mess dress, but
they buy replacements at their own expense. Military and air force
officers buy their own mess dress, and the initial cost has been held to
be non-deductible capital expenditure - 13 TBRD Case N 83; 11 CTBR (NS)
Case 33. On the ground, however, that the wearing of mess dress is
necessary and peculiar to the officer's occupation, the cost of
replacements is deductible in principle. As a rule of practice, where
an officer claims as a deduction the cost of such replacements, his
uniform maintenance allowance should be brought into assessable income,
and he should be allowed a deduction of such expenditure incurred by him
during the year of income in replacing all items of uniform (including
mess dress) as is established by detailed particulars. To this extent
the ruling in CITCM 758, as varied by the addendum to CITCM 773 - under
which deductions up to the amount of the uniform maintenance allowance
are allowed without particularization - is modified.
8. In addition to deductions for the cost of
working clothes of a non-conventional nature, Boards of Review have
displayed a readiness to extend the deduction to the cost of
conventional clothing in certain limited circumstances. Where it is
established that, because of peculiar and unavoidable conditions
directly attributable to a taxpayer's duties (e.g., a necessity to
provide an abnormal number or variety of garments or to suffer excessive
wear and tear of garments) a taxpayer incurs extra expense beyond that
which is incurred on conventional clothing by persons in occupations not
subject to such conditions, a deduction may be allowed of such extra
expense. As indicated in paragraph 6 of the Circular Memorandum, the
application of this ruling is limited primarily to television
personalities, comparable public entertainers, mannequins and
models.
9. Board of Review No.3 in a decision reported as
14 TBRD Case P62, 11 CTBR(NS) Case 82, extended this principle to allow
a deduction of an amount regarded by the Board as extra expense incurred
on conventional clothing by a plain clothes policeman. Although this
decision is in direct conflict with that reported as Case No.23, 12 CTBR
(old Series), it was decided not to appeal from the decision.
10. The decision by Board of Review No.3 should not
be taken, however, as extending, even in principle, the allowance of a
deduction to the cost of conventional clothing worn in any other case
falling within Class D of the Circular Memorandum - e.g., business
executives, salesmen, etc.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
3 June 1964
References
ATO references:
NO J35/952 P3 F31
Date original memo issued:
03.06.64
Related Rulings/Determinations:
CITCM'S 758
773
812
IT 300
Subject References:
PROTECTIVE CLOTHING
UNIFORMS
Legislative References:
51(1)
Case References:
- Case 23
12 CTBR(NS) 23
- Case 26
11 CTBR(NS) 26
- Case 33
11 CTBR(NS) 33
- Case 82
11 CTBR(NS) 82
- FC of T v Finn
106 CLR 60