IT 227 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 227
Forced disposal of livestock
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
This ruling contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been rewritten. The ruling still has effect. Paragraph 32 in
TR 2006/10
provides further guidance on the status and binding effect of public rulings where the law has been repealed or repealed and rewritten. The legislative references at the end of the ruling indicate the repealed provisions and, where applicable, the rewritten provisions.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102629
PREAMBLE
The question has been raised whether sections 36AA and 36AAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act apply to the proceeds arising from the sale of sheep affected with footrot disease.
RULING
2. Legislation in New South Wales relating to the
control of disease in livestock does not provide for the compulsory
destruction of footrot affected sheep. A grazier who finds footrot in
his sheep generally has two courses open to him. One is to incur the
expense of treating the disease; the other is to sell the sheep to an
abattoir for immediate slaughter. Any decision to dispose of infected
animals is made solely on the judgement of the owner. In these
circumstances neither section 36AA nor section 36AAA would have any
application to the proceeds of sale.
3. The situation is different in Victoria and South
Australia. There is provision in the relevant legislation in both of
these States for the compulsory destruction of footrot affected sheep.
Section 33(3) of the Stock Disease Act of Victoria enables the Minister
to require the owner of sheep within the footrot control area to sell
for the purpose of slaughter any sheep in quarantine by reason of
footrot or any sheep which in the opinion of the Chief Inspector have
been exposed to infection with footrot. Similarly, under Regulation 34A
of the Stock Diseases Act of South Australia, the Minister, if satisfied
that any sheep have been quarantined by reason of footrot, or have, in
the opinion of the Chief Inspector, been exposed to infection with
footrot, may require the owner thereof to sell such sheep for the
purposes of slaughter.
4. Both section 33(3) of the Stock Diseases Act of
Victoria and Regulation 34A of the Stock Diseases Act of South Australia
are accepted as laws for or in relation to the compulsory destruction of
livestock. Proceeds from sales of sheep for slaughter in terms of
either provision would attract the operatiton of section 36AA or 36AAA.
If the relevant legislation in the remaining States or Territories is to
the same effect as that in Victoria and South Australia the same
conclusion will follow.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
13 July 1981
References
ATO references:
NO J.85/122 P5 F32
Date original memo issued:
13.07.81
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 228
Subject References:
LIVESTOCK
FORCED DISPOSAL
COMPULSORY DESTRUCTION
SHEEP - FOOTROT AFFECTED
COMPENSATION
Legislative References:
36AA
36AAA