IT 229 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 229
Application of averaging provisions : sale of pastoral property
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102655
PREAMBLE
The following advice was forwarded to Branch Offices as a result of a request for reference to the Board of Review.
2. The question at issue was whether the averaging provisions should be applied to the taxpayers' assessments for the year ended 30 June 1977 in circumstances where a contract for sale of their pastoral property was signed on 1 May 1976, settlement was effected on 19 August 1976 and as a result of the sale recoupment of depreciation of farm assets was included in the taxpayers' assessable incomes for the year ended 30 June 1977. The real question, therefore, is whether the taxpayers' primary production business had ceased before the beginning of the year of income in question, viz 1 July 1976.
RULING
3. The situation is somewhat similar to the case
where a taxpayer receives amounts from wheat or barley pools in a year
subsequent to the sale of a primary production business. As indicated
in an earlier memorandum, the policy with such cases is to allow the
taxpayer the benefit of the averaging provisions in the latter year. The
mere receipt of income from a wheat or barley pool does not of itself
necessarily constitute the carrying on of a business of primary
production but where such income is received in a year of income
subsequent to the year in which the assets used in producing the crop
were disposed of, the taxpayer is to be regarded as continuing in a
business as a primary producer for the purposes of the averaging
provisions.
4. While receipts from crop pools are more clearly
perceived to be primary production receipts, for consistency there
should be no difference in treatment were the assessable income is
derived from the sale of plant used in a business of primary production. It is agreed that the denial of the benefit of the averaging provisions
may be strictly and technically correct but such a narrow
interpretation, if taken to extremes, would produce an illogical and
unintended result.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
10 July 1980
References
ATO references:
NO 80/5951 F43
Date original memo issued:
10.07.80
Subject References:
SALE OF PASTORAL PROPERTY
DEPRECIATION - RECOUPMENT
AVERAGING PROVISIONS
Business Line:
SB
Legislative References:
156(1)
157