IT 26 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
4 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 26
Computers - depreciation, investment allowance
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100262
Preamble
As a result of representations received, the following rulings were issued in relation to the treatment of computer costs for income tax purposes.
Ruling
Computer hardware
2. Computer "mainframe" or "hardware" constitute
depreciable plant and qualify for investment allowance, the latter being
subject to the other requirements of the investment allowance provisions
of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 being met. Associated delivery and
installation costs form part of the total capital cost for depreciation
and investment allowance purposes.
3. Computer systems installed on or after 1 July 1976 may
be depreciated at the rate of 20% per annum prime cost or 30% per annum
diminishing value.
Computer software
4. The costs of "software" or "programs" would normally
be allowed as deductions to purchaser in the year in which the costs are
incurred. Such costs are accepted as revenue expenses deductible under
section 51(1) of the Act. Further, items of computer software or
programs would not qualify for investment allowance.
5. Where, however, the software is sold as an integral
part of the computer system itself, for example, because of the
technical nature of the computer system, the total computer system would
be subject to depreciation and the investment allowance.
Computer maintenance
6. If, under a contract of sale, a separate allocation of
price is made for maintenance of a computer, the costs of maintenance
would be expenses deductible by a purchaser under section 51(1) in the
year in which the expenses are incurred. Where, however, the contract
does not include a separate maintenance fee, but provides for
maintenance of the computer, the cost of the computer as invoiced would
be taken into account in determining depreciation and investment
allowance deductions.
Commissioner of Taxation
21 December 1979
References
ATO references:
NO 79/4188 F6
Date original memo issued:
21.12.79
Subject References:
computers
software
hardware
depreciation
investment allowance
Legislative References:
ITAA 55
ITAA 82AA
ITAA 51(1)