IT 267 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 267
Education expenses - Encyclopaedia Britannica and other standard reference books of a general character
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070096
FACTS
In an oral decision, Taxation Board of Review No.2 upheld the disallowance of a deduction claimed by a taxpayer under section 82J for expenditure said to have been "necessarily incurred" in connection with the full-time education of his son.
FACTS
2. The taxpayer had claimed to deduct the cost of instalments paid in respect of an Encyclopaedia Britannica, purchased for the use of his son, while at a High School. The taxpayer endeavoured to distinguish his case from that of 13 TBRD Case N 29; 10 CTBR(NS) Case 104, where an Encyclopaedia Britannica had been purchased by a taxpayer for the use of his children at a primary school.
RULING
3. The Board was of the opinion that there was
insufficient nexus between the expenditure on the encyclopaedia and its
use in the taxpayer's son's full-time education to bring it within the
terms of section 82J. The Board was unable to accept that the fact that
the child in this case was attending secondary school made a material
difference in the circumstances and, in fact, all members of the Board
expressed views which implied that such an encyclopaedia would be of
more value to a primary school student than a secondary school student
in the course of his education.
4. The Board's decision therefore, confirms the
ruling given in the Addendum to CITCM 698 attached to CITCM 829, which
states that deductions should not be admitted under section 82J in
respect of the purchase of the Encyclopaedia Britannica and other
standard reference books of a general character.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
13 February 1968
References
ATO references:
NO J 345/42 P6 F209
Date original memo issued:
13.02.68
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
EDUCATION EXPENSES
ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA
REFERENCE BOOKS
Legislative References:
82J
159T
Back to top