IT 249 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
11 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 249
Ex gratia payments received by former employees
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102046
FACTS
Following the judgment of the Federal Court of Australia in FC of T v Harris reported at 80 ATC 4238; 10 ATR 869 the Commissioner sought the special leave of the High Court of Australia to appeal to that Court. The High Court, on 6 November 1980, refused the Commissioner's application.
2. To briefly recapitulate, the question at issue was whether an amount of $450, being an ex gratia payment made to the taxpayer, a retired bank officer, by his former employer, the Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, on 21 April 1976 was assessable income in his hands under section 25(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The amount was paid by the Bank to the taxpayer and other eligible members of the Bank's (independent) superannuation scheme, in recognition of "the problems caused by continuing high rates of inflation". No promise or indication of further payment was given to such recipients though, in fact, similar payments have been made in subsequent years.
3. The Federal Court, which by majority (Bowen C.J., Fisher J. and Deane J. dissenting) dismissed the Commissioner's appeal from the Supreme Court of Victoria, considered a number of factors including the fact that the payment was unexpected and unsolicited, the relationship between the receipt and the former employment, the fact that the payment was one in a series of annual payments, and made to supplement the pension. Bowen C.J. and Fisher J. considered that the payment was not a product of the employment, that it was not periodical and was not a substitution for, or addition to, salary (cf. FC of T v Dixon (1952) 86 CLR 540).
4. The High Court, in refusing the Commissioner's application for special leave to appeal considered that the Federal Court had not misconstrued the principles emerging from Dixon's case and McCathie v FC of T (1944) 69 CLR 1 and that the critical factor was one of degree in applying the principles to this case.
RULING
5. In the light of the decision of the High Court
it is clear that it must now be accepted that ex gratia payments
received in circumstances similar to those existing in this case cannot
be characterised as income under section 25(1). The payment in this
case was the first of a series of similar such payments received by the
taxpayer and there is dicta at least to suggest that subsequent payments
possibly may be characterised as income. At the same time, the judge at
first instance and the members of the Court who, on appeal, found for
the taxpayer noted that the payment made in 1976 was the first of four
annual payments that had been received by the taxpayer. Because of this
it has been decided that the decision must be applied to both the
initial and subsequent payments.
6. Accordingly, such payments should not be treated
as income. It is to be noted, however, that this decision is to be
applied only in circumstances clearly analogous to those in this case.
Where, for example, former employers make the ex-gratia payments on a
regular basis (in some cases they are made monthly together with the
usual pension payment) the payment would lack the necessary similarity
and should be brought to account as income. Clearly, in such cases, the
payments exhibit the characteristics of income.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
7 January 1981
References
ATO references:
NO 77/6331 P3 F2
BO SYD AF 1478/3
Date original memo issued:
07.01.81
Subject References:
EX GRATIA PAYMENT
LUMP SUM PAYMENT
RETIRED EMPLOYEE
BANK EMPLOYEE
Business Line:
SEO
Legislative References:
25(1)
Case References:
- FC of T v Dixon
(1952) 86 CLR 540
- FC of T v Harris
80 ATC 4238
10 ATR 869
- McCathie v FC of T
69 CLR 1