IT 234 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
5 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 234
Amended assessments - deductions for losses: calculation of average income
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102705
FACTS
Consideration has been given to a case in which a private company was assessed for the year ended 30 June 1963 on a taxable income of $2,932 but the amount shown as purchases in its return of income had been understated by $20,080. This meant that the company had actually incurred a loss of $17,148. By the time the company had discovered the error and brought it to notice, however, the permissible period for amendment specified in section 170 had expired. The incorrectly based 1963 assessment therefore had to stand but the question arose whether any section 80(2) deduction was nevertheless allowable in subsequent years in respect of the actual loss of $17,148.
2. It has already been ruled that later assessments may be amended to remedy such a defect where the fault in the earlier assessment has been corrected by amendment (Head Office reference J 97,31 P6 dated 2 December 1965).
RULING
3. In the case referred to in paragraph 1, it was decided
that the prohibition of any amendment by section 170 did not prejudice
the taxpayer's entitlement to section 80(2) deductions aggregating
$17,148 in subsequent years.
4. In dealing with similar cases in the future, the
principle to be followed is that the deduction allowable under section
80(2) in respect of a prior year's loss is available if, in fact, such a
loss has been incurred and remains unrecouped. In other words, the
availability of the deduction is not affected by the fact that the
provisions of section 170 preclude the earlier year's assessment being
reopened to convert an assessed figure of taxable income into a loss.
Correspondingly, a prohibition against the amendment of a prior year's
assessment should not be treated as a barrier against the use of the
correct amount of taxable income (i.e., assessable income less allowable
deductions) for the year concerned in calculating the average income of
a primary producer for a later year.
5. These rulings are based on the view that the raising
of an assessment for a particular year requires, independently of
anything that has occurred in relation to any other year's assessment, a
proper application of every provision of the legislation which affects
the determination of the amounts of taxable income and tax payable for
that year.
6. Support for this view may be found in the judgment of
Kitto J. in V.J. & F. Barnes v FC of T, (1957) 96 CLR 294. It had been
suggested to the Court that, in making an assessment of further tax
payable by a company under Division 7 of the Act, the Commissioner was
bound to start with the amount of taxable income in the company's
ordinary assessment, which had been confirmed by a Taxation Board of
Review. With regard to this suggestion, His Honour said at page 315:-
"In my opinion, however, it is not correct to say that he was
bound to accept the figure of taxable income as conclusively established
by the assessment of ordinary income tax. Section 177 was referred to in
argument, but I do not think it has any application to the problem. No
doubt in practice the sensible course in assessing Div.7 tax is to start
with the taxable income as already assessed for ordinary income tax. It
would ordinarily be foolish to go through the process again. but when
the Commissioner does start with the taxable income as assessed, he is
not obeying any positive requirement of the Act that he shall do so; he
is simply adopting, for the purpose of the assessment he is engaged in
making, that which he has already done for another
purpose."
7. While a prohibition against the amendment of an
incorrect assessment for a loss or an average year is not an estoppel
against the use of the correct figure in later years, the terms of
section 170 could, of course, operate to preclude the amendment of an
assessment for one or more of the later years. In the case referred to
in paragraph 1, for example, the 1964 assessment was amended to allow a
section 80(2) deduction equal to the assessed taxable income of $5588.
This would not have been possible if a request for amendment of the 1964
assessment had not been made within the time specified in section
170(6).
8. In general, the rulings referred to above may be
applied irrespective of which particular restriction in the terms of
section 170 precluded an amendment of the earlier assessment. An
exception to this general rule could arise in a case where the fault in
the earlier year was due to a mistake of law and, in the absence of
knowledge that the view of the law was mistaken, the fault was
perpetuated in later assessment. In these circumstances, there would be
no authority to amend the later assessment to allow a section 80(2)
deduction or correct the average income unless the purpose of the
amendment was to give effect to a decision on an objection, appeal or
review in respect of that assessment or (in accordance with the
interpretation of section 170(7) given in the memorandum of 2 December
1965) the earlier assessment. Correct figures for section 80 or average
income purposes may, of course, be used in an original assessment for a
later year whether the fault in the earlier year was due to a mistake
either of law or of fact.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
4 February 1970
References
ATO references:
NO J97,31 P6 F297
Date original memo issued:
04.02.70
Subject References:
AMENDMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
PRIOR YEAR LOSSES
AVERAGE INCOME
Business Line:
IAI
Legislative References:
80(2)
170
Case References:
- V.J. & F. Barnes v FC of T
(1957) 96 CLR 294