IT 237 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 237
Primary production - expenditure on eradication of noxious weeds
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
View the
Addendum notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102726
PREAMBLE
As a result of representations received, advice issued to Branch Offices on the question of whether a deduction is allowable for expenditure incurred in the eradication of noxious weeds.
RULING
2. It is well established that the initial
expenditure incurred in the clearing and eradication of noxious weeds
from land not previously used for primary production is of a capital
nature. This is so whether the expenditure is incurred in compliance
with a State Department order or whether incurred on the initiative of
the taxpayer.
3. However, there is no question of deductions being
denied for expenditure of this nature incurred by a primary producer, as
a result of the amendments to the income tax law passed by Parliament
last year. Where the expenditure is of a capital nature, the timing of
the deduction has merely been altered. Instead of being deductible in
full in the year in which it was incurred the capital expenditure will
be deductible by way of ten equal annual instalments. The first
deduction being against income of the year in which the expenditure was
incurred.
4. On the other hand expenditure on weed control of
a continuing or recurring nature after the initial clearing of the
property would be of a revenue nature and, as such, deductible in full
in the year in which the expenditure was incurred.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
25 October 1974
References
ATO references:
NO 74/1260 (J35/23)
Date original memo issued:
25.10.74
Subject References:
PRIMARY PRODUCTION
ERADICATION OF NOXIOUS WEEDS
CLEARING OF LAND
Legislative References:
75A