IT 271 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
14 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 271
Expenditure on self education
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102374
PREAMBLE
Principles originally laid down in Head Office memorandum of 10 July 1964 to assist in determining whether deductions are allowable under section 51 for expenditure incurred on a university or other training course were explained.
RULING
2. The starting point in this area is, of course,
the decision of the High Court in FC of T v Finn (1961) 106 CLR 60. In
that case, the taxpayer was an architect employed by the State public
service in Western Australia. While on long service leave, he made an
overseas tour, partly at his own expense, to study developments in
architecture. It was not seriously contested that the additional
knowledge thus obtained would be likely to increase the taxpayer's
efficiency and his prospects of future promotion. However, the Court
did not regard this as sufficient to give the expenditure a capital
nature and it was held that the cost of the travelling was deductible
under section 51.
3. The essence of the Finn decision seems to lie in
a recognition that knowledge is continually developing and that a
taxpayer in a skilled occupation may need to be continually adding to
his store of knowledge if he is to maintain his status. The fact that
this process may increase the taxpayer's efficiency in his employment or
help him to win promotion is not regarded by the Court as sufficient
justification for denying deductions under section 51.
4. The position was taken a stage further by the
decision of the Board of Review in 11 CTBR(NS) Case 51, 14 TBRD Case
P15, in which the Board of Review No.3 held that an accountant who had
undertaken a university course in public administration was entitled to
deduct the fees paid. The case was, however, an unusual one because the
taxpayer was a public accountant and valuer of some 25 years' standing.
He had abandoned the course before the hearing and there could be no
serious contention that the course undertaken was likely to lead him to
a new field of employment. Not all of the views expressed by the Board
members in that case can be accepted as having general application but,
given the finding that the taxpayer had undertaken the course to promote
his efficiency in his current employment rather than to obtain a
university qualification, the decision was not necessarily inconsistent
with the decision in Finn's case, and it was accepted by the
Commissioner.
5. The Head Office memorandum of 10 July 1964 was
based on these decisions. It was directed that deductions should not be
allowed in any case where a course of studies would be likely to open up
a new field of employment to a taxpayer. Deductions were to be denied
not only in cases where the studies would lead to a formal right to
practice in a particular field (e.g. law, accountancy, surveying,
valuing) but also in any case where a first university degree was likely
to be obtained in due course. As a practical rule, it was to be
assumed that the obtaining of a first university degree in any faculty,
by giving the taxpayer the status of a graduate, would inevitably open
up new fields of employment to him.
6. On the other hand, the memorandum envisaged that
the cost of studies for a second degree or post-graduate studies leading
to a higher degree would not necessarily be debarred from deduction.
Provided that the course was undertaken for the purpose of maintaining
or improving ability in an existing occupation, deductions might be
allowed if, upon examination of the facts, it could be accepted that the
course had not been undertaken to enable the taxpayer to enter into any
new income earning occupation.
7. In practice, this means that it can be accepted
that a post-graduate course has been undertaken for the purpose of
promoting the taxpayer's efficiency in his employment if the course was
directly relevant to his duties. Deductions would be allowable under
section 51 so long as the course was not one that was likely, in the
ordinary course of events, to open up a new field of earning activity,
whether in his present employment or in some new employment.
8. The application of these principles can be
illustrated by two subsequent decisions given from Head Office.
9. On 16 August 1966 advice was given (Head Office
reference J.35/1051) of a decision to accept that public servants who
attended, at their own expense, a one-year part-time course in the
general principles of automatic data processing might deduct the cost
under section 51. The view was taken that a minor course of this nature
would merely enable the participants to keep abreast of new developments
that they might encounter in the ordinary course of their present
duties. On the other hand, it was indicated that a different view might
have to be taken where a taxpayer undertook a major course in A.D.P.
extending over a much longer period because this might qualify him to
take on a wholly different type of job.
10. Recently, a chartered accountant who was already
a university graduate in Commerce undertook a management course which
would lead ultimately to the degree of Master of Business
Administration. Theoretically, the higher degree might have enabled the
taxpayer to obtain a university posting which would not otherwise have
been available to him. However, this seemed a remote possibility in his
particular case and it was accepted as a fact that the taxpayer's
dominant purpose in undertaking the course was to enable him to carry
out more effectively his existing duties as a chartered accountant.
Accordingly, it was accepted that the cost of the course was deductible
under section 51.
11. On the other hand, it would not be accepted that
the cost of a post-graduate course is deductible if its nature is such
that it would be a reasonable assumption that it had been undertaken to
enable the taxpayer to enter a new field. For example, a doctor in
general practice would be able to deduct the cost of a refresher course
designed to bring his general medical knowledge up to date, but he would
not be entitled to deduct the cost of a course which would enable him to
practice in some particular field as a specialist.
12. The Board of Review case referred to in
paragraph 4 should be regarded as an exceptional case as it concerned
studies for a first university qualification. It should not be
followed, without prior reference to Head Office, except where the
course is relevant to the taxpayer's duties and there is convincing
evidence that the course was not the first step towards a university
degree. Deductions should not be allowed merely because the taxpayer
contends that he does not expect or intend to complete the full course
of which his subjects form part.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Withdrawn by TR 92/8
References
ATO references:
NO J35/1051 P1 F180
Date original memo issued:
07.07.67
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 271W
IT 285
IT 312
Subject References:
SELF EDUCATION EXPENSES
FC OF T V FINN 106 CLR 60
Legislative References:
51(1)
82JAA
159U
Case References:
Case 51
11 CTBR(NS) 51
FC of T v Finn
106 CLR 60
Back to top