IT 253 Taxation Ruling
IT 253
Sole parent rebate in circumstances of mental or physical incapacity or imprisonment
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070406
FACTS
1. In cases where a parent has a spouse, consideration has been given to whether mental or physical incapacity or imprisonment of the partner should be accepted as special circumstances for the purpose of granting the sole parent rebate.
2. Section 159K provides, under specified conditions, for a rebate of tax where a parent has the sole care of a dependent child. However, where the parent has a spouse, the rebate is not allowable unless the Commissioner is of the opinion that, because of special circumstances, it is just to allow a rebate.
RULING
3. The term "sole care" is not defined in the Act
and must be given the meaning it bears in normal usage. Sole, in this
context, means exclusive. Sole care, it is considered, means full and
unshared responsibility for the physical care and upbringing of the
child. It does not, of course, connote full financial responsibility
for the child. There are many organisations which exist to help, assist
and advise single or sole parents. But the responsibility for any
decision concerning the child's welfare ultimately rests upon the parent
alone. Where this situation exists it is accepted that the parent has
the sole care of the child for the purposes of section 159K.
4. Where a parent is so mentally incapacitated that
he is unable to share in the care of his child, i.e., he has not
sufficient mental capacity to make intelligent or reasonable decisions
to assist in arriving at them, the remaining parent does in fact have
sole care of the child. It would not be relevant whether the
incapacitated parent resides with the family or apart from them. Severe
mental incapacity may, therefore, be accepted as special circumstances
for the purposes of section 159K(3). However, the parent must be
mentally handicapped to the extent that he would be completely incapable
of taking any part in the care of a child. It will accordingly be
necessary to obtain certification of his condition by a medical
practitioner or authority properly qualified for such purposes and the
rebate will be limited to those cases where the condition is certified
to be permanent or that recovery is most unlikely. The rebate will
apply as from the date the condition is established.
5. It has also been decided that, prima facie,
special circumstances would not exist where a parent suffers from
social, economic or physical disabilities, notwithstanding how severe
the latter may be nor where the parent is imprisoned for a short term.
However, imprisonment for a long term, e.g. in excess of twelve months,
should be accepted as a special circumstance - in many respects it may
be likened to the position where one spouse has deserted the other
(refer Taxation Ruling IT 254).
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
9 January 1978
References
ATO references:
NO J345/10 P1 F10
Date original memo issued:
09.01.78
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 254
IT 2243
Subject References:
SOLE PARENT REBATE
MENTAL OR PHYSICAL INCAPACITY
IMPRISONMENT
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
DEFINITION - SOLE CARE
Legislative References:
159K(3)