IT 228 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 228
Forced disposal of livestock
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
This ruling contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been rewritten. The ruling still has effect. Paragraph 32 in
TR 2006/10
provides further guidance on the status and binding effect of public rulings where the law has been repealed or repealed and rewritten. The legislative references at the end of the ruling indicate the repealed provisions and, where applicable, the rewritten provisions.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102634
PREAMBLE
Taxation Ruling IT 227 dealt with the application of sections 36AA and 36AAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act to the proceeds arising from the sale of sheep affected with footrot disease. It was stated that, where State and Territory laws governing the control of stock diseases have provisions similar to those applying in Victoria and South Australia which empower the Minister to require sheep in quarantine by reason of footrot to be sold for slaughter and sheep are sold in terms of the relevant provisions, sections 36AA or 36AAA may be applied to the proceeds of sale.
RULING
2. It has been ascertained that the relevant stock
diseases laws in all States and Territories other than Queensland
contain provisions for or in relation to the compulsory destruction of
sheep affected by footrot. Paragraph 2 of the earlier memorandum is,
therefore, modified to the extent that legislation in New South Wales
does in fact provide for the issue of destocking orders in respect of
sheep affected by footrot, but only in a prescribed area, i.e. the North
and North East of the State (known as the New England Protected Area for
Footrot in Sheep).
3. It has been further ascertained that it is very
rare for the power vesting in Ministers to be used. What usually
happens is that when the disease reaches certain proportions the
property and affected sheep are placed in quarantine and an appropriate
official such as a district veterinary officer of a State Agriculture
Department makes recommendations as to the course of treatment. In many
cases it is recommended that sale for slaughter is the only practicable
means of dealing with the problem.
4. In the circumstances, when considering elections
made in respect of income arising from the disposal of footrot affected
sheep, it will be necessary to examine each case on its merits. Where
sheep officially quarantined because of footrot are sold direct to an
abattoir for slaughter on the advice of a district veterinary officer or
other appropriate official as the most effective means of eradicating
the disease, sections 36AA or 36AAA may be applied to the proceeds of
the sale for slaughter.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
21 April 1982
References
ATO references:
NO J.85/122 P5 F75
Date original memo issued:
21.04.82
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 227
Subject References:
LIVESTOCK
FORCED DISPOSAL
COMPULSORY DESTRUCTION
SHEEP-FOOTROT AFFECTED
COMPENSATION
Business Line:
SB
Legislative References:
36AA
36AAA