IT 265 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 265
Education expenses - ACT German language school
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070075
FACTS
The question has been raised whether fees paid by parents of students at the A.C.T. German Language School in Canberra would qualify for deduction under section 82J of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
2. The school holds classes on Saturday mornings for three terms a year. All students attending Saturday morning classes are full-time students under the age of 21 who intend to sit during the year of study or at a later date, for the school certificate or higher school certificate examinations in German. The school also holds evening classes for adults and others who are not full-time students, although some full-time university students under 21 attend the classes.
RULING
3. Provided a student is under 21 years of age and
is otherwise in receipt of full-time education at a school, college or
university or from a tutor, fees paid to the A.C.T. German Language
School by a parent or a person who is otherwise entitled to a deduction
for the student's maintenance will be accepted as being education
expenses necessarily incurred by the taxpayer in connection with the
student's full-time education. That being so, the fees will be an
allowable deduction under the provisions of section 82J of the Act,
subject to the maximum deduction of $300 per annum allowable in respect
of the education of any one student.
4. This ruling will apply whether or not the student
intends to sit for a public examination in German.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
24 March 1971
References
ATO references:
NO J345/42 P7 F16
Date original memo issued:
24/03/71
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
EDUCATION EXPENSES
FOREIGN LANGUAGE SCHOOLS
A.C.T. GERMAN LANGUAGE SCHOOL
Legislative References:
82J
159T