IT 285 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
26 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 285
Self-education expenses - application of recent court decisions
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070201
FACTS
In two decisions in the Supreme Court of New South Wales, FC of T v Smith 78 ATC 4157; 8 ATR 518 and FC of T v Lacelles-Smith 78 ATC 4162; 8 ATR 524, Waddell J. accepted that expenditure incurred by two assessors in the Australian Taxation Office in pursuing courses of study undertaken by them as a prerequisite to entry into the assessing branch qualified for deduction under section 51. In one case, the claim for deduction was limited to the excess of the expenditure incurred over $400, which amount had been allowed as a deduction under section 82JAA as it then existed. The other case involved the cost of travelling necessary in the pursuit of the particular course of study.
2. As it has been decided not to seek leave to appeal to the Federal Court, the purpose of this ruling is to explain the implications of the decisions.
RULING
3. The circumstances in which expenditure on
self-education incurred by employee taxpayers would qualify for
deduction under section 51 were first outlined in CITCM 813 which issued
in 1962. Generally, that circular memorandum, which had as its genesis
the decision of the High Court in FC of T v Finn (1961) 106 CLR 60,
limited the deduction for self-education expenses to persons already
qualified or skilled in a particular profession. It was stated that,
because it is an implied condition in the employment of a person engaged
in a skilled occupation that he shall maintain his professional
knowledge and skill, any expenditure so incurred by that person is prima
facie deductible under section 51.
4. At the same time the CITCM went on to state that
there was nothing in the decision in Finn's case which required
modification of the administrative view that the cost of acquiring
higher professional qualifications, for example, an academic degree,
represented an outgoing of a capital or private nature expressly
precluded from deduction by the very terms of section 51. Indeed,
paragraph 12 of the CITCM gave as an illustration of non-deductible
education expenses:-
"Educational courses undertaken to obtain a higher status in the
profession or occupation, e.g. an academic degree, diploma or trade
certificate, or to obtain knowledge or status as a qualification for
advancement, e.g. a typist undertaking a course in shorthand to qualify
for advancement to stenographer."
5. As a result of subsequent Taxation Board of
Review decisions, the rulings in the CITCM required certain
modifications. From the Board decisions there had emerged a principle
that, if the facts establish that a course of study is undertaken for
the purpose of maintaining or increasing a taxpayer's knowledge, or
ability in his existing occupation or employment, expenditure incurred
in connection therewith is deductible under section 51 on the authority
of Finn's case irrespective of whether the course is a short refresher
course or whether the attainment of higher academic qualifications such
as a degree or diploma may be the result of the course of study.
6. Further Board of Review decisions amplified the
above treatment of self-education expenses. As a result deductions
under section 51 were not to be allowed for expenditure on
self-education where the course of study would be likely to open up a
new field of employment. Deductions were to be denied not only in cases
where the studies would lead to a formal right to practise in a
particular field, for example, law, accountancy, surveying, valuing, but
also in any case where a first university degree or other tertiary
qualification was likely to be obtained in due course. As a practical
measure it was to be assumed that the obtaining of a first degree would
inevitably open up new fields of employment.
7. On the other hand, it was recognised that the
cost of study for a second degree or post-graduate studies leading to a
higher degree would not necessarily be debarred from deduction. Provided
that the course was undertaken for the purpose of maintaining or
improving ability in an existing occupation, deductions might be allowed
if, upon examination of the facts, it could be accepted that the course
had not been undertaken to enable the taxpayer to enter into any new
income earning occupation.
8. In practice this meant that it could be accepted
that a post-graduate course had been undertaken for the purpose of
promoting a taxpayer's efficiency in his employment if the course was
directly relevant to his duties. Deductions would be allowable under
section 51 so long as the course was not one that was likely, in the
ordinary course of events, to open up a new field of earning activity
either in the present employment or some new employment.
9. By way of illustration expenses incurred by
public servants who attended part-time courses in automatic data
processing would qualify for deduction under section 51. So also would
the expenses incurred by chartered accountants who undertook a
management course which would lead ultimately to the degree of Master of
Business Administration. Another example is the expenditure incurred by
the graduate employee who does his masters degree. By way of contrast a
doctor in general practice would not be entitled to a deduction under
section 51 for expenditure incurred on a course of study which would
enable him to practice in some particular field as a specialist.
10. The above principles have been and should
continue to be applied in determining whether deductions under section
51 are allowable for second degrees or qualifications or post-graduate
studies. Once the relevance of the further studies has been
established, the only other question is whether the particular course
was undertaken to enable the taxpayer to enter into a new income earning
activity or occupation. It is not sufficient to say that the further
studies might open up new income earning activities - that could be said
of most, if not all, further studies. The question is whether the
further studies were undertaken for that purpose and, in the final
analysis, the answer to this question will depend upon an examination of
all the circumstances including the taxpayer's motives in undertaking
the further study.
11. Since July 1967 most of the disputes concerning
self-education expenses have revolved around expenditure incurred in
pursuing initial courses of study or in gaining initial qualifications.
Since the decision of Menzies J. in FC of T v Hatchett; (1971) 125 CLR
494 it has not been open to argue that this sort of expenditure is of a
capital nature.
12. Deduction for expenditure on initial courses of
study has been denied on the ground that the particular expenditure was
not incurred in gaining or producing the assessable income in the
relevant sense. Generally speaking it has been argued for the
Commissioner that self-education expenses have not been part and parcel
of the particular duties of employment nor have they arisen as an
inevitable incident of the employment. In the generality of cases, the
expenditure was incurred as a pre-requisite to gaining the employment or
in order to acquire a position from which greater income may be derived. On the authority of the decisions of the High Court in John Fairfax &
Sons Pty Ltd v FC of T (1959) 101 CLR 30 and Lodge v F C of T (1972) 128
CLR 171, expenditure of this type does not qualify for deduction under
section 51 because it does not have the necessary connection with the
actual derivation of the assessable income. It is at a stage too remote
from the earning of the income because the need for expenditure arose
out of undertakings or decisions made in order to obtain the opportunity
to derive the income.
13. In essence these were the arguments addressed to
the Court in the assessors' cases. It is not necessary to recite in
detail the facts of the two cases. The judgments delivered in those
cases set out both the requirements for officers to be pursuing
appropriate courses of study in order to be eligible for entry into the
assessing area and the provisions in the Public Service Act prohibiting
advancement beyond certain levels in the absence of suitable
qualifications.
14. Having satisfied himself of the relevance of the
studies to the duties of the employment, Waddell J. found a real
connection between the expenditure and the earning of the assessable
income. To take the case of Smith, for example, his Honour found that
the commencement of the course was reasonably calculated to lead to an
increase in the assessable income in future years, that it had in fact
led to the confirmation of his salary range by his appointment as
Assessor, Grade 2, that his continuation with the course had, during the
year of income, led to an increase in his salary because of his
appointment as Acting Assessor, Grade 3, and that it was reasonably
calculated to lead to future increases in assessable income.
15. The acceptance of the decisions amounts to a
recognition of the fact that the arguments put forward for the
Commissioner do not have any validity where the circumstances are
comparable to those which existed in the two cases. Accordingly, his
Honour's reasoning should be applied to other taxpayers who have
undertaken courses of study because the particular employment requires
it. Some examples of other taxpayers to whom the decisions should be
applied are other assessors in the Australian Taxation Office, articled
clerks in law firms, employees of accountancy firms who are required to
undertake studies in accountancy, apprentices who are required to attend
educational institutions as part of their training and Australian
Government cadets.
16. Where the duties or conditions of the particular
employment do not require the pursuit of study and the taxpayer
voluntarily undertakes a course of study to improve his efficiency, to
increase his chances of promotion or, even, to seek other income earning
opportunities, claims for deduction for education expenses should
continue to be disallowed.
17. It will be appreciated that, by virtue of the
operation of section 82A, claims for deduction under section 51 will be
limited to amounts in excess of $250. Where the facts support the
allowance of a deduction for the cost of a course of study the cost will
include, in addition to any fees paid, other relevant expenditure
incidental to the course, for example, the cost of travelling to and
from the college or university, text books, stationery, instruments and
equipment.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Withdrawn by TR 92/8
References
ATO references:
NO J 35/1051 P3 F323
Date original memo issued:
17.07.78
Related Rulings/Determinations:
NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL
IT 271
IT 312
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
SELF-EDUCATION EXPENSES
COURSES OF STUDY
Legislative References:
51(1)
82JAA
159U
Case References:
- FC of T v Finn
106 CLR 60
- FC of T v Hatchett
125 CLR 494
(1971) 71 ATC 4184
(1971) 2 ATR 557
- FC of T v Lacelles-Smith
78 ATC 4162
8 ATR 524
- FC of T v Smith
78 ATC 4157
8 ATR 518
- John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v FC of T
101 CLR 30
- Lodge v F C of T
128 CLR 171
(1972) 72 ATC 4174
(1972) 3 ATR 254