IT 278 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
9 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 278
Disposal of property by trade-in - application of section 26aaa and 59
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1101288
NOTICE OF ARCHIVAL - 9th DECEMBER 1993
PREAMBLE
The following advice was given concerning profits arising from the disposal by trade-in of property acquired under leasing arrangements in the light of the High Court's decision in the Hamblin case, (1974) 131 CLR 570.
RULING
Application of s.26AAA
2. The first question to be considered is whether,
because of a possible lack of identity in interest between the property
acquired from the lessor and the property traded-in, the section is
applicable at all. Application of the section to trade-ins of formerly
leased property within 12 months of the lessee obtaining the proprietory
interest, but outside of 12 months from the commencement of the lease,
probably the usual situation encountered, could well be open to
challenge on this point. However, it is considered that the section
should be applied in all cases where formerly leased property is
immediately traded-in at a value in excess of the residual value.
3. With regard to the question of cost price for the
purpose of calculating the profit, the "paid-out" figure should be
accepted as the cost price.
4. Another matter for consideration is the figure to
be regarded as the sale price for the purpose of calculating the profit. In view of the opinions expressed by at least three of the High Court
judges in the Hamblin case, it appears that, in many trade-in cases at
least, the sale price ought to be regarded as something less than the
trade-in value. The real sale price in these cases will not be easily
apparent, particularly where the property traded-in is an uncommon and
expensive item of plant. Nevertheless, there seems to be no real
alternative to equating sale price in these cases with market price i.e.
value on the open market, itself not a very obvious quantity in many
cases.
5. However, it should not by any means be accepted
that in all trade-in cases the sale price would be less than the
trade-in price. This would clearly not always be the case, for
instance, in relation to the purchase of motor cars. Hence, the above
ruling should only be applied where one is satisfied that in the
particular case the trade-in is in fact "a device to obtain a reduction
in the effective price of the article to be acquired", to use the words
of Jacobs J. In those cases where not so satisfactorily established and
where it appears that the trade-in price is substantially equal to or
less than the market value, the trade-in price should be regarded as the
sale price for the purposes of calculating the profit.
6. Where satisfied that the sale price for the
purpose of calculating the profit is less than the trade-in price, the
price of the new property purchased should be reduced by the difference
for depreciation purposes. If the trade-in price is not to be regarded
as the sale price, this is only on the ground that it includes some
subsidy or discount on the price of the new property. Accordingly, to
prevent the taxpayer from receiving an unwarranted advantage, the cost
price of the new property should be reduced for depreciation purposes by
the amount of this discount.
Application of s.59
7. With regard to the application of s.59 and Tax
Ruling IT 87, some difficulty exists in applying s.59(3)(d) in the light
of the apparent conclusion of the majority of the court in Hamblin that
a trade-in does constitute a sale.
8. Accordingly, the instructions contained in
paragraph 5 of Tax Ruling IT 87 are amended to the extent of striking
out the last sentence and replacing it by the following: "Where it is
shown that the trade-in allowance does in fact include a discount
element on the price of property acquired, the "sale price" for the
purposes of s.59(3)(a) should be, generally speaking, market value. In
some cases such as certain kinds of expensive, uncommon earth moving
equipment, arriving at the market value will not be easy. Regard should
be had, if possible, to the price the property would fetch in the best
available market. In these cases, as the excess of the trade-in
allowance over the sale price of the article traded-in has been regarded
as a disguised discount on the purchase of the new article, the amount
of the excess is deductible from the cost price of the new article in
arriving at the figure on which depreciation will be
allowable."
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
3 June 1976
References
ATO references:
NO 75/9815 F11
Date original memo issued:
03.06.76
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 87
IT 278 NOTICE OF ARCHIVAL
Subject References:
PROPERTY - DISPOSAL BY TRADE-IN
PROPERTY - ACQUIRED BY LEASE
PROFITS ON TRADE-INS
Legislative References:
26AAA
59
Case References:
- Hamblin case
131 CLR 570
(1974) 74 ATC 4310
(1974) 5 ATR 16