IT 290 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 290
Gifts to public libraries, public museums
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103833
PREAMBLE
The following advice was given concerning the status of national, state and institutional archives for the purposes of the scheme of Taxation Incentives for the Arts. So far as relevant, that scheme provides income tax deductions for gifts (not being testamentary gifts) of the value of $2 and upwards of property (other than money or an estate or interest in land or in a building or part of a building), given to, and accepted by a public library, public museum or public art gallery for inclusion in a collection maintained or being established by the donee institution.
RULING
2.
The term 'public library' is not a technical term
and, as it is not defined in the Income Tax Assessment Act, is required
to be construed according to its ordinary or natural meaning. In the
context of the gift provisions it is generally accepted that a public
library is one whose collection of books and other literature is
available to the public and which is owned or controlled by a government
or quasi-government authority, or by persons or an institution having a
degree of responsibility to the public. Similar considerations would
apply in relation to a 'public museum', which, broadly, is taken to mean
a building used for storing and exhibiting objects illustrating
antiquities, natural history, art etc.
3. Where a library or museum is established as part
of a public educational institution it is normally possible to accept
that the gift provisions mentioned may apply provided that the affairs
of the library or museum can be reasonably distinguished from the
general affairs of the institution and that it is clear that the gift in
question has been made to the library or museum as distinct from the
institution. In these cases, assurances are sought that such gifts have
been, or will be, accepted for the exclusive use of the library or
museum for as long as they remain the property of the institution. Where
this assurance is given and other conditions of eligibility are
satisfied, a gift of property other than money accepted by, say, a
University library for inclusion in a collection that it maintains or is
establishing may qualify for deduction under the liberalised gift
provisions of the income tax law.
4. Of course, where a library maintains, as part of
its collection, a section devoted to manuscripts and other archival
material, donations of property to form part of the archival collection
may also qualify for deduction under the scheme.
5. The question whether a National or State archive
would qualify in its own right as an eligible recipient under the scheme
would need to be examined having regard to the activities of the
particular institution, the material collected, its ownership and
control, and the availability of its facilities and material to the
general public. Should a particular organisation wish to clarify its
status in this regard, it would be appropriate for its administrators to
supply full details regarding its activities, location, administrative
control and availability to the general public; to the Australian
Taxation Office in the State in which the organisation is
located.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
13 September 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 78/3297 F6
Date original memo issued:
13.09.78
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 290W
Subject References:
GIFTS
PUBLIC LIBRARIES
PUBLIC MUSEUMS
ARCHIVES
Legislative References:
78(1)(a)(xxvii)
78(1)(aa)