IT 259 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
10 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 259
Special areas for zone allowance purposes
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070545
FACTS
From 1 November 1981 a special basic rebate of $750, in lieu of the ordinary basic rebate of $216 and $36 for Zone A and Zone B respectively, is available for people residing or spending the required period of time in particularly isolated areas (the special area) within either zone, ie, at places in excess of 250 kilometres by the shortest practicable surface route from the centre of the nearest population centre of 2,500 or more (based on 1976 census data).
2. The following guidelines are issued to assist in determining special areas for zone allowance purposes.
RULING
Shortest Practicable Surface Route General
3. The test to determine special areas for zone
allowance purposes is in similar terms to that used to determine
"remoteness" for the purpose of taxing subsidised housing benefits of
employees. The guidelines set out in paragraphs 8 and 9 of IT67
concerning housing benefits are generally applicable for establishing
the shortest practicable surface route for zone allowance purposes also. The following additional comments may be of assistance.
Road Routes
4. In the vast majority of cases, road routes will
be the shortest practicable surface routes to and from population
centres. Where the road is reasonably well-defined, whether it is a
sealed highway or a major or minor access road (public or private), and
is normally used by zone residents to travel between a point in a zone
area and the relevant population centre, the distance by that road will
determine eligibility for the special basic zone rebate.
5. The fact that the road in question may be
occasionally impassable as a result of floods, etc, will not mean that
it is not a practicable route. However, a road that is regularly
impassable for a significant part of the year will not be a practicable
route.
Water Routes
6. Where a water route is wholly or partly the
generally adopted method of travelling to and from a population centre,
that route would, to that extent, form the practicable route. It would
not be reasonable, however, to treat a water route as being practicable
if it was not readily negotiable, in terms of water conditions or
distance, unless there was a regular passenger service available.
7. For example, in the case of Groote Eylandt (in
the Gulf of Carpentaria), it is understood that there is no passenger
boat service between the island and the nearest population centre of
2,500 or more (Nhulunbuy - which is about 200 kilometres away by water)
and that the generally adopted means of travel to and from the island is
by air to more distant centres. In these circumstances, it is
considered that the water route from the island to Nhulunbuy is not a
practicable route. Indeed, it is accepted that there is no practicable
surface route, (which does not include an air route) between the two
places, and Groote Eylandt has, on that basis, been accepted as being in
the special area.
8. Where there is a practicable water route, the
fact that one or more of the residents of a particular area choose to
fly rather than use the water route, will not make that area a special
area.
Train Routes
9. It would seem that only in exceptional cases
would a train route be a practicable route in remote zone areas. In
view of their infrequency, train services would not normally be the
means by which zone residents would travel to and from a population
centre - they could generally be expected to travel by road.
Accordingly, if the distance by rail from a point in a zone area to the
nearest population centre of 2,500 or more is less than 250 kilometres,
while by road it is more than 250 kilometres, the point should not be
excluded from the special zone area without prior reference to Head
Office.
Summary
10. The question to be decided is whether the
particular route is the generally accepted and reasonably available
means of travel for the relevant zone residents as a whole. The
circumstances of a particular individual, for example whether or not he
or she actually owns a car or boat, is not the determining
factor.
11. Where, on applying the above guidelines, it is
established that there is no practicable surface route from a point in a
zone to the nearest population centre, that point should be accepted as
being in the special zone area.
Near Neighbours
12. The new zone allowance arrangements, like the
taxation of employee housing benefits legislation, also introduce the
concept of a near-neighbour test. Sub-section 79A(3E) is designed to
reduce anomalies that could arise through a strict interpretation of the
250 kilometre shortest practicable surface route test. Where near
neighbours reside on either side of the 250 kilometre dividing line,
this test should be used to provide consistent treatment between the
neighbours.
13. Operation of this sub-section is not intended to
be used to allow the special rebate to cases other than "borderline"
cases as outlined above.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
29 June 1982
References
ATO references:
NO L80/40 P5 F160
Date original memo issued:
29.06.82
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 343
Subject References:
ZONE REBATES
SHORTEST PRACTICABLE SURFACE ROUTE
NEAR NEIGHBOUR DISCRETION
DEFINITION - SURFACE ROUTE
Legislative References:
79A
79A(3D)
79A(3E)
79A(4)