IT 286 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 286
Income tax: averaging of income - beneficiaries of trust estates section 157(3)
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
This ruling has been withdrawn and replaced by
TR 95/29
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103623
FACTS
A review has been made of the operation of section 157(3) in relation to beneficiaries of trust estates engaged in primary production activities.
RULING
2. Section 157(3) was inserted into the Income Tax
Assessment Act to overcome the effect of the decision of the High Court
in Doherty v FC of T (1933) 48 CLR 1 where it was held that a
beneficiary in a trust estate did not carry on the business of the
estate. It is not without significance that the beneficiary in the
Doherty case was seeking to claim a deduction for her share of the loss
incurred by the trust estate. What section 157(3) does is to extend the
benefit of the averaging provisions to a beneficiary who is presently
entitled to all or part of the income of a trust estate in a business of
primary production.
3. It is to be noticed that sub-section (3) does not
require that a beneficiary be presently entitled to a share of the net
income of a trust estate calculated in accordance with section 95.
Present entitlement relates to the income of a trust estate. It is not
necessary to dwell on what is involved in a beneficiary being presently
entitled to a share of the income of a trust estate. That expression
was considered by the Federal Court in FC of T v Totledge Pty Ltd, 82
ATC 4169; 12 ATR 830. It is quite consistent with the authorities that
a beneficiary may be presently entitled to income of a trust estate
notwithstanding that the trust may have incurred a loss in a
year.
4. Furthermore, the application of section 157(3)
must be considered in the whole context of Division 16. Section 153
provides that any year in which a taxpayer was carrying on a business of
primary production but had no taxable income shall be capable of being
an average year. It is a reasonable inference to draw that, had it been
intended that section 153 would not apply to beneficiaries in trust
estates, the legislation would have expressly provided for this
result.
5. For these reasons it should be accepted that,
where a beneficiary is presently entitled, under the terms of a trust
deed, to the income or part of the income of a trust estate which
carries on a business of primary production, any year in which the trust
estate incurs a loss is capable of being an average year.
6. On the other hand in a discretionary trust
engaged in a business of primary production, a beneficiary would not, as
a general rule, be deemed to be carrying on a business of primary
production in any year in which the trustee does not exercise the
discretion in favour of the beneficiary. It would seem most unlikely
that the trustee would exercise the discretion where the business
activities resulted in a loss. There may be cases arising in
discretionary trusts, however, where there is a loss for income tax
purposes, but income for general trust purposes, e.g. as a result of a
substantial investment allowance deduction. Should the trustee exercise
his discretion in such a case in favour of a beneficiary the beneficiary
should be treated as carrying on a business of primary production for
the purposes of Division 16.
7. The instructions in the preceding paragraphs are
subject, of course, to section 157(3A).
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Withdrawn by TR 95/29
References
ATO references:
NO J 319/15 P7 F368
Date original memo issued:
15.07.82
Subject References:
AVERAGING PROVISIONS
PRIMARY PRODUCTION TRUSTS
DISCRETIONARY TRUSTS
Legislative References:
157(3)
Case References:
- Doherty v FC of T
(1933) 48 CLR 1
- FC of T v Totledge Pty Ltd
82 ATC 4168
12 ATR 830