IT 235 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
9 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 235
Timber industry workers - contract tree fellers
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103077
PREAMBLE
The following advice issued concerning the treatment to be given to the remuneration of workers in the timber felling industry.
RULING
2. Two main categories of workers were identified,
the principal contractor and the timber fellers.
(1) PRINCIPAL CONTRACTORS
3. Where a person contracts with a mill to supply
timber and the contract requires that person, or a person engaged by
him, to cut, snig and haul the timber, that person is considered to be
carrying on a business and as such, his income from that activity will
be subject to provisional tax. In most cases, it is envisaged that he
will be carrying on a business of primary production as defined in
section 6 of the Income Tax Assessment Act and thus the averaging
provisions of that Act will apply to that income. Voluntary income tax
instalment deductions should not be accepted in lieu of provisional
tax.
(2) TIMBER FELLERS
4. Where workers are engaged to fell trees and cut
them into log lengths and the equipment they provide is limited to chain
saws, saws and axes etc. and a vehicle to transport the equipment, it is
considered that the remuneration to those workers falls within the
definition of salary or wages. The contracts are substantially for the
labour of the person who may be hired or fired by the mill management or
the principal contractor and their duties are controlled in a way
characteristic of a master and servant relationship. The situation is
not influenced by piece-work rates or the fact that they may be required
to provide and maintain the tools of their trade. As the workers are
considered to be employees of the principal contractor or the mill, they
are not carrying on a business and consequently, the averaging
provisions will not apply to the income received. Further, as the
remuneration is salary or wages, income tax instalment deductions are
required to be made in accordance with the schedule of standard
deductions.
5. An examination of returns lodged by taxpayers in
this category indicates that the calculation of tax instalment
deductions on 90 per cent of the gross payments would be appropriate
where the timber cutter is required to provide and maintain his own
chain saws etc. Where the cutter is also required to provide his own
motor vehicle to transport his equipment to the work site, the
instalment deductions should be based on an amount equal to 80 per cent
of the gross payments. It is considered that these variations will be
appropriate in the majority of cases but where a particular taxpayer
necessarily incurs expenses significantly greater than those generally
provided for, he is of course, at liberty to apply for a variation
appropriate to his circumstances. Any such application should be
considered on its own merits.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
September 1982
References
ATO references:
NO 81/110
Date original memo issued:
Sept 82
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 235W
Legislative References:
6(1)
156(1)
157
221D
221YA
Back to top