IT 210 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
4 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 210
Application of averaging provisions - income from hire of farm plant
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1102282
PREAMBLE
The Commissioner had occasion to reply to a Federal Member of Parliament concerning the treatment, for the purposes of the averaging provisions, of income derived by a primary producer from the hire of farm plant to other primary producers or from the operation of the plant by him on their properties. This ruling is in the form of an extract of the reply.
RULING
"You will appreciate that I must apply the law as enacted
by the Parliament. As the law stands, leaving aside the amount of
non-primary production income for purposes of the averaging provisions,
the income that qualifies for the averaging benefit is income that a
person derived from the carrying on of a business of primary production,
or that was included in the assessable income of the person in
consequence of the carrying on of a business of primary production by
that person. "Primary production" is defined in the Income Tax
Assessment Act to mean "... production resulting directly from -
(a)
the cultivation of land;
(b)
the maintenance of animals or poultry for the purpose of selling
them or their bodily produce, including natural increase;
(c)
fishing operations; or
(d)
forest operations;
and includes the
manufacture of dairy produce by the person who produced the raw
materials used in that manufacture; ...".
That definition is of long standing in the Act. Whether
or not income qualifies as income from primary production will, of
course, depend on the facts in each case. As mentioned by the firm of
accountants who raised the matter with you, there seems to be no scope
to argue that income that a cane harvesting contractor derived from the
hire of plant, or from the hire of plant plus the services of the
operator of the plant - which is their first example - is income from
primary production.
As to the second example - of a few canefarmers grouping
together to buy equipment in order to harvest their own cane - I am not
at all clear that assessable income is being derived. It would well be
that in such a situation the mutuality principle applies and that each
person would be entitled to his share of appropriate deductions such as
depreciation of the jointly owned property, or of fuel and oil and other
expenses.
If, however, the circumstances were such that the
mutuality principle did not apply, e.g. because some work was done for
persons outside the group arrangement, it would again depend on the
facts whether the partnership profits could be regarded as income from
primary production. If the "outside" work were limited to merely
incidental work done for neighbours the partnership profit would, in the
absence of factors leading to a contrary conclusion, be accepted as
income from primary production. This, of course, would not be the case
if in fact a separate contracting business extending regularly to
outsiders was being carried on.
The answer to the third example, which you have
particularly stressed, would again depend on the facts. Where a
separate contracting or hiring business is being operated by a
canegrower after discussion and agreements with neighbours, or otherwise
on a regular basis, the income would not be from primary production.
The position would, however, be different if, as an incidental part of
carrying on his farming operations, a canegrower were to derive income
through helping out a neighbour on occasions by hiring out or using his
own harvester to harvest the neighbour's cane.
You may recall that when the Treasurer announced the
decision to change the averaging provisions in his 1978-79 Budget
Speech, he said that the change would ensure that persons with minimal
interest or activities in primary production are not able to abuse the
system to reduce their tax on non-primary production income. Given that
objective, I would think that it would be against the spirit of the
legislation if I were to treat income that a person derives from what is
virtually a separate contracting business as primary production income,
because in such a situation it would be open to any contractor to get
the benefit of the averaging provisions on income from contracting
merely by having a minimal interest in a primary production
business."
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
22 October 1980
References
ATO references:
NO 79/1437 F10
Date original memo issued:
22.10.80
Subject References:
FARM PLANT - INCOME FROM HIRE OF
AVERAGING OF INCOME
DEFINITION - PRIMARY PRODUCTION
Business Line:
SB
Legislative References:
6(1)
156
157