IT 20 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 20
Investment allowance and depreciation: steel moulds used in the production of castings for sewage treatment plant
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100026
Facts
A branch office sought advice on the treatment for investment allowance and depreciation purposes or a steel mould used in the production of castings for a sewage treatment plant.
2. The mould is used in producing castings, the external dimensions of which are 4.2m x 2.2m x .8m for a core section and 4.2m x 2.2m x .9m for a base and top. In addition, the mould has the added features of:
(a)
Turnbuckles to permit lifting and turning around and/or over
(b)
Vibrators attached to facilitate filling with concrete
(c)
Four hydraulic rams fitted to a central console to separate the external skin of the mould and the product from the internal steel formwork
(d)
The capability, by use of selected internal steel formwork, to produce a variety of patterns.
Ruling
3. Notwithstanding the size of the mould and the added
features, there does not seem to be any compelling reason to treat the
steel mould in question any differently from moulds used in the
manufacture of concrete pipes. Accordingly it was directed that the
investment allowance deduction should be refused. Reference to
"concrete pipes" is made in the light of para. 109 of CITCM 830 which
included a mould used in the manufacture of concrete pipes as an article
to which section 62AA(3)(h) applies.
4. On the question of depreciation, it was agreed that
the recommended effective file is five years. Accordingly, a rate of 20
per cent prime cost, 30 per cent diminishing value applies to the steel
mould.
Commissioner of Taxation
23 June 1981
References
ATO references:
NO 81/5869 F7
Date original memo issued:
23.06.81
Subject References:
sewage plant
investment allowance
depreciation
Legislative References:
ITAA 55
ITAA 82AF(2)(g)