IT 354 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
6 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 354
Sharedealing transactions by overseas investors : application of sections 254 and 255
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070826
PREAMBLE
Following the introduction of section 26AAA, consideration was given to the interpretation of sections 254 and 255 as it relates to the sharedealing transactions of non-resident investors.
RULING
2. Section 255 deals specifically with persons
having the receipt, control or disposal of money belonging to a
non-resident. On a literal interpretation, the section might be thought
to cast upon any person having a liability to pay money to a
non-resident a duty to retain funds sufficient to meet an unspecified
tax demand, and would render that person liable if he failed to do
so.
3. However, the context in which the section
appears in the Act suggests that it was intended to be as a general
provision directed towards facilitating the recovery, from moneys in
Australia, of tax assessed in cases where a person in receipt or control
of money for a non-resident has received a notice from the Commissioner
requiring him to pay the tax due.
4. This is how the provision has always been
interpreted by the Commissioner. The view is taken that section 255
does not require stockbrokers or other persons having the receipt,
control or disposal of money belonging to a non-resident to retain any
part of the money unless tax has been assessed and the person has
received notice of that fact from the Commissioner.
5. Section 254 deals with the position under the
Act of an agent. "Agent" is defined in section 6 as including -
(a)
every person who in Australia, for or on behalf of any person out
of Australia holds or has the control, receipt or disposal of any money
belonging to that person; and
(b)
every person declared by the Commissioner to be an agent or the
sole agent of any person for any of the purposes of the
Act.
6. Under section 254 an agent is answerable as
taxpayer to make returns in respect of income and is required to retain
out of money which he receives as agent an amount sufficient to pay the
tax which is or will become due in respect of the income.
7. The view has always been taken that this
provision is directed at agents carrying on continuing business
activities on behalf of a non-resident and that money need not be
withheld in a case where an agent or trustee is engaged in an isolated
transaction unless an assessment has been made and the agent or trustee
has notice of that fact.
8. It remains to consider the effect of the
requirement of section 254 that the agent or trustee shall be answerable
as taxpayer for the doing of all things that are required under the Act
in respect of income derived by virtue of his agency. A supporting
provision says that he shall make the returns in respect of such
income.
9. It is open to argument that an agent can be
called upon to lodge a return whenever he knows, for example, that
shares have been sold within one year of purchase because section 26AAA
raises at least a presumption that there is income that may be subject
to tax. However, the Commissioner accepts that section 254 does not
require a stockbroker or other agent to take the initiative in lodging
returns on behalf of an overseas principal if the agent is only handling
particular transactions and does not have the general management of his
principal's affairs and is not in a position to know whether the
principal has a potential liability to pay tax.
10. To sum up, the new provisions of the law
relating to casual profits arising from the sale of property are viewed
on the basis that sections 254 and 255 do not impose on stockbrokers any
liability to deduct tax from money received on behalf of non-residents
unless an assessment has been raised and the stockbroker concerned has
notice that tax is outstanding. Nor is there an obligation to take the
initiative and lodge income tax returns, in the circumstances referred
to, without being specifically requested to do so. The non-residents
themselves remain liable to lodge annual income tax returns and to pay
the tax assessed. If they fail to do so, they render themselves liable
to prosecution and to the penalties which the Act imposes for failing to
lodge correct returns.
11. There can be no question, of course, that our
general powers of obtaining information enable us to require that
stockbrokers and other persons holding information about the
transactions of non-residents should, on demand, furnish such
information as is in their possession.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Withdrawn by IT 2544
IT 2544
References
ATO references:
NO J206/11 P1 F63
BO SYD AF4018
Date original memo issued:
05.04.74
Subject References:
SHAREDEALING - NON-RESIDENT
SHAREDEALING TRANSACTIONS
OVERSEAS INVESTORS
STOCKBROKERS
Legislative References:
254
255
26AAA
26(a)