IT 323 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 323
Education expenses - swimming lessons
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1104019
FACTS
In an oral decision, Taxation Board of Review No.2 has upheld the disallowance of a deduction claimed by a taxpayer under section 82J for expenditure said to have been "necessarily incurred" in connection with the full-time education of his children.
2. The taxpayer had claimed a deduction under section 82J of the cost of private swimming lessons for his children. He gave evidence during the hearing to the effect that swimming was a compulsory activity at the primary school which the children attended unless exemption was sought by the parents.
RULING
3. In rejecting the taxpayer's claim, the Chairman
said:-
"Whether or not a parent decides to have a child taught swimming
is a matter of personal choice. The fact that the child can swim, can
take part in swimming activities at school does not establish a clear
enough or close enough nexus between the swimming lessons and the school
activity to describe the expenses as 'necessarily incurred for or in
connection with the full-time education of the
child'."
4. The Chairman had expressed some doubt on more
than one occasion during the hearing as to the correctness of the
allowance of deductions under section 82J for the cost of music lessons
and an educational tour to Cairns. He said he found it "somewhat
difficult to see a clear line of distinction between the expenditure on
the swimming lessons which were disallowed and expenditure on the music
lessons which were allowed".
5. So far as the cost of music lessons is
concerned, the Chairman's views are not supported. There should be no
departure from the official view as expressed in the Addendum to CITCM
698, attached to CITCM 820. In the Addendum it is made clear that, as
music and art are subjects generally recognised as part of school
curricula and as examination subjects, claims for fees paid for tuition
in these subjects outside the school or college at which the child is
receiving full-time education are allowable, whether or not these
subjects have been selected by the student for his examination.
6. Claims for fees paid on behalf of a student in
respect of tuition undertaken outside the school or college in subjects
not generally recognised as part of a normal educational curriculum, for
example, swimming and those other subjects specifically mentioned in
paragraph 5 of the Addendum, should continue to be disallowed. The
criterion, of course, is that music is an academic and examination
subject; swimming is not.
7. The basis for this distinction is the
recognition that section 82J does not require that expenditure be
incurred on the full-time education of the child - it is sufficient if
it is "in connection with" it. It must also be kept in mind that the
words "necessarily incurred" do not imply that only inescapable
expenditure may be deducted - it is sufficient if it is the kind of
expenditure which a prudent parent would consider it reasonable to incur
in connection with the child's schooling.
8. Questions of degree are therefore involved. It
is accepted that section 82J applies not only to direct school expenses
but also to private tuition undertaken to assist a child in his academic
studies at the school at which he is receiving full-time education. It
is also accepted that the section extends to reasonably necessary
expenditure on the equipment needed for official school sporting
activities. However, when a child is given private tuition to assist him
in performing better in school sports, this has reached a second stage
of remoteness from the full-time education and it is not accepted as
being necessarily incurred within the meaning of section 82J.
9. There is, of course, a further reason for
denying a deduction for swimming lessons. In practice, the taxpayer
cannot readily demonstrate that the purpose of the expenditure was to
assist the children in their full-time education rather than to enable
them to pursue their private recreation more effectively.
10. With regard to educational tours, however,
great care should be taken before claims in this regard are allowed in
future. The official view remains the same as set out in paragraph 6 of
the abovementioned Addendum, where it is stated:-
"Similar considerations apply in respect of the costs associated
with pupils undertaking conducted tours of national projects and other
places of general educational interest. Unless it is shown to be part of
the student's course that such tours be undertaken, for example, for
practical or field work in botany, geology, etc, the relevant expenses
should be disallowed."
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
13 February 1968
References
ATO references:
NO J345/42 P6 F209
Date original memo issued:
13.02.68
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
EDUCATION EXPENSES
SWIMMING LESSONS
Legislative References:
82J
159T