IT 351 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 351
Certain expenditure on land used for primary production
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
View the
Addendum notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070781
PREAMBLE
Consideration has been given as to the extent to which expenditure incurred on primary production land in connection with various forms of flood prevention or mitigation work may qualify for immediate deduction.
RULING
2. As a general proposition, expenditure incurred
in combating flooding on land used for primary production is deductible
under paragraph 75A(1)(g) in equal annual instalments over 10 years.
However, the qualification to paragraph (g) excludes from the scope of
the section expenditure which is deductible under section 75D in respect
of the construction or extending levee banks and similar improvements as
well as surface or sub-surface drainage works.
3. Section 75D provides an immediate deduction for
capital expenditure incurred by a primary producer on a wide range of
soil conservation and other measures. Paragraphs (e) and (f) of
sub-section 75D(1) bring within the scope of expenditure eligible for
immediate deduction the cost of constructing or extending levee banks
and similar improvements as well as surface or sub-surface drainage work
for the assistance of drainage control, subject to the proviso that the
expenditure is not for the draining of swamp or low-lying land.
4. It is considered that expenditure on the
construction of levee banks and similar improvements constructed on
primary production land is deductible under paragraph 75D(1)(e), whether
for flood prevention or mitigation purposes, soil conservation, land
reclamation or other purposes connected with the use of land for primary
production.
5. Paragraph (f) of section 75D, which refers to
capital expenditure incurred in an operation consisting of the
construction of surface drainage works or sub-surface drainage works, is
also considered to apply to a wide range of flood prevention or
mitigation work. The sinking of drainage bores and the laying of
surface or sub-surface piping in the course of constructing floodwater
drainage work would, for example, come within the scope of the section.
Such items, being within the extended definition of "plant" under
paragraph 54(2)(b), would not be excluded from section 75D by virtue of
sub-section 75D(3). Expenditure on items that are plant or articles by
ordinary concepts or on an operation which can properly be described as
the preparation of land for agriculture (such as the initial grading of
irrigation land), is not deductible under section 75D.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
24 February 1982
References
ATO references:
NO J35/23 P2 F175
Date original memo issued:
24.02.82
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 351W
Subject References:
PRIMARY PRODUCTION
SOIL CONSERVATION
FLOOD PREVENTION
DRAINAGE CONTROL
LEVEE BANKS
Legislative References:
75A(1)(g)
75D