IT 326 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 326
Metal trades industry - assessability of payments for accumulated "rostered day-off time" made on termination of employment - whether payments subject to tax instalment deductions
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1104087
PREAMBLE
Recently, representations were made concerning the treatment for taxation purposes of payments for accumulated 'rostered day-off time' made to employees of the Metal Trades Industry on termination of employment.
RULING
2. On examination of the variations to the Metal
Industry Award 1971 and the Metal Trades Award 1952, it is considered
that payments under these awards in lieu of accumulated "rostered
day-off time", made in consequence of retirement from, or termination
of, employment, would fall for assessment under section 26(d) of the
Income Tax Assessment Act. Hence, only 5% of the amount received would
be included in the assessable income of the employee.
3. In this situation, the payments would not be
subject to tax instalments and the full amount of the payment should be
shown against component B in column 4 of the group certificate. Similar
treatment would be accorded to payments in lieu of "rostered day-off
time" made in consequence of retirement from, or termination of,
employment under other Awards where their provisions closely equate with
those of the Metal Industry Award 1971 and the Metal Trades Award 1952
referred to above.
4. However, in other cases it would be necessary to
examine the relevant award or the terms of the agreement between the
employer and employee before a firm decision could be
given.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
5 October 1982
References
ATO references:
NO 82/4015 F17
BO SYD AF 2433 Pt 12
Date original memo issued:
05.10.82
Subject References:
METAL TRADES INDUSTRY
LUMP SUM PAYMENTS
TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT
RETIRING ALLOWANCE
"ROSTERED DAY-OFF TIME" PAYMENTS
TAX INSTALMENT DEDUCTIONS
Legislative References:
26(d)
221A