IT 341 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 341
University staff on overseas study leave : income tax deductions for expenditure.
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070592
PREAMBLE
Consideration has been given to several cases involving claims for overseas travelling expenses by university staff members on study leave.
RULING
2. University fellows and lecturers are generally
encouraged to avail themselves of study leave to pursue a course of
study overseas. When applying for leave the applicant is normally
required to set out a plan of study and to state whether financial
assistance additional to his normal salary is required. Any financial
assistance which he expects to receive from other sources (e.g. overseas
universities) is also taken into account by the relevant university body
in determining the amount of a study leave grant. In most cases, the
amount of the grant is much less than either the taxpayer's anticipated
or actual costs.
3. While it is clear that the grant received forms
part of the taxpayer's assessable income in the year of receipt, some
difficulty arises in determining the deductions allowable under section
51 for expenses incurred while on study leave.
4. The decisions in Finn's case and subsequent
Board of Review decisions require acceptance of the proposition that the
quantum of expenditure allowable under section 51 is not necessarily
limited to the amount of the grant received. The main problem in these
cases is rather to determine the quantum of expenditure allowable,
particularly with regard to living expenses and incidental expenses such
as entertainment, daily fares, etc.
5. Claims for fares to and from overseas paid by
the taxpayer should be allowed in full along with the cost of travelling
from place to place while pursuing study overseas. Where a taxpayer
incurs daily expenditure from an overseas place of residence to
universities etc. to pursue his study, reasonable claims for the cost of
daily travel may also be allowed. However, where it is ascertained that
travelling expenses on holidays or sightseeing are incurred while
overseas, no deduction should be allowed for those expenses.
6. With regard to living expenses (meals and
accommodation etc.) unverified claims of up to $10 per day may be
allowed without query but, if the taxpayer supplies satisfactory
evidence of expenditure in excess of $10 per day, the higher figure may
be allowed. No deduction for living expenses while on holidays or
sightseeing should be allowed.
7. The figure of $10 per day is not intended to be
inflexible but is regarded as a reasonable amount to cover the average
living costs of a taxpayer who visits several countries while overseas.
The actual costs in each case must, of course, differ and assessors will
need to use their discretion when considering such claims. For example,
where it is obvious that the taxpayer has resided in the one place for
the major part of his stay overseas, $10 per day would normally be the
maximum amount allowable. However, where there is an extended visit to
the United States, this amount may not be sufficient because of the
higher cost of living in that country.
8. Other incidental expenditure incurred in
pursuing study, e.g. transport of books, telephone, insurance,
conference fees, typing, postage etc., should be allowed in full.
9. In general, no deduction should be allowed for
the travelling or living expenses of the taxpayer's wife or children and
any claim that a wife was required to accompany her husband in the
capacity of a secretary should not be admitted without detailed
scrutiny.
10. It often happens that the overseas trip extends
over two income years. In some of the cases examined, the full amount
of the travel grant and the full cost of travelling to and from overseas
were shown in the first year's return. In the interests of simplicity,
this basis was accepted for assessment purposes even though it was not
strictly accurate. This practice may also be followed in comparable
cases where it produces a fair and equitable result. It was found on
examination that the transfer of part of these items from one return to
another would have had very little effect on the total taxes payable for
the two years.
11. Where a taxpayer derives income from lecturing,
research work etc., while overseas and that income remains liable to
Australian tax, deductions should be allowed for expenses which fall
within the categories already mentioned. However, if such overseas
income is exempt from Australian tax because of the provisions of
section 23(q), it is necessary to ascertain what part of the expenditure
is attributable to the derivation of exempt income and consequently not
deductible under section 51.
12. If the exempt income is earned concurrently
with the earning of assessable income at one place over the whole
duration of the trip as in the unreported decision of Board of Review
No.3, the apportionment of the allowable deductions should be calculated
along the lines upheld in the Board's decision, the disallowance being
calculated by the formula -
(Exempt income / Total income) of allowable
expenses.
13. In other cases, however, a taxpayer may in the
course of going from place to place derive exempt income for a limited
period only and then proceed to other places where no exempt income is
derived. In this situation, it is usually not practicable to establish
any direct relationship between the cost of travelling to and from
overseas and the derivation of exempt income. As a practical working
rule, therefore, such expenditure should be wholly allowed as a
deduction. On the other hand, the quantum of exempt income may warrant
some adjustment to the deduction otherwise allowable in respect of the
taxpayer's living costs while overseas.
14. Consistently with the principle applied in the
case mentioned in paragraph 12 above, the portion of the living expenses
disallowed should be based on the ratio which the exempt income derived
during the relevant part of the income year bears to the total income
derived during the same period. The following example illustrates the
method of calculation. Assuming that a taxpayer on a salary of $10,800
per annum receives a travel grant of $1,200 to cover a full year's study
leave and earns $4,000 exempt income during a period of four months,
half the living costs ($10 per day for 120 days) applicable to the
period in which exempt income was derived should be disallowed, viz:-
(Exempt income / Total income) x of living costs
, i.e., ((4000) / (4000 + 400 + 3600)) x 1200 = ((4000 / 8000) x $1200) =
$600
In the above calculation, $4,000 is the exempt
income, $400 represents one-third of the travel grant and $3,600
represents one-third of taxable salary received while on study
leave.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Withdrawn by TR 92/8
References
ATO references:
NO J35/194 P8 F41
BO SYD AF.1865/4
Date original memo issued:
31.03.70
Subject References:
UNIVERSITY STAFF
OVERSEAS STUDY LEAVE
EXEMPT INCOME - OVERSEAS STUDY
EXPENDITURE APPORTIONED
Legislative References:
51(1)
23(q)