IT 313 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
4 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 313
Speed Reading courses
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070217
FACTS
Consideration has been given to the question of whether persons are entitled to a deduction for expenses incurred on a course of speed reading.
FACTS
2. Two of the main organisations conducting speed reading courses in Australia are the Evelyn Wood Reading Dynamics Institute and Staff Training Centre Pty. Ltd. (N.S.W.) which have branches established in the various States. The emphasis and contents of the courses given by these firms vary but basically their objectives are the same - to correct the bad reading habits which people have developed and to assist them in reading faster with minimal loss of comprehension.
RULING
3. Although some of the claims for a speed reading
course put forward by its organisers may be extravagant, there is no
doubt such a course does represent "education" in the broad sense. The
premise upon which the whole general education system is based is the
fact that a child can read and understand the material taught him at
school. Any course which is designed to break down bad reading habits
must be of benefit to the whole range of subjects studied by the child.
It is considered, therefore, that, provided the child is receiving
full-time education at a school, college, university, etc., the expense
involved in his taking a speed reading course should be deductible under
section 82J.
4. As regards expenses incurred by a person on a
speed reading course for self-education purposes there would seem little
doubt that the provisions of section 82JAA would apply to permit a
deduction for the amount involved. This would be provided that the
person concerned establishes that his purpose in undertaking the course
is to use the skills gained in his present or future employment rather
than for private reasons.
5. Furthermore, although it is a question to be
determined in the light of the facts of each case, it would seem that,
having regard to decisions of the Taxation Boards of Review in
self-education cases, many taxpayers would be able to establish that the
costs of speed reading courses could also be deductible pursuant to
section 51.
6. It may be desirable, in view of the cost of some
speed reading courses, to seek receipts in appropriate cases to
substantiate claims.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
5 March 1973
References
ATO references:
NO J345/42 P7 F225
BO SYD AF 1400/J 5
Date original memo issued:
05.03.73
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
EDUCATION EXPENSES
SELF-EDUCATION EXPENSES
SPEED READING COURSES
Legislative References:
51
82J
82JAA
159T
159U