IT 334 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 334
Abnormal income - artists amounts received from sale of paintings
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103271
PREAMBLE
Consideration has been given to the application of Division 16A of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
to proceeds arising from the sale of paintings by artists.
RULING
2. Generally, an amount received by an artist for
the outright sale of a painting, whether received in a lump sum or in
instalments, is not considered to fall within the definition of "lump
sum earnings". The view is taken that, normally, the nature of such a
transaction would be the sale of a chattel, viz. the painting itself,
and the sale price would substantially, if not wholly, be consideration
for the chattel rather than for the sale or assignment of the artist's
copyright in the work. Although the sale by an artist of a painting
might involve assignment of the copyright in the painting, it would be
only in exceptional cases that the sale price could be regarded as
consideration for the assignment of copyright.
3. It is considered, however, that a sum received
by an artist for the outright sale of his or her painting would, in
general, be an amount received, otherwise than by way of royalties, in
respect of an artistic work. On this basis and provided the amount is
not remuneration for the employment of, or services rendered by, the
artist, such an amount could qualify as "recurrent earnings" for the
purpose of Division 16A.
4. Where an artist is commissioned to produce an
artistic work the amounts received by way of commission are not "lump
sum earnings" for the purposes of Division 16A. The question whether
such receipts constitute "recurrent earnings" is one which can only be
determined on the particular facts of each individual case having regard
to the precise nature of the contractual arrangements between the
parties.
5. As a general rule, a commission fee paid in
circumstances where the artist is required to do little more than
provide his or her skill and labour in producing the artistic work would
be remuneration for services rendered. Amounts received by way of
remuneration for the employment of, or services rendered by, an artist,
whether received in one sum or not, are excluded from both categories of
"abnormal income".
6. In some cases, an artist may be required to meet
quite substantial costs in producing the artistic work that he or she is
commissioned to produce. Where the contract is of this nature it is the
practice of this Office to accept the proceeds as "recurrent
earnings".
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
15 July 1982
References
ATO references:
NO J130/73 P1 F384
Date original memo issued:
15.07.82
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 334W
Subject References:
ABNORMAL INCOME - ARTISTS
DIVISION 16A - ARTISTS
SALE OF PAINTINGS
ARTISTS - TREATMENT OF INCOME
LUMP SUM EARNINGS
RECURRENT EARNINGS
Legislative References:
158C(2)