IT 330 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 330
Children's bank accounts : treatment of interest income
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103224
PREAMBLE
The following ruling issued as a result of a reveiw of the income tax implications attaching to interest earned on bank and building society accounts opened on behalf of children by their parents and/or relatives. Attention has been drawn to the question as a result of dividend and interest checks in recent years.
RULING
2. The answer to be given in any case, i.e., whether
the interest belongs to the child, whether the arrangements constitute a
trust, whether the child is presently entitled, etc. will inevitably
depend upon the facts of the particular case. As a practical approach,
however, the following proposals may be followed.
Account in child's name with child as signatory
3. Generally a savings institution will accept an
account in the name of a child with the child as signatory and operator
of the account as soon as the child can legibly write his or her own
name.
4. In this situation there would be a prima facie
presumption that the moneys in the particular account were the property
of the child. Unless the circumstances lead to a contrary conclusion it
may be accepted that the income generated by the account would be
assessable to the child in his or her own right and will, subject to the
exceptions specified therein, fall for assessment under the provisions
of Division 6AA.
Account opened by third party
5. Where it is established that the account was
opened as a result of a settlement by a third party it should normally
be presumed, unless there is evidence to the contrary, that the
arrangements constitute a trust for the benefit of the child or
children.
6. Assessment of the interest in this situation will
depend upon the extent to which it can be said that the child is
presently entitled to the interest. Where it appears that the child is
presently entitled either on the face of an existing trust instrument or
because the child has a vested and indefeasible interest in the trust or
because the trustee has exercised a discretion and paid or applied money
to or on behalf of or for the benefit of the child, the income should be
assessed in accordance with sections 97 or 98, subject to the provisions
of Division 6AA. Where it appears that the child is not presently
entitled to the interest from the bank account then the interest should
be assessed to the trustee in terms of section 99A.
Account held in child's name with parent/s as signatory
7. The difficulty that is inherent in this situation
is to determine what the intentions were in opening the account. In
very many cases enquiries would reveal no fixed intention on behalf of
the parent or parents other than a general purpose of putting some money
aside for the future benefit of the child or children. In the event
that some family financial emergency might arise resort would be had to
the moneys in the account. There would be very little likelihood that
moneys in the account would pass to the child's legal personal
representative in the manner that occurred in Taylor v FC of T (1970)
119 CLR 444.
8. In the circumstances it is most unlikely that a
child could be said to have a vested and indefeasible interest in the
moneys accumulated in an account of this nature. The child's interest
in the moneys would be more in the nature of a contingent interest and
as explained in CITCM 760, paragraph 102(1)(b) would not apply.
9. It would seem that the best approach with this
sort of account is to assess the interest income to the parent signatory
in his or her own right. In the event that the assessment is disputed
the parent should be advised that if the assessment is not correct the
income may be assessable under section 99A or paragraph 102(1)(b) or
Division 6AA, all of which would produce much the same result.
10. However, there may be cases in this category
where the correct conclusion would be that the income is that of the
child. For example, where income derived by a child, e.g. from
delivering newspapers, delivering brochures, child minding etc. is
deposited into an acccount in the name of the child with the parent as
signatory, it should be accepted that the interest is that of the
child.
11. Another situation has its origin in the practice
of banks some years ago not to open an account in the child's name with
the child as signatory - children's accounts were generally opened with
the parent as signatory. Cases will arise in this situation where it is
also the proper conclusion to draw that the interest belongs to the
child.
12. The examples outlined at paragraphs 10 and 11
emphasise the statement in paragraph 2 that the proper conclusion to be
drawn in any case will depend upon the facts of each particular
case.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
25 June 1982
IT 2486
References
ATO references:
NO J78/120 P2 F312
Date original memo issued:
25.06.82
Subject References:
CHILDREN'S BANK ACCOUNTS
INTEREST - CHILDREN'S ACCOUNTS
TRUSTS - CHILDREN'S BANK ACCOUNTS
TRUSTEE - CHILDREN'S BANK ACCOUNTS
Legislative References:
97
98
99A
102(1)(b)
102AA
Case References:
- Taylor v FC of T
(1970) 119 CLR 444