IT 363 (Addenda exist) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
5 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 363
Mining company : application of Division 10 to principal and sub-contractors engaged in mining operations
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
View the
Addendum notice
for this document.
View the
Addendum (2) notice
for this document.
This ruling contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been rewritten. The ruling still has effect. Paragraph 32 in
TR 2006/10
provides further guidance on the status and binding effect of public rulings where the law has been repealed or repealed and rewritten. The legislative references at the end of the ruling indicate the repealed provisions and, where applicable, the rewritten provisions.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1071064
PREAMBLE
Consideration was given to the ascertainment of entitlement to Division 10 deductions where a transport company subcontracted to provide all cartage (including the removal of overburden and transport of ore) for the principal contractor who is engaged in mining operations.
RULING
2. It is accepted that the company is entitled to
Division 10 deductions in respect of its operations at the mine.
3. In C.I.T.C.M. 667, paragraphs 10 and 11, the
deductions provided by the then Division 10 were expressed not to be
restricted to mine owners and lessees but to extend to contractors who
carry out the operations on the mining property for the recovery of the
deposit being sought. This interpretation was consistent with the
terminology of the Division which operated where a person incurred
relevant expenditure in connexion with the carrying on by him of mining
operations upon a mining property. There was no inbuilt restriction
limiting the operation of the Division to mine owners or lessees -
rather it applied to operations rather than to persons.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
18 December 1974
References
ATO references:
NO 74/6094 F31
Date original memo issued:
18.12.74
Subject References:
MINING COMPANY - CONTRACTORS
Legislative References:
DIVISION 10
122