IT 32 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 32
Investment allowance - disposal of interest in partnership within 12 months of acquisition
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100047
Preamble
A Board of Review considered the taxation treatment of the disposal of a partnership interest within 12 months of its acquisition.
Ruling
2. The Board, in deciding to allow the taxpayer's
objection, did not decide the substantive issue of the reference,
namely, whether section 82AJ(1) operates to recoup a deduction for the
investment allowance in a situation where the unit of eligible property
has been taken by a partner who retired from the partnership within 12
months of the acquisition of the property. The question to be answered
was whether the taxpayer, who continued as a partner in the
reconstituted partnership, had disposed of the whole or a part of his
interest in the partnership or in the property taken by the retiring
partners. The view held by this office was that the taxpayer did dispose
of such an interest and that view has not been altered as a result of
the comments made by the Board in this case.
3. In deciding against the Commissioner, the Board seized
upon a procedural error made in the determination of the taxpayer's
share of the net income of the partnership. What occurred in this case
was that the appropriate amount of the recoupment determined for the
purposes of section 82AJ(1) was applied to reduce the deduction
otherwise allowable to the partnership in respect of the investment
allowance and thereby to increase the taxpayer's share of the net income
of the partnership. However, the section clearly permits the deduction
to the partnership but requires the adjustment to be made to the
assessable income of the partner. The net result is, of course, the
same under either approach.
4. In view of the decision in FC of T v Wade (1951) 84
CLR 105, it is considered that the Board was wrong in deciding to allow
the taxpayer's objection on the grounds of the Commissioner's procedural
error. However, because of the relatively small amount of tax involved
and the fact that the Board's reasons were delivered orally, an appeal
will not be lodged against the decision.
5. It would be appreciated if you would ensure that your
officers are aware of the correct procedure in cases involving
adjustments under section 82AJ. Where that section applies and a
deduction is allowable or has been allowed to the partnership, the
required adjustment is to be made in the partner's assessment by
specific inclusion of the relevant amount, and not by adjustment to the
share of partnership net income.
Commissioner of Taxation
28 September 1979
References
ATO references:
NO 78/6279 F138
Date original memo issued:
28.09.79
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 32W - Withdrawal
Subject References:
disposal of interest in partnership
investment allowance
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AJ(1)
Case References:
FC of T v Wade
(1951) 84 CLR 105