IT 31 Taxation Ruling
IT 31
Investment allowance - structural improvements - plant structures
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
edited for FOI purposesFOI number:
I 1100312
Preamble
Representations received from a number of quarters necessitated a review of practices which appear to have arisen in the consideration of claims for investment allowance deduction in respect of capital expenditure on plant structures in the manufacturing, industrial or mining industries.
2. The particular question which arises is the extent to which plant structures are disqualified from the investment allowance deduction as structural improvements within the meaning of section 82AE of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Ruling
3. A literal reading of section 82AE would suggest that
all structural improvements, apart from the exceptions specified in the
section, would not be eligible for the investment allowance deduction.
The section must be read, however, in the context of the investment
allowance provisions as a whole and in the light of earlier investment
allowance provisions relating to manufacturing and primary production
plant.
4. At the forefront of the interpretation of section 82AE
is section 82AB which authorises a deduction in respect of the
acquisition or construction by a taxpayer of a new unit of eligible
property. The term "construction" is defined to include manufacture and
this inclusive definition indicates that the deduction was to be
available in respect of eligible property, i.e., plant or articles, not
only manufactured by a taxpayer but also built, erected, fitted
together, etc. by him.
5. In essence section 82AE has its origin in section
62AB(3)(a) of the earlier investment allowance provisions which excluded
from deduction buildings, wharves, fences, dams, earth tanks, bores,
wells or other structural improvements used in carrying on a business of
primary production. It is of significance that section 62AA which
provided a special deduction for investment in manufacturing plant does
not have any exclusion in respect of structural improvements.
6. In a Press Release of 26 January 1976 the then
Treasurer stated that the purpose of section 82AE was to exclude from
the investment allowance certain structural improvements, e.g., wharves
and jetties and primary producers' boundary fencing, employees'
cottages, machinery and shearing sheds and stables. There was no
suggestion that the exclusion was intended to be any wider than
this.
7. Consistently with the intention of the legislation it
was stated in a memorandum from this office of 15 October 1976, H.O.
Ref. 76/3587, that it is not the view of this office that section 82AE
applies generally to exclude from the investment allowance deduction
expenditure incurred in the construction of plant comprised wholly or in
part of structures whether or not the plant structures are affixed to
the land.
8. If structures for use in industries other than primary
production are not to qualify as eligible property for investment
allowance purposes it will be on more general principles and not in
reliance on section 82AE, i.e., because the structures do not qualify as
plant or articles within the meaning of section 54. Where structures do
qualify as plant or articles within the meaning of section 54 they will
also qualify as eligible property for investment allowance
purposes.
9. In the circumstances there are no grounds for the
approach which seems to have arisen in some offices that anything which
resembles a structure or any part of a structure made of concrete or
principally concrete does not qualify as eligible property because of
section 82AE. If a structure is properly characterised as plant it will
be eligible property for investment allowance purposes whatever its
appearance or composition.
10. In determining what structures are plant,
particularly where major manufacturing, industrial and mining complexes
are involved, regard should be had to Head Office memorandum J63/4 of 1
March 1972 and the attachment thereto, viz. memorandum dated 28 February
1972 to the Crown solicitor concerning an appeal to the Full High Court
in FC of T v ICI Australia Limited (1972) 127 CLR 529. In the Head
Office memorandum of 1 March 1972 it was stated:
2. 'In The Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd v FCT, (1967) 120 CLR
240, Kitto J. gave the following explanation with regard to the meaning
of the word "plant" in section 122, and this is no doubt a reasonably
accurate statement of the way in which the courts would interpret the
conception of "plant" as it is used in the depreciation provisions. At
p.247, his Honour said:-
'As to the meaning of the word "plant", it is sufficient at this
point to refer to a line of English decisions from Yarmouth v France
(1887) 19 Q.B.D. 647, at p.658, to J. Lyons & Co Ltd v Attorney-General
(1944) 1 Ch. 281, t p.287, and Jarrold v John Good & Sons Ltd. (1963) 1
W.L.R. 214, and to say that in my opinion, in accordance with the
exposition to be found in these cases, the word as used in s.122(1)
includes every chattel or fixture which is kept for use in the carrying
on of the mining operations, not being (in case of a building) merely in
the nature of a general setting in which a part of those operations are
carried on.'
11. At p.263 his Honour went on to say that he was of the
opinion that most of the structures in question were in the nature of
plant. He regarded as plant the buildings which were more than
convenient housing for working equipment and (considered as a whole,
without treating as separate subjects for consideration the iron roofing
and cladding of buildings where the main structural members are
specially adapted to the needs of the processes to be carried on inside)
played a part themselves in the manufacturing process, e.g., the holding
bay for the basic oxygen steel making installation as well as the very
specialised building which because of its inbuilt equipment forms part
of that installation.
12. The memorandum of 28 February 1972 to the Crown
Solicitor stated at paragraph 42 that:-
(42.)
'........ the Commissioner now accepts that, in major
manufacturing complexes, where there is a massive collection of
machinery housed in its own specially designed structure, the point can
readily be reached where the whole structure is plant for depreciation
purposes. The structure is treated as depreciable if it can be shown
that the structure goes far beyond merely housing the machinery and is
completely integrated with it, supporting it and making its functioning
possible.
(43.)
Depreciation is not allowed in full on the typical, open plan
factory hall with an overhead gantry crane which houses a number of
machines or machine tools, but here a compromise - not necessarily
reconcilable with principle - is usually negotiated. A proportion of the
cost of the building - estimated as that part of the cost which is
attributable to the support of the travelling crane and special
features, such as heavy industrial flooring - is regarded as subject to
depreciation.'
13. A typical example of a structure which qualifies as
plant and which is accepted as not being disqualified from the
investment allowance deduction by section 82AE is a sinter plant which
was referred to in the memorandum from this office of 15 October 1976 in
para 7 above. The sinter plant consisted of steel uprights and cross
members which were essential to support items of plant at varying
heights and at varying spaces from other items of plant. It is an
illustration of structure where, to the words of Kitto J. the
foundations and main structure members are specially adapted to meet the
needs of the process carried on in the structure. Another example of a
structure which has been accepted as plant is the N.S.S.C. pulp
mill.
14. Where a structure qualifies as wholly plant it is
accepted that the concrete foundations or footings in which the uprights
of the structures are embedded also qualify as plant. It is a fact that
the concrete foundations, etc. in plant structures are specially
designed and constructed to withstand what would otherwise be
detrimental effects produced by the operations or processes carried on
inside the structures, e.g., vibration, pressure, heat, etc. Similarly
the cost of excavating for foundations for wholly plant structures
should be accepted as part of the cost of the plant, cf. I.R. Commrs. v.
Barclay, Curle & Co. Ltd. (1969) 45 TC 221 : see also CITCM 830., para
162. General site preparation, however, e.g., land levelling, land
forming, etc. would not constitute part of the cost of the plant.
15. In those cases where a structure is accepted as being
wholly in the nature of plant there may be some doubt whether ground
level concrete walkways or flooring and external cladding should be
treated as part of the plant. In the generality of cases the structures
which will be accepted as wholly plant will cost many millions of
dollars. Experience has shown that in these cases the expenditure on
ground level flooring and external cladding is insignificant in relation
to the whole. Accordingly it has been the practice in this office to
accept the expenditure as part of the cost of the plant.
16. In many cases the conclusion will be reached that
only part of a structure or building qualifies as plant. A typical
example is that referred to earlier in para 12, i.e., the open plan
factory hall with an overhead gantry crane which houses a number of
machines or machine tools. In such cases it will be a question of
arriving at a figure which can be said to fairly represent the cost of
plant items. This problem was considered in memorandum from this office
of 30 September 1964, H.O. Ref. J63/215 Pt.3, under the heading
"Buildings Integral with Plant" and relevant extracts are repeated here:
'Because section 54 provides for a deduction for depreciation
"...... of any property, being plant, or articles ......", the principle
behind paragraphs 48 and 49 of the I.T.O. is that depreciation is
allowed on the whole or part of a building when plant and building
become so integrated that "plant" includes the whole or part of the
building.
In the application of the paragraphs referred to, the basic
principle to be observed is that contained in the last sentence of
paragraph 48, viz:
'Buildings form integral parts of plant, wholly or in part, when,
and to the extent that, the structures are absolutely essential to the
support of the working plant.'
It is only when the extent to which the structure is absolutely
essential to the support has been ascertained, that any calculation as
per paragraph 49 is made.
In succeeding paragraphs the application of this basic principle
to buildings or parts of a building will be outlined. It will be
appreciated that exceptional cases will arise in which some unusual type
of manufacturing process, or other special facts, may necessitate a
departure from a general ruling. The general rulings should be found to
apply however to the majority of cases coming under notice.
Floors
The added costs of strengthening to carry particular items of
plant is depreciable, provided that the part of the floor strengthened
can be regarded as a plant bed or foundation for plant. Generally,
however, no part of the cost of floors of uniform thickness should be
depreciated.
Gantry Housing
The cost of additional height of walls or roof to house a gantry
should not be treated as depreciable cost of building integral with the
gantry.
Roofing
The cost of strengthening at particular points to support plant,
for example cranes, hoists, etc., should be treated as depreciable cost.
The cost of general strengthening of a roof should not be allowed as
depreciable.
Walls
Walls become integral with plant at points where they are
strengthened specially to support plant. The quantum of depreciable cost
is the extra cost of the strengthening of any such walls. The mere
attachment of plant to walls is not sufficient to establish that any
part of the walls is integral with that plant.
Footings foundations, piers and columns
Where walls, floors or roofs have been strengthened to support
plant, additional strengthening of footings, foundations, piers or
columns may be necessary also.
The cost of any associated excavation work, if details are
known, should not be treated as depreciable cost.'
17. The exclusion of the cost of any associated
excavation work from the depreciation calculation is explicable by
reason of the fact that the excavation work in these cases generally
relates to the building content, which is non-depreciable, rather than
to the plant content. If it is established in any case that part of the
excavation is necessary for the operation of particular items of plant,
the costs may be taken into account for depreciation purposes as part of
the cost of the plant.
18. In CITCM 830, in dealing with this matter in relation
to section 62AA, it was stated at para 159 that, where buildings form an
integral part of plant, their cost may, as is the practice in relation
to depreciation allowance, be admitted for the purpose of the investment
allowance to the extent that they are integral with the plant. That
advice still applies. To the extent that a building or structure does
not have a plant function or is not integral with plant it is not
necessary to rely on section 82AE to exclude it from the investment
allowance - it is excluded because it is not plant within the meaning of
section 54.
Commissioner of Taxation
30 April 1981
References
ATO references:
NO J153/119/10 P15 F129
Date original memo issued:
30.04.81
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 108
CITCM 830
Subject References:
plant
structural improvements
investment allowance
industrial or mining industries
Legislative References:
ITAA 54
ITAA 82AE
Case References:
FC of T v ICI Australia Limited
(1972) 127 CLR 529
The Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd v FCT
(1967) 120 CLR 240
Yarmouth v France
[1887] 19 QBD 647
J. Lyons & Co Ltd v Attorney-General
[1944] 1 Ch 281
I.R. Commrs. v. Barclay, Curle & Co Ltd
(1969) 45 TC 221