IT 39 Taxation Ruling
IT 39
Expenditure incurred in servicing or managing income producing investments - application of section 51(1)
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100522
Facts
As a result of a request for reference to Board of Review, consideration was given to the question of the application of section 51(1) where expenditure has been incurred in "servicing" an investment portfolio (consulting with inter-state stock brokers and attending interstate stock exchange, etc).
2. The arguments proposed in defence of the assessments in dispute were that, on the facts of the case, such expenditure was not incurred in carrying on a business in relation to the taxpayer's investment activities and that, in any case, the expenditure was of a capital nature.
Ruling
3. In relation to the first of these arguments it was
considered the taxpayer was not carrying on any business in connection
with his investment activities and that any profit arising from a
turnover of the investments would not be assessable income (unless
caught by section 26AAA). However, it was not considered that this had
much relevance to the question to be decided. As the Full High Court
said in FC of T v Green (1950) 81 CLR 313: "Section 51, it should be
observed, is not limited to deductions from income derived as being the
proceeds of a business.
4. There can be no doubt that the expenditure in question
was relevant to the gaining of the dividend and interest income from the
taxpayer's investments: the real question therefore was how the
expenditure should be characterised. It was appreciated that the
expenditure could be viewed as possessing the character of a capital
outlay (relating to the protection and reorganisation of investments of
capital) and that such a view was supported by the decision of the Board
of Review in 9 CTBR (OS) Case 26. However, that decision was delivered
as long ago as 1939 and, of course, preceded the decision in Green's
case (supra) and other leading court decisions dealing with section
51(1).
5. The decision in Case 26 and some other Board decisions
prior to Green's case must now be of doubtful value in the present state
of the law regarding section 51(1). Although the relevant part of
Green's case was concerned with travelling expenses incurred to inspect
and supervise investments in rented properties, the decision that such
expenses were deductible was based on the broad proposition that they
were incurred "in relation to the management of the income producing
enterprises of taxpayer". In the light of this, it was decided that
expenditure of the kind in issue here should be treated, in principle,
as a deductible outgoing. It should properly be regarded as incurred in
relation to the management of income producing investments and thus as
having an intrinsically revenue character.
Commissioner of Taxation
8 April 1980
References
ATO references:
NO 80/5916 F38
Date original memo issued:
08.04.80
Subject References:
business carrying on
investment activities
Business Line:
IAI
Legislative References:
ITAA 51(1)
Case References:
- FC of T v Green
(1950) 81 CLR 313