IT 312 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
15 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 312
Self-education expenses - travelling expenses
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070193
FACTS
Taxation Ruling IT 285 dealt with the implications of decisions of the Supreme Court of New South Wales in FC of T v Smith 78 ATC 4157; 8 ATR 518 and FC of T v Lacelles-Smith, 78 ATC 4162; 8 ATR 524. The ruling concluded by stating that where the facts support the allowance of a deduction under section 51 for costs of self-education, the costs will include, in addition to any fees paid, other relevant expenditure incidental to the course, e.g. the cost of travelling to and from the place of education.
2. It would appear however, that some claims for the cost of travel to and from the place of education are being disallowed on the grounds that the cost of travel is of a private nature similar to expenditure on fares to and from work.
RULING
3. The deductibility of fares to and from work is
governed by the phrase in section 51, "incurred in gaining or producing
the assessable income". Because of the judicial meaning given to the
phrase, it cannot be said that fares to and from work are incurred in
gaining or producing assessable income from the work. Notwithstanding
that the fares are a necessary prerequisite to gaining or producing the
assessable income, they are incurred at a point prior to the actual
activities by which the assessable income from the work is gained or
produced.
4. The reasoning which the courts have applied in
giving meaning to the expression "incurred in gaining or producing the
assessable income" simply does not apply to ascertaining the costs of
self-education. If section 51 permitted a deduction for expenses of
employment, there would be little doubt that the cost of fares to and
from the place of employment would qualify for deduction. So it is with
expenses of self- education. The cost of travel to and from a place of
education is as much a part of the costs of the education as the costs
of travel to and from a convention or seminar is a part of the cost of
attending the convention or seminar.
5. The deductions allowable for the cost of travel
to and from a place of education may be illustrated in the following
examples:-
(a)
Where a taxpayer travels directly from his place of employment or
business to and from the place of education, the cost of travel forms
part of the cost of the self-education.
(b)
Where the taxpayer travels directly from his home to and from the
place of education, the cost of travel is part of the cost of the
self-education.
(c)
Where the taxpayer travels directly from his home to the place of
education and then to his place of employment or business, the cost of
travel to the place of education is part of the cost of the
self-education.
The cost of travel from the place of education to the place of
employment or business should be regarded as of the same nature as the
cost of fares to and from work and not deductible, cf 76 ATC Case H18 at
pp.134/5; 20 CTBR(NS) Case 72 at pp.714/715; Sargent v Barnes [1978] 2
All ER 737. This will be the case irrespective of whether the place of
education is on the normal route from the taxpayer's home to the place
of employment or business or on some other route.
(d)
Where the taxpayer travels directly from his place of employment
or business to the place of education and thence to his home the same
approach as in (c) should be followed, i.e. the cost of travel to the
place of education is part of the cost of the self-education and the
cost of travel from the place of education to home is not
deductible.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Withdrawn by TR 92/8
References
ATO references:
NO J 35/1051 P3 F352
BO SYD AF 1400/S
Date original memo issued:
27.11.80
Related Rulings/Determinations:
NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL
IT 271
IT 285
Subject References:
SELF-EDUCATION EXPENSES
TRAVELLING EXPENSES
FARES
COST OF TRAVEL
Legislative References:
51(1)
159U
Case References:
- FC of T v Smith
78 ATC 4157
8 ATR 518
- FC of T v Lacelles-Smith,
78 ATC 4162
8 ATR 524
- Case H18
76 ATC 130
- Sargent v Barnes
[1978] 2 AllER 737