IT 347 Taxation Ruling
IT 347
Trust estates : present entitlement
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1135734
PREAMBLE
Consideration has been given to the effect of the decision in Commr of I.R (NZ) v Ward (1970) NZLR 1 on the phrase "presently entitled".
RULING
2. It has been accepted that the Ward decision,
which followed the earlier English decision in Re Vestey's Settlement
(1950) 2 All E.R. 891, is authority for the proposition that in some
cases a resolution or determination of a trustee to apply, divide, set
aside, etc. trust income for or amongst beneficiaries may have the
effect, of itself, of vesting trust income in a beneficiary and thus
making him presently entitled to that income for the purposes of
sections 97 or 98. It consequently appears to remove the necessity for
taxpayers and tax planners, in attempting to avoid operation of section
99A by having beneficiaries regarded as presently entitled to trust
income, to look to section 101. Whereas previously, in deciding whether
beneficiaries ought to be regarded as presently entitled to trust
income, the question was whether there had been an application of income
for the beneficiaries' benefit within the meaning of section 101, the
primary question now, in the light of these two decisions, is whether a
resolution or determination of the trustee to set aside, apply, etc.
trust income for beneficiaries, purportedly in pursuance of the trust
deed, has been of itself effective in causing those beneficiaries to be
presently entitled.
3. The decisions should, however, be regarded and
applied with some caution. The view is taken that both decisions rest
on the finding or premise that the trustees' resolutions were a genuine
exercise of their powers and were final and irrevocable. (See, for
instance, McCarthy J. in Ward's Case). If this view is correct the
principle the cases enunciated would not be applicable where a trustee's
resolution or determination did not conform to those requirements.
Regarded in this light, the decisions do not have as widespread an
application as at first glance they may appear to have. It is
considered they should only be applied to trust cases where the
Commissioner is satisfied that the trustee's resolution or determination
is a genuine, final and irrevocable exercise of his power under the
deed.
4. Deciding whether these conditions are met may
not be easy in some cases. Where the deed incorporates provisions which
made the trustee's resolution irrevocable and binding on him, the
conditions will usually be met. Trusts including a provision or
provisions directing that the trustee hold income allocated to
beneficiaries on separate trusts for those beneficiaries absolutely
would be acceptable.
5. Where the trust instrument gives the trustee a
discretion to pay or apply the income to or for the benefit of the
beneficiaries as they think fit but contains no provisions having the
effect of making their act irrevocable and binding on them, problems may
arise if the action taken by the trustees as a consequence of the
exercise of their discretion leaves doubt as to whether there is an
application of income for the benefit of the beneficiaries for the
purposes of section 101. At this stage it is not practicable to issue a
general direction which would encompass all the varying sets of
circumstances that could be met in this field. If the decision in
Ward's case is to be accepted it would follow that present entitlement
could result in some cases of this nature. In practice, present
entitlement may be conceded where the Commissioner is satisfied, in the
particular circumstances of the case, that the trustee, in formally
passing the resolution or making the determination in question, has
acted genuinely and irrevocably in the exercise of his powers to
distribute income of the trust and has intended to vest the income in
the beneficiary concerned. In deciding this question, what the trustee
has actually done with the trust moneys concerned is considered relevant
though not decisive. Other circumstances to be taken into account, but
which may or may not have a bearing on the question depending on the
facts of each individual case, are the wording of the resolution or
determination and whether the beneficiary has been advised of the
resolution, etc.
6. If the action of the trustee falls within the
requirements previously accepted in connection with the application of
trust income for the purposes of section 101 there is, of course, no
problem as the beneficiary will be deemed to be presently
entitled.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
11 June 1971
References
ATO references:
NO 70/9809 F111
BO V.O. : VJ 172/1 P3
11.06.71
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 319
IT 348
Subject References:
PRESENT ENTITLEMENT
TRUST ESTATES
Business Line:
PW
Legislative References:
97
98
99A
101