IT 314 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 314
Self-education expenses - Karate course
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070222
FACTS
Advice was sought concerning the deductibility under section 82JAA of expenses incurred by a taxpayer on a course of karate instruction undertaken at the Tae Kwon Do School, Hobart.
2. The taxpayer, a public servant, hoped to eventually gain income by giving karate instruction but first had to be judged suitable to give this instruction by reaching a certain relatively high level of proficiency or "belt grading".
RULING
3. Generally speaking, instruction in a sport or an
activity such as karate is not education in the generally accepted
meaning of the term. A person may undergo such instruction and,
incidentally thereto, attain a grading or a level of proficiency which
enables him to gain income, for example by practising the activity
professionally or by teaching it to others, but it is considered that
the instruction would not thereby qualify as education. Where a person
attains a grading or a high level of proficiency in such an activity
solely or mainly for the purpose of teaching it to others (as distinct
from engaging professionally in the activity itself) it is also
considered that any instruction undertaken in reaching that level would
not constitute education.
4. In any event, and regardless of the taxpayer's
purposes in undertaking his instruction in karate, it was not conceded
that the Tae Kwon Do School, Hobart, was a "school, college... or other
place of education" within the context of section 82JAA.
5. For these reasons, the conclusion was reached
that the karate instruction received by the taxpayer was not a
"prescribed course of education" as defined in section 82JAA.
Accordingly the taxpayer's expenditure on fees and books for the course
did not qualify for deduction under section 82JAA.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
26 February 1974
References
ATO references:
NO 73/3002 F10
BO SYD AF 1400/S
Date original memo issued:
26.02.74
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
SELF-EDUCATION EXPENSES
KARATE COURSE
OTHER PLACE OF EDUCATION
Legislative References:
82JAA
159U
Back to top