IT 355 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 355
Sharedealing transactions by overseas investors
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
This ruling contains references to repealed provisions, some of which may have been rewritten. The ruling still has effect. Paragraph 32 in
TR 2006/10
provides further guidance on the status and binding effect of public rulings where the law has been repealed or repealed and rewritten. The legislative references at the end of the ruling indicate the repealed provisions and, where applicable, the rewritten provisions.
FOI status:
May be ReleasedFOI number:
I 1070810
PREAMBLE
Consideration was given to the effect of double tax agreements upon the assessments of profits from sharedealing transactions by overseas investors not maintaining a permanent establishment in Australia.
RULING
United States and Canadian Agreements
2. The exemption under Article III of the respective
agreements is available only for the profits of an "industrial or
commercial enterprise". A fiscal operation such as dealing in shares is
certainly not industrial, and it is arguable that it is outside the
scope of anything than can fairly be described as commercial. Kitto J.
was inclined to take this view in E.S. & A. Bank Ltd v F.C.T., 69 ATC
4069 at p.4071; 1 ATR 104 at p.106. However, the agreements appear to
have the effect of exempting all profits of an industrial or commercial
enterprise (apart from certain specific exclusions not presently
relevant). If the enterprise is industrial or commercial, it does not
appear to matter whether the particular profit can be described as
industrial or commercial.
3. It should therefore be maintained that the share
dealing profits made by an individual investor or by one not engaged in
industry or commerce in the strict sense are not exempt under the double
taxation agreements. However, it may eventually have to be conceded
exemption in any case in which it is clear the investor would have to be
categorised as an industrial or commercial enterprise. (NOTE: A new
Canadian agreement came into effect on 1 July 1975. Article 7 of the new
agreement replaced Article III of the old agreement but the new
agreement does not use the term "industrial or commercial
enterprise".)
United Kingdom and New Zealand Agreements
4. The position is very much weaker in relation to the
United Kingdom. Under the old double taxation agreement, the businesses
of banking, insurance and dealing in investments were expressly deemed
to be industrial or commercial and the proceeds of such businesses were
deemed to be industrial or commercial profits. The new agreement is much
wider in its terms. It still uses the expression "industrial or
commercial profit" but now it is a rigorously defined expression, which
is declared to mean (subject again to exclusions not here relevant)
"income derived by an enterprise from the conduct of a trade or
business".
5. No possible basis can be seen for arguing that a
United Kingdom investor which is buying and selling Australian shares or
other property in the course of a business is ineligible for the
exemption provided by Article 5 on the ground that the proceeds are not
industrial or commercial profits withing the meaning of the agreement.
The new agreement is drafted in such a way that it is no longer relevant
to consider whether or not share dealing is within the ambit of the
expression "commercial profits" as it is understood in common
usage.
6. The decision of the Full High Court in the Investment
and Merchant Finance Co. Ltd. Case (1971) 125 CLR 249 and other
Australian decisions seem to leave no room for doubt that a finance
company or bank which deals in shares in its own right would be held to
be doing so in the course of conducting a business: cf. also Ostime v
Australian Mutual Provident Society, (1960) AC 459.
7. This leaves no option but to concede that UK banks and
financial institutions which but and sell Australian property in their
own right in the ordinary course of their businesses are entitled to
have their profits exempted on the ground that Article 5 of the double
taxation agreement prevails over sections 26(a) and 26AAA.
8. Simple investors whose activities do not amount to the
carrying on of a business do not appear to be affected by the double
taxation agreement with the UK. Business operators buying and selling on
behalf of overseas beneficial owners would also be outside the ambit of
the exemption.
9. The effect of the New Zealand agreement which came
into force in relation to the income year ended 30 June 1973 is
designedly similar to the UK agreement in the relevant respects and what
has been said about the effects of the UK agreement applies also to the
New Zealand agreement in the securities context. However, special
provisions apply to profits from the sale of land in shares representing
land, so that these are never "industrial or commercial profits".
10. Should a question arise under the former NZ
agreement, however, it is considered that the matter should be resolved
on the basis that the effect of the former agreement was the same as
that of the United States and Canadian agreements as outlined
above.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
11 January 1975
References
ATO references:
NO J206/11 P1 F76
BO SYD AF 4018
Date original memo issued:
11.01.75
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 355W
Subject References:
DOUBLE TAX AGREEMENTS
DOUBLE TAX - UNITED STATES
DOUBLE TAX - CANADA
DOUBLE TAX - UNITED KINGDOM
DOUBLE TAX - NEW ZEALAND
BUSINESS PROFITS - DOUBLE TAX
Legislative References:
US AGREEMENT - ARTICLE III
CANADIAN AGREEMENT - ARTICLE III
UK AGREEMENT - ARTICLE 5
NZ AGREEMENT - ARTICLE 5
26(a)
26AAA
Case References:
- ES & A Bank Ltd v FCT
69 ATC 4069
1 ATR 104
- Investment and Merchant Finance Co. Ltd. Case
(1971) 125 CLR 249
- Ostime v Australian Mutual Provident Society
[1960] AC 459