IT 38 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 38
Travelling expenses - airfares apportionment
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100517
Facts
As a result of a request for reference to a Board of Review, consideration was given to the question of both business and private elements.
2. The issue in the taxpayer's request for reference was whether he should be allowed the full cost of his and his wife's airfares incurred when they attended a conference for doctors and nurses in Perth in August 1977. Following the completion of the 6 day conference, the taxpayer and his wife spent 5 days sight-seeing in Perth before returning home. Deductions were allowed for expenses incurred during the period of the conference and for 6/11ths of the airfares. No deduction was claimed for expenses incurred during the sight-seeing period. It was accepted that this was a case where expenses of the taxpayer's wife, a qualified nursing sister employed by the taxpayer, were deductible to the same extent that the taxpayer's own expenses of the trip were deductible. The only issue, therefore, was whether or not it was proper to apportion the airfares between the business and private elements of the trip.
Ruling
3. The departmental policy in relation to this kind of
issue is that an appropriate apportionment of the expenses should be
made where a trip has a dual purpose. However it always remains a
question of fact to determine whether apportionment is appropriate in
the particular circumstances of each case that arises.
4. In the case under consideration, it is an
over-simplification of the facts to merely say that the trip was taken
for a dual purpose of attending a conference and holidaying. Even
though roughly equal times were spent on each activity, it is clear that
the predominant purposes of the trip was to attend the conference. As
the taxpayer and his wife had no friends or relatives in Perth it would
be particularly difficult to refute the claim that the trip would not
have been made but for the desire to attend the conference.
5. In the circumstances, it was decided that the
taxpayer's objection should be allowed. It may be accepted generally
that, where sight-seeing involves only a few days, it should be treated
as merely incidental to the main purpose of a trip of the kind involved
here. In such cases the fact that the opportunity is taken to spend
some time sight-seeing does not alter the essential character of the
expenditure on airfares. It is otherwise, of course, if the facts of a
particular case lend themselves to a proper inference of dual purpose,
i.e., where the opportunity to take a holiday, or visit friends or
relatives, etc., can reasonably be regarded as having influenced the
decision to make a trip which is otherwise made for non-private
purposes.
Commissioner of Taxation
15 April 1980
References
ATO references:
NO 80/5869 F.43
Date original memo issued:
15.04.80
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 38W - Notice of Withdrawal
Subject References:
travelling expenses
combined business/holiday
airfares apportionment
Legislative References:
ITAA 51(1)
Back to top