IT 300 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
9 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 300
Deductions - expenditure incurred by employee taxpayers in providing specialised clothing worn in the course of employment
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103429
PREAMBLE
In a decision reported as 69 ATC Case A45; 15 CTBR(NS) Case 24, Taxation Board of Review No.3 unanimously upheld a taxpayer's claim for a deduction under section 51 in respect of the cost of providing an ex-army jacket, a pair of ex-army trousers and flannel shirts (all made of wool) which were worn by him in his occupation as a cast house labourer at a blast furnace.
RULING
2. While it has been decided to accept the Board's
decision, it is considered that it should be followed only in those
cases where it is clear that the facts are sufficiently similar. In
this connection, it is important to note the special factors which the
Board members took into account in deciding that the costs were
deductible, which included:-
(a)
The clothing was kept, and used exclusively at work;
(b)
It was entirely unsuitable for normal private use, including
travelling between home and place of employment. The Chairman regarded
the garments as being unsuitable for private use by any normal person.
Similarly, Mr Dempsey (member) could not imagine that any normal person
would adopt it as his every day means of garb between home and work;
and
(c)
It bore a distinct occupational character because of its special
protective qualities against the high level of danger involved in the
taxpayer's duties. The special protective qualities of woollen clothing
in the presence of extreme heat were demonstrated before the
Board.
3. Where it is clear that these three conditions
are met, a deduction may be allowed under section 51 in accordance with
general principles contained in Taxation Ruling IT 297 and those
principles should continue to be applied in determining claims for
working clothes. As indicated in paragraph 6 of that ruling, claims
under such vague general headings as "working clothes" should continue
to be disallowed. However, deductions may be allowed in cases where
facts similar to those existing in the Board reference are either
established by the taxpayer or are within the knowledge of
assessors.
4. In particular, it should not be conceded that a
taxpayer can obtain a deduction merely by keeping different sets of
clothing for use during the period spent at work and during his leisure
periods. It is clear that the Board would not have allowed a deduction
solely on this ground. Further, the decision should not be regarded as
authorising deductions for clothes which are suitable for normal private
use including travelling to and from work.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
15 October 1969
References
ATO references:
NO J35/952 P3 F154
BO SYD AF 2800 Pt 3
Date original memo issued:
15.10.69
Related Rulings/Determinations:
CITCM's 758
773
812
IT 297
Subject References:
PROTECTIVE CLOTHING
SPECIAL QUALITIES
Legislative References:
51(1)
Case References:
- Case A45
69 ATC 270
Back to top