IT 327 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 327
Payments by employees to trade unions, associations of employees and professional associations
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103174
FACTS
Consideration has been given to the deductibility of subscriptions, levies and contributions to trade unions or associations of employees and professional associations under sections 51(1) and 73 following the decision of Taxation Board of Review No.2 reported as 70 ATC, Case B68; 16CTBR (NS) Case 14. In that case, the taxpayer was a commercial airline pilot who, in the relevant year of income, claimed a deduction for a subscription to the Australian Federation of Air Pilots. The taxpayer's objection was based solely on the provisions of section 73 and, although the Board by majority upheld the Commissioner's decision, it was made clear in the reasons of all three members that the claim would have been allowed if the terms of the objection had been sufficiently wide to permit consideration of the question under section 51.
RULING
2. It has been decided to accept in principle that
a periodical subscription made by an employee to a trade union or an
association of employees may qualify for deduction under section 51
where the subscription is made in circumstances which are comparable
with those encountered in the decided case. The reasoning in the
airline pilot's case is a further indication on the part of the Boards
of Review that, in the absence of binding authority to the contrary, a
narrow view should not be taken of claims made under section 51 in
relation to expenditure which an employee might reasonably be expected
to incur in the course of deriving assessable income.
3. Deductions claimed for periodical subscriptions
should be considered firstly under section 51 and recourse to the
provisions of section 73 will be necessary only if section 51 is
inapplicable. Broadly stated the test is whether when considered from
the taxpayer's point of view, the payment falls within the description
of an outgoing which is incidental and relevant to the derivation of
assessable income. The question whether a periodical subscription paid
to any organisation qualifies for deduction under section 51 is a matter
for determination in the light of the particular facts and, strictly, it
would be necessary to have regard to the activities of the organisation
to ascertain the principal purpose for which the outgoing was
incurred.
4. In the decided case the taxpayer, as a member of
the Australian Federation of Air Pilots, was required to pay an annual
subscription of an amount approximately equal to 1% of his gross salary. Although the Federation has power under its constitution to pursue
certain other objects, its activities in the main are directed towards
protecting the interests of its members, the publication of a
professional journal and the negotiation of short term contracts
relating to salary and conditions of all services. While membership of
the Federation is not compulsory, an overwhelming majority of eligible
pilots are members and, having regard to the pressures exerted by the
Federation in improving salaries and working conditions for its members,
there is a clear link between the payment of the annual subscription and
the derivation of assessable income.
5. Most trade unions and associations of employees
have as their principal objective the gaining of higher salaries and
improved working conditions for members. At present, annual
subscriptions to such organisations are almost invariably at a flat rate
and usually exceed $42 per annum. Where this is the case, it would
ordinarily be apparent from the nature of the taxpayer's occupation and
local knowledge of the activities of the organisation to which the
payment is made whether the deduction claimed should be allowed under
section 51 without further enquiry. Similar treatment should also be
extended to members of associations such as the Australian Federation of
Air Pilots where it is known that the annual subscription payable by all
members is a fixed percentage of gross salary.
6. Where special levies or contributions are paid
by employees to a trade union or association of employees, it will be
necessary to have regard to the purpose for which the payment is made
and to determine whether the test contained in section 51 is satisfied.
A levy made specifically to assist a political party or to provide
overseas relief would be quite unrelated to the derivation of assessable
income nor could it be accepted as a periodical subscription within the
meaning of section 73(3). On the other hand, levies paid by members of,
for example, the Association of Professional Engineers to defray costs
of arbitration proceedings qualify for deduction under section
51.
7. Periodical subscriptions paid by employees to
professional associations which are concerned with providing a
specialised service to members practising in a particular profession
usually exceed the limit of $42 per annum specified in section 73(3). As
in the case of periodical subscriptions to trade unions and associations
of employees, however, such claims would qualify for deduction under
section 51 in appropriate circumstances. Although such associations may
not be directly concerned with obtaining increased earnings as such for
members, access to information disseminated and other assistance
provided by a professional association play just as necessary a part in
enabling an employee to keep abreast of current developments in his
particular field as the type of expenditure considered by the High Court
in FC of T v Finn (1961) 106 CLR 60. Thus, an accountant employed by a
bank would be eligible for deductions under section 51 for periodical
subscriptions paid to a bank officers' association and for annual
subscriptions paid to a society of accountants.
8. Where it is reasonably clear that a payment made
to a trade union, an association of employees or a professional
association cannot satisfy the test in section 51, as for example a
payment made by a taxpayer in retirement, or a payment which is
obviously unrelated to the derivation of income, the claim falls for
consideration under section 73(3) if it comes within the description of
a periodical subscription.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
16 June 1971
References
ATO references:
NO J35/15 P5 F175
BO SYD AF 2521 Pt 5
Date original memo issued:
16.06.71
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 327W
Subject References:
SUBSCRIPTIONS
SUBSCRIPTIONS IN EXCESS OF $42
SUBSCRIPTIONS - SPECIAL LEVIES
Legislative References:
51(1)
73
Case References:
- CASE B68
70 ATC 326
- FC of T v Finn
(1961) 106 CLR 60