IT 360 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
210 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 360
Afforestation companies - payments made pursuant to service contracts : whether deductible to payer
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103337
PREAMBLE
As a result of two decisions of Taxation Boards of Review reported as 78 ATC Case K18; 22 CTBR (NS) Case 38, and 79 ATC Case L1; 23 CTBR (NS) Case 8 it has become necessary to formulate guidelines for determining whether a person who participates in what may be termed an afforestation scheme is engaged in the business of afforestation and the extent to which expenditure incurred by the person in the particular scheme qualifies for deduction.
RULING
2. The decisions of the two Board of Review cases
when read in conjunction with the decisions of the High Court in Milne v
FC of T (1975-1976) 133 CLR 526 and Lloyd v FC of T 76 ATC 4007; 5 ATR
793, lead to the conclusion that, in the generality of cases,
participation in an afforestation scheme may be classified in one of two
ways, i.e. as an investment or as a business pursuit. Where, as in the
High Court cases, participation in the afforestation scheme is by way of
investment in bonds the expenditure so incurred is of a capital nature.
It follows that no deduction is allowed for moneys outlaid to acquire
the bonds and any proceeds are not assessable income.
3. On the other hand where a person alone or in
association with others acquires an interest in an identifiable area of
land and enters into an agreement to have that land developed, planted
and maintained by a management company for the purpose of growing forest
trees then it is accepted that the person may be carrying on a business
of afforestation. Where the conclusion is reached that a business is
being carried on the provisions of the income tax law relating to
primary producers and to timber operations are to be applied where the
requirements of the relevant sections are otherwise satisfied.
4. In determining whether a business is being
carried on the area of the land in which the person has acquired an
interest is not a vital consideration. The question is whether, in the
circumstances, the growing of trees on the land represents a
commercially viable business operation. It is a feature of most of the
afforestation schemes that, even though a person may have an interest in
a relatively small area of land, that area of land forms part of a much
larger area devoted to afforestation. In these circumstances the
commercial viability has to be ascertained, therefore, in relation to
the whole area. In the generality of cases the evidence will point to
the conclusion that the whole project is commercially viable.
5. In the past the degree of control which
management agreements gave a person over the development and maintenance
of his land has been seen to be significant in determining whether a
business is being carried on. In the more recent Board case, 79 ATC
Case L1; 23 CTBR(NS) Case 8, the Board accepted as sufficient de jure
control rather than de facto control. Most, if not all, of the schemes
examined, other than the investment type schemes, confer de jure control
on the participants. Accordingly the fact that a person does not
exercise direct control over the development, maintenance and felling
carried out on his land is not a factor to be relied upon in determining
whether the person is carrying on a business on that land.
6. In the final analysis the question of whether a
person is carrying on a business of afforestation will depend on the
answers to the questions:-
(i)
does he have an interest in an identifiable area of
land?
(ii)
are the afforestation operations carried on on the land
comparable to ordinary forestry albeit on a small scale?
(iii)
is the project commercially viable?
(iv)
are the operations being carried out in a businesslike
manner?
(v)
has the person a sufficient degree of control over the operations
carried out on his land?
7. Situations may arise where the operations are
carried on in such a haphazard manner that it would not be possible to
classifiy them as a business. However, if a person satisfies the tests
set out in paragraph 6 then the appropriate conclusion to be drawn is
that he is carrying on business.
8. From the schemes considered in this office it
would seem that there are, broadly, two methods by which they are
conducted. The individual either purchases a direct interest in a
certain area of land or he subscribes to a partnership or syndicate
which, in common with other partnerships or syndicates, holds the
relevant land through a trustee acting on behalf of all the partnerships
or syndicates.
9. The more recent of the Board of Review
references, 79 ATC 1 Case L1, 23 CTBR (NS) Case 8, was an instance of
the acquisition of the direct interest in an area of land. The taxpayer
entered into an agreement with a management company under which the
company was to prepare two hectares of land for planting, to supply
radiata pine seedlings and to plant them and thereafter for nine years
to tend the area planted. The company further undertook, on request, to
cut and market the timber and deliver it to a sawmill or processor. The
planting of the trees was, in fact, accomplished by mid-June of the year
under review. The taxpayer agreed to pay $3937.50 to the company for
the work to be done of which $3000 had been paid in the year under
review.
10. The decision in the reference proceeded on the
basis that, because the management company did the work at the behest of
the taxpayer, it was the taxpayer and not the company which must be
regarded as carrying on the business of afforestation. That being so the
amount of $3000 paid by the taxpayer in the year under review was
deductible to the extent that the work carried out by the management
company was not of a capital, private or domestic nature. In the
particular circumstances the Board found that the full amount was
allowable under section 51 although Dr Beck recognised that, in other
circumstances, some amounts may qualify for deduction under section 75A
or other sections of the Act.
11. In many cases where a person acquires a direct
interest in the land the moneys outlaid by him in a year will vary from
the expenditure incurred by the management company. This is so because
the relevant management agreement will provide that the amount to be
paid under the agreement may be paid in a lump sum at the time of
signing the agreement or in instalments over two or three years or over
the lifetime of the agreement. In most of the schemes which have come
to the attention of this Office it has been possible to ascertain the
components of the total contribution that a person is required to make,
i.e. how much represents the cost of land, clearing, planting of trees,
provision of access roads, maintenance, etc. The payment made by a
person in any year should be apportioned according to the various
components of his total contribution. The relevant provisions of the
income tax law should then be applied to each component to determine its
deductibility.
12. Some expenditure will be precluded from
deduction because it is of a capital nature, i.e. the acquisition of the
land, the interest in the land or the interest in the partnership.
Expenditure on preparing the land for planting the trees will be
deductible under section 75A. To the extent that expenditure is
incurred on access roads, deductibility will have to be considered under
the provisions of Sub-division A of Division 10A of the Assessment
Act.
13. In some cases that have come to attention
taxpayers have acquired land which has already been cleared. Whether or
not it will be legitimate in these circumstances to attribute some part
of the cost of the land to the clearing operations before acquisition
will be a matter to be determined in the light of the particular
contract. If the proper construction of the contract is that a taxpayer
has acquired cleared land then the whole cost should be disallowed as
capital. On the other hand, however, the proper construction of the
contract may be that the taxpayer has agreed to acquire land and to pay
for clearing to be done. In the latter circumstance the expenditure
would qualify for deduction under section 75A.
14. It will also be a question to be determined in
each case whether expenditure relates to the preparation of the land for
planting of the trees or whether it is the first step in the actual
planting. Ploughing of the land specifically for the purpose of
planting the trees is accepted as the first step in the planting
operations and expenditure thereon would be deductible under section
51.
15. The determination of allowable deductions in
the partnership type arrangement, of which the decision in 78 ATC 174
Case K18, 22 CTBR (NS) Case 8, is representative, should present little
difficulty. The partnership should lodge a return for each year showing
its income and expenditures. It will then be a matter of applying the
relevant provisions of the law to the expenditures of the partnership to
arrive at a net income or net loss which will be distributed between the
partners.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
26 April 1979
References
ATO references:
NO J 315/10 P1 F153
Date original memo issued:
26.04.79
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 360W
Subject References:
AFFORESTATION - COMPANIES
AFFORESTATION - PARTNERSHIPS
BUSINESS - CARRYING ON FORESTRY OPERATIONS
PRIMARY PRODUCTION - AFFORESTATION
Legislative References:
51
75A
SUB-DIVISION A OF DIVISION 10A
Case References:
- Case K18
78 ATC 174
- Case L1
79 ATC 1
- Milne v FC of T
(1975-1976) 133 CLR 526
- Lloyd v FC of T
76 ATC 4007
5 ATR 793