IT 356 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
8 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 356
Meaning of mining operations for purposes of Division 10. Open cut workings
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1071043
PREAMBLE
Following the decision in Waratah Gypsum Pty Ltd v FC of T (1965) 112 CLR 152; 13 ATD 482, this office considered whether extraction by means of open cut workings of certain substances may be accepted as mining operations within the meaning of Division 10.
RULING
2. Where it is clear that the extraction by such
methods of any particular substance falls literally within the tests
propounded in the Waratah Gypsum case, the activity may be accepted as
mining operations. Thus the open cut extraction of talc and of the
rarer or more valuable types of felspar, such as used in glass
manufacture or ceramic glazes, may be accepted as mining operations
because the recovery of these minerals has traditionally been associated
with the concept of mining. Likewise the extraction by these methods of
the lower grades of felspar, which it is understood are used in the
production of bricks and similar building material, would bring these
substances within the exclusion mentioned by his Honour.
3. The extraction of kaolin by means of open cut
operations may be accepted as mining operations where the product is
high grade clay such as is used for paper or rubber fillers, ceramic
ware or paints. However, it should be maintained that open cut
extraction of the lower grades of kaolin, used in the production of
basic building materials, does not constitute mining operations for the
purposes of Divison 10. It might be noted in this connection that the
Bureau of Mineral Resources, in a booklet on clay issued in 1952,
commented in respect of the Longwood deposits worked by South Australian
Silicates Co. Pty Ltd - 'For many years this deposit has supplied the
bulk of the plastic clay for the South Australian ceramic industry,
although the plasticity is only mediocre and firing qualities poor.
Although unsuitable for high quality white ware, for which it was used
in the past, it is valuable for the manufacture of stoneware, pipes,
tiles and bricks.
4. Open cut extraction of the following substances
viz., sand, shellgrit, dolomite, limestone, calcite, flint pebbles,
fireclay and moulders loam, should not be accepted as mining operations
for the purposes of Division 10 without further consideration by this
office.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
24 December 1965
References
ATO references:
NO J 43/1 P7 F181
Date original memo issued:
24.12.65
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 353
Subject References:
MINING OPERATIONS
OPEN CUT MINING
WARATAH GYPSUM CASE
Legislative References:
DIVISION 10
Case References:
-Waratah Gypsum Pty Ltd v FC of T
(1965) 112 CLR 152
13 ATD 482