IT 316 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
8 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 316
Minor beneficiaries : court or damages trusts
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1219958
PREAMBLE
Consideration has been given to the income tax treatment of income derived by court or damages trusts.
RULING
2. It is considered that minor beneficiaries in
court trusts which require the income to be accumulated until the
beneficiary attains the age of majority are presently entitled to the
income so accumulated. Accordingly assessments in these cases should be
raised on the trustee under section 98.
3. In the course of his judgment in Taylor v FCT
(1970) 119 CLR 444, Kitto J. went to some lengths to analyse the earlier
decision of the Full Court in Whiting v. FCT (1943) 68 CLR 199. As a
result of the analysis he was able to conclude that the tenor of the
judgments of the majority in that case was that "presently entitled"
refers to an interest in possession in an amount of income that is
legally ready for distribution so that the beneficiary would have the
right to obtain payment of it if he were not under a disability.
4. The terms of the trust deed in the Taylor case
led Kitto J. to conclude that the beneficiary became absolutely entitled
to the income arising during his minority although his personal
enjoyment of it was postponed, i.e. his minority prevented him from
obtaining payment of the income.
5. By the very nature of court trusts a minor
beneficiary has an absolute indefeasible interest vested in possession
both as to the capital and the income. He is under a disability in as
much as the Supreme Court Acts prevent him from getting the money until
he reaches his majority. It is the same disability that existed in
Taylor's case. It would follow, therefore, that the decision in the
Taylor case would apply with equal force to court and damages
trusts.
6. It has been suggested that provisions in certain
State Trustee Acts might operate to deny present entitlement in these
trusts. Typical of the provisions is section 37(1) of the Trustee Act
of Victoria which provides that, where a minor beneficiary has either a
vested or contingent interest in the income of a trust estate, to the
extent that it is not applied for the beneficiary's benefit a trustee is
required to accumulate the income as an accretion to the capital of the
trust to pass with the capital. If section 37 applies then,
notwithstanding that the beneficiary may in the literal sense of the
trust instrument be entitled to the income, he would not, in fact, have
a legal right to get it except insofar as it is applied in his favour.
Whether he would get any of the accumulated income would depend on the
directions in the trust deed relating to the disposition of the
capital.
7. It is extremely doubtful whether provisions such
as section 37 of the Trustee Act of Victoria have any application to
court and damages trusts. Court and damages trusts are generally
controlled by the Supreme Court Acts of the various States - it is not
clear that the Trustee Acts would have any application to them. Even if
the Trustee Acts were to apply the position remains that the beneficiary
is absolutely entitled to both the income and the capital on his
attaining his majority. There is no question of the capital passing
other than to the beneficiary.
8. As from 1 July 1979 it is the expressed
intention of the Government to legislate to ensure that minor
beneficiaries in these trusts are treated as presently entitled and the
trustees assessable under section 98. It is likely, therefore, that
this ruling will have practical application only to outstanding
assessments for 1978 and 1979 and objections in respect of those
years.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
17 October 1979
References
ATO references:
NO J78/95 P7 F98
Date original memo issued:
17.10.79
Subject References:
MINOR BENEFICIARIES
COURT OR DAMAGES TRUSTS
TRUSTS
PRESENT ENTITLEMENT
Legislative References:
98
99
Case References:
- Taylor v FCT
(1970) 119 CLR 444
- Whiting v. FCT (
1943)
68 CLR 199
2 AITR 421