IT 321 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 321
Proceeds of sale of wool by auction
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1103951
PREAMBLE
Following a decision of Board of Review No. 1 (11 TBRD Case L12; 9 CTBR (NS) Case 45), it has been necessary to review the procedure to be adopted in assessing late June wool sales.
2. The Board expressed the view, although it did not affect its actual decision, that, on a sale of wool by auction, there comes into existence on the fall of the hammer a contract which is a valid contract, even though it be voidable on the ground of fraud or misrepresentation, and it remains a valid contract unless and until it is so voided. On this view, the date upon which these contracts come into existence has been regarded by the Board as the date upon which the trade debts accrued and became income derived for the purposes of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
RULING
3. That case has not been viewed as demanding a
departure from the long-standing administrative practice of regarding
the proceeds of wool sold by auction as being derived by the vendor in
the year of income in which payment is received by the broker, as agent
for the vendor, if that is the way in which the vendor himself treats
the proceeds in his taxation returns. If, on the other hand, the
vendor, for taxation return purposes, treats the proceeds as derived in
the year of income in which the hammer falls, it is necessary for the
proceeds to be so taxed because, otherwise, it might be open for him to
argue, on the basis of the Board's observations, that the proceeds could
not be taxed in the year of actual receipt of the
proceeds.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
13 January 1970
References
ATO references:
NO J 130/8 P2 F243
Date original memo issued:
13.01.70
Subject References:
WOOL SALES - PROCEEDS
SALE OF WOOL BY AUCTION
YEAR ASSESSABLE
Legislative References:
25(1)