IT 318 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 318
Speech therapy treatment and related expenditure
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
May be releasedFOI number:
I 1070335
FACTS
Consideration was given to the circumstances in which expenditure on speech therapy treatment and equipment qualified as an allowable deduction for income tax purposes.
RULING
2. In certain circumstances expenditure on speech
therapy treatment is deductible as "medical expenses" under section 82F
of the Income Tax Assessment Act. Briefly, this section authorises the
deduction of medical expenses incurred by a taxpayer in respect of
himself, wife, children under 21 years and other dependants in respect
of whom he is entitled to a dependants maintenance deduction. "Medical
expenses" to the extent relevant for the purposes of this ruling, is
defined as follows in section 82F(3):-
"Medical expenses means payments -
(a)
to a legally qualified medical practitioner, nurse or chemist, or
a public or private hospital, in respect of an illness or
operation;
(b)
...
(c)
...
(d)
for therapeutic treatment administered by direction of a legally
qualified medical practitioner;
(e)
in respect of an artificial limb (or part of a limb), artificial
eye or hearing aid;
(f)
in respect of a medical or surgical appliance (not otherwise
specified in this definition) prescribed by a legally qualified medical
practitioner;
(g)
...
(h)
...
(i)
...
3. Payments for speech therapy treatment would be
allowable in accordance with this provision in any case where a legally
qualified medical practitioner has referred a patient for treatment or
for diagnostic examination and subsequent treatment by a speech
therapist.
4. In addition to the cost of speech therapy
treatment, expenditure on speech therapy equipment may qualify as
"medical expenses". Claims by taxpayers may refer to particular items
of equipment and some of the more common items and their uses include:-
Types of Equipment
(a)
Auditory Trainer - Literally, a very powerful hearing aid. Used
in speech therapy clinics, schools for deaf children and by children of
normal hearing with poor ability to discriminate sound.
(b)
Language Master - Basically, short lengths of tape, the
principle of the section of tape being similar to a tape recorder. Used
in speech therapy clinics, remedial classes in schools and by some
special schools.
Language Programmes and Kits
(a)
Distar - Boxed graded programme devised for remedial
work.
(b)
Peabody Language Development Kits - Remedial programmes designed
for the atypical child.
5. The "auditory trainer" is essentially similar to
a conventional hearing aid and, on this understanding, would be within
the scope of the definition of "medical expenses" the remaining items
are, however, basically aids to learning rather than "medical or
surgical appliances" and, accordingly, expenditure on these items is not
considered to be allowable as medical expenses.
6. Section 82J of the Act, which authorises
deductions for expenses incurred in respect of the full-time education
at a school, college or university, or from a tutor, of the taxpayer's
children or dependants under 25 years of age, will also be relevant. In
view of the fundamental relationship between spoken English and the
educational programme of our schools, it is accepted that expenditure
incurred in obtaining speech therapy treatment for a child of school age
can qualify as education expenses. Deductible expenditure would include
expenditure on equipment used, such as that outlined, in this ruling,
travelling expenses in obtaining treatment and the cost of treatment.
Any amount deductible as medical expenses, however, would not also be
treated as education expenses.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Withdrawn by TR 93/34
References
ATO references:
NO J345/42 P7 F245
BO SYD AF 1400/G 5
Date original memo issued:
10.11.72
Subject References:
CONCESSIONAL REBATES
MEDICAL EXPENSES
EDUCATION EXPENSES
SPEECH THERAPY TREATMENT
SPEECH THERAPY EQUIPMENT
Legislative References:
82F
82J
159P
159T