IT 47 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 47
Investment allowance - lift installations in buildings
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100068
Facts
Representations were made concerning the application of the investment allowance to new equipment which forms part of a lift installation.
2. It was submitted that a lift installation can be broken down into numerous equipment areas that perform specific functions and are identifiable. The different areas submitted for consideration were:
New Controllers - described as being the nerve centre of a lift, which identifies passenger demands.
Motor Generator Sets - converts normal alternating current to a direct current supply which is essential for most lift power controls
Landing Enclosure Equipment - primary function is to safeguard the user, e.g., fire rated door panels and to improve door operations.
Car Equipment - primary function is to transport passengers.
Sundry Equipment - cables, ventilation and lighting systems, etc.
Ruling
3. It is considered that the investment allowance is not
available when only part of an installation is renewed. The investment
allowance is, of course, available in respect of a new lift
installation. Moreover, it is considered that a lift installation may
be separated into a number of identifiable units of property.
Nevertheless, it is not accepted that the renewal of any one or more of
those units would attract the investment allowance unless the renewal
constitutes an improvement.
4. In this regard, it is considered that the cost of
renewing any part of a lift installation usually would not involve
capital expenditure, that the renewal would be more in the nature of
repair, its cost wholly deductible when incurred, non depreciable and
therefore not eligible for the investment allowance.
Commissioner of Taxation
7 September 1979
References
ATO references:
NO 78/9817 F9
Date original memo issued:
007.09.79
Subject References:
lift installation
investment allowance
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AA
Back to top