IT 44 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 44
Application of section 52 where loss is sustained due to contract not being completed
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100349
Facts
The question concerned the application of section 52 in a particular situation where a taxpayer entered into a contract to purchase land for the purpose of resale at a profit but failed to complete the contract and incurred loss by forfeiture of the deposit.
2. It was accepted that the taxpayer and his colleagues set out to acquire the subject blocks for the purpose of selling them at a profit. There was no suggestion nor was there any evidence to the contrary. That being so what was in issue was the income tax consequences arising out of a transaction on revenue account in circumstances where the transaction was frustrated.
Ruling
3. The law should not be construed too narrowly in these
circumstances. If the taxpayer and his colleagues were in business as
land dealers there would be no doubt that a deduction would be allowable
for the expenditure under section 51. Because they have embarked upon
an isolated transaction does not mean they are not entitled to a
deduction. It is most undesirable that a revenue transaction should be
treated so differently because of the varying circumstances.
4. While arguments exist against the application of
section 52, it is far from clear that a deduction is not authorised by
section 51. The expenditures arose out of a transaction entered into
for the purpose of gaining or producing assessable income, i.e., profit
on the sale of the blocks. To that extent it may be said that they were
incurred in gaining or producing assessable income within the meaning of
section 51.
5. In all the circumstances it was considered that the
deduction claimed should be allowed.
Commissioner of Taxation
Not provided
References
ATO references:
NO 78/6102 F57
Date original memo issued:
29.11.78
Subject References:
loss on sale of land
Legislative References:
51
52