IT 49 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
1 related document
Taxation Ruling
IT 49
Investment allowance - plant used in premises leased or let to others
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100094
Preamble
Representations were made by a firm of chartered accountants on behalf of a large retail outlet concerning the application of the investment allowance provisions to plant leased or let to others.
Ruling
2. The difficulty appears in relation to subparagraphs
82AA(a)(ii)(A) and (C). A view has been put that the investment
allowance would not be available where plant is installed in rented
premises because the owner of the property has leased or granted rights
to use the plant. It is considered however that the owner of a building
that is leased or let on a rental basis should not be regarded, in the
sense of subparagraph (A) or (C), as having leased or otherwise granted
rights to use fixtures such as air-conditioning, lifts, escalators,
employees' amenities, burglar and fire alarm systems, etc. installed in
the building. In these circumstances the landlord should be regarded as
having leased or let only the premises with those investment allowance
fixtures being used by the landlord in gaining or producing assessable
income from that leasing or letting otherwise than by leasing those
fixtures or by granting rights to use them.
3. Fixtures of these kinds are considered to qualify for
the allowance, other conditions of the allowance being satisfied,
whether the premises are used wholly by the owner for business purposes
as an occupant or whether the premises are wholly or partially leased or
let out to one or more tenants. These rulings would not apply, for
example, to a portable air-conditioner provided with the premises,
whether included in the rental charged for the premises or provided by
the landlord for a separate fee.
Commissioner of Taxation
12 October 1978
References
ATO references:
NO J153/119/10 P13 f135
Date original memo issued:
12.10.78
Subject References:
premises leased or let
plant
investment allowance
Legislative References:
82AA(a)(ii)(A)
82AA(a)(ii)(C)