IT 58 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 58
Investment allowance - cargo ships
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100850
Preamble
The following questions were considered in relation to the application of the investment allowance to cargo ships:
(1)
What is the cost of a ship for investment allowance purposes where the ship is constructed in an overseas country for use by an Australian company in the Australian Coastal trade?
(2)
Would the investment allowance be available if the ship carried a cargo on its delivery voyage?
(3)
What extent of use of a ship outside Australia would result in the disallowance of the investment allowance concession?
Ruling
2. A decision on the first question will depend on
whether the ship is brought to Australia in ballast or with cargo. If
in ballast, the cost will include the cost of company engineers in
attendance during the construction, the cost of crewing including fares
for sending the crew overseas and the costs of the delivery voyage to
Australia. If the ship carries a cargo to Australia, the costs of the
delivery voyage will not form part of the capital cost of the ship but
will be treated as revenue expenditure. Where this is incurred in
gaining assessable income it will be deductible under the general
deduction provisions. Of course, should the income be exempt, no
deduction will be allowable.
3. As to the second question, it is accepted that
the investment allowance would be available where a cargo was carried on
the delivery voyage provided the shilp followed its normal delivery
route to Australia. Thus, it would be acceptable for a cargo to be
carried from the country of construction to Australia, from the country
of construction to an intermediate port or from an intermediate port to
Australia subject to the intermediate port being on the normal
route.
4. In relation to the final question, it is pointed
out that one of the basic requirements of the investment allowance
provisions is that the relevant plant be for use wholly and exclusively
in Australia. The law also specifically provides for the automatic
disallowance of the investment allowance where plant is used outside
Australia within the first 12 months of use. It also provides for the
disallowance of the concession where plant is used outside Australia
after the first 12 months of use and the Commissioner is satisfied that
at the time the taxpayer acquired the plant it was the taxpayer's
intention to use the plant outside Australia after becoming entitled to
the allowance.
5. In applying the second test, the Commissioner
will be guided by the facts of each case in deciding the taxpayer's
intention at the time of acquisition of the plant. Because of the terms
of the test, it is not possible to give any assurances that the
investment allowance will not be forfeited if a taxpayer commences to
use the plant outside Australia after, say, 4 years of use in Australia. At the same time, it is recognised that after an extended period of use
in Australia, circumstances could arise that were not present at the
time of acquisition of the plant. If, as a result of these changed
circumstances, the plant is used outside Australia, the investment
allowance would not be forfeited.
6. Subject to the comments in the preceding
paragraph, therefore, any planned voyage outside Australia would cause
the loss of the allowance. However, the allowance would not be lost
where due to unforeseen or unexpected circumstances the ship does go
outside Australia waters. In these circumstances, there would be no
question of disallowing the concession.
Commissioner of Taxation
15 February 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 81/3365 F25
Date original memo issued:
15.02.78
Subject References:
cargo ships
ship - cost of
ship - use outside Australia
investment allowance
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AA
ITAA 82AG(1)(c)