IT 54 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
13 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 54
Expenditure incurred by professional footballers
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100585
Preamble
An examination was made of the treatment of items of expenditure of professional footballers relating specifically to;
(i)
replacement of training clothes;
(ii)
squash fees;
(iii)
after game expenses;
(iv)
appearance at functions; and
(v)
medical expenses for the treatment of football injuries.
Ruling
Replacement of Training Clothes
2. It was suggested by representatives of players in the
code that expenditure will be incurred on such items as football
jumpers, T shirts, shorts and shoes. While this may be the case in some
isolated instances, it is understood that the majority of players are
supplied with all necessary clothing and equipment, either by the club
itself or sporting firms and advertisers to which the club is tied under
contract. However, it is now accepted that claims for such clothing
would be allowable under section 51(1), provided the taxpayer actually
incurred that expense and can demonstrate that the garments were used
principally in the course of his professional sporting activity. Claims
by players who are unable to satisfy both conditions should be
disallowed.
Squash Fees
3. The decision in 77 ATC Case J3; 21 CTBR(NS) Case 25,
is, of course, relevant to any considerations is this regard. The
Board, as you are aware, upheld a claim by the taxpayer, a professional
footballer under contract, that the expenditure he had incurred in
playing squash at the direction of his coach was an allowable deduction
under section 51(1). That decision, however, is not seen as "carte
blanche" for other professional players to obtain a deduction; although
they may readily demonstrate that they have incurred expenditure in
playing squash.
4. Claims in this regard will be allowed in circumstances
only where it has been clearly demonstrated that the game (squash) was
played as part of a regular and programmed training schedule, drawn up
and directed by the team's coach. It would be expected that the
direction would be passed on to players through the club secretary. It
is not sufficient that the playing of squash be an express condition of
employment before a deduction will be allowed; it must be an intergrated
part of that employment.
After Game Expenses
5. It is considered that activities of this nature are
designed principally to attract supporters and well-wishers to the
respective social clubs. This, in turn, would actually increase any
profits of that club. Accordingly, any nexus between the derivation of
assessable income by the player and his attendance at those functions is
too remote for acceptance of a claim that the expenditure was incurred
as part of his employment. Before any such claim is allowed, the player
is to be required to document his claim, and then show that the
expenditure was neither for his own private purpose nor for the benefit
of a social club.
Appearances at Functions
6. Expenditure ancillary to that referred to in the
preceding paragraph includes outgoings incurred in travelling to those
functions. Again, the same conditions would have to be met before a
deduction will be allowed. It is expected, however, that expenditure of
this nature would be reimbursed to the player in some manner.
Medical Expenses
7. The proposition has been put that expenditure incurred
on medical treatment for injuries sustained while playing should be
deductible under the provisions of section 51(1) and not be treated as
rebatable concessional expenditure in terms of section 159P of the
Act.
8. However, claims by a professional footballer for a
deduction under section 51(1) for medical expenses incurred in the
treatment of injuries sustained while playing should continue to be
disallowed as private or domestic expenditure. The amount incurred may
be treated as rebatable concessional expenditure in terms of section
159P.
Commissioner of Taxation
19 November 1979
References
ATO references:
NO 78/3787 F57
Date original memo issued:
19.11.79
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 112 (Travel expenditure)
Subject References:
professional footballers
training clothes
squash fees
after game expenses
treatment of injuries
Legislative References:
ITAA 51(1)
Case References:
Case J3
77 ATC 39
Back to top