IT 5 | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
9 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 5
Property investment trust expenditure - interest payable and service fee
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised version of this ruling.
FOI status:
edited for FOI purposesFOI number:
I 1100769
Preamble
A taxpayer contemplating investing money in property investment trusts sought advice as to whether the following outgoings would qualify for deduction under the provisions of S51(1):-
(a)
service fee (7%) payable in advance, when purchasing units in (a) and (b) the service fee being specifically for information services to be rendered to the taxpayer during the life of the Trust and the Fund; and
(b)
interest (17%) payable by (the taxpayer) on a loan from in respect of the loan portion of a geared investment in (Depending upon the proportion of the investment representing borrowed funds, the interest payable could exceed the income from the investment.)
Ruling
2. Although the amount of interest payable under the
loan contract is materially in excess of any assessable income arising
from the investment, it is accepted that the full
interest charge would qualify as an allowable deduction in terms of
section 51(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
3. In the taxpayer's situation, it is possible to
distinguish the decision in Ure v FC of T, 80 ATC 4264; 10 ATR 908,
which involved a complex series of loan transactions. The situations
discussed in 25 CTBR (NS) Case 27; 81 ATC Case N73 and 24 CTBR (NS) Case
62; 80 ATC Case M87, where expenditure of maintaining a house exceeded
the small rental received, are considered to be more akin to the
taxpayer's circumstances. In both cases, the Boards of Review saw fit
to distinguish Ure's Case and allowed a deduction to the extent of the
outgoing incurred. The decision in two earlier cases, Re Land and
Income Taxation Act 1910 (Court of Review Decision, Volume 2, p.349) and
Re a Taxpayer (NSW) (No.1) 2 ATD 210, are also relevant.
4. Essentially, the deductibility of interest
depends upon the manner in which the borrowed moneys were applied and,
income tax being an annual impost, any decision concerning a possible
deduction must be made each year. Accordingly, the taxpayer was
advised, subject to the usual reservation, that a deduction for the
interest paid under the contract would be an allowable deduction in each
year of income.
5. The service fee, on the other hand, paid when the
taxpayer purchases units in either the is not an
allowable deduction. This expense is seen to be clearly of a capital
nature, being incurred as part of the purchase price of units in the
particular Trust. In addition, it is not seen to be an expense incurred
in the management, by the taxpayer himself, of his investment portfolio. In the situation, management lies with the promotors of the fund, not
the unitholders.
Commissioner of Taxation
11 March 1982
References
ATO references:
NO 82/3178 F18
Date original memo issued:
11.03.82
Subject References:
property investment trusts
interest payments
service fees
Legislative References:
ITAA 51(1)
Case References:
Ure v FC of T
80 ATC 4264
10 ATR 90
Case N73
81 ATC 191
Case M8
80 ATC 64