IT 57 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 57
Investment allowance - industrial storage racking
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100845
Preamble
The eligibility for the investment allowance of industrial storage racking has been considered.
Ruling
2. Except where the components of a system are used
to make up office shelving or retail display units, industrial storage
racking is accepted as being eligible for investment allowance purposes
and not excluded by the operation of section 82AF(1)(b).
3. While it is acknowledged that racking systems are
capable of being dismantled and reassembled, that fact alone is not
sufficient reason to regard racking as being similar in nature to
scaffolding. Whereas scaffolding is essentially a temporary structure
intended to be dismantled and relocated from time to time, it is thought
that the racking in question would generally be planned and used as a
long-term installation. Accordingly, each component of a racking system
should not be treated as a unit of property but rather each new complete
installation should be treated as a separate unit.
4. Plant items operated in conjunction with the
racking systems, e.g. stacker cranes, fork-lifts, computer control
modules, etc., would be regarded as additional, individual units.
Pallets manufactured for use with the systems are also regarded as
individual units of property.
5. Where an existing racking system is extended, for
example by the addition of an extra aisle and storage bay, it is
considered that the cost of the extension, if in excess of $500, would
qualify for investment allowance deduction. A minor extension to
lengthen an existing bay, however, may not satisfy the unit of property
test.
6. In any case where a racking system constitutes
part of the structure of a storage building (i.e. where the racking
supports the roof and outer walls), it is not accepted that the walls,
roof or floor of such a building are eligible for the investment
allowance. They would be excluded as structural improvements. The
racking itself would not, of course, be excluded.
Commissioner of Taxation
23 May 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 78/9809 F87
Date original memo issued:
23.05.78
Subject References:
industrial storage racking
storage racking
investment allowance
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AB
ITAA 82AF(1)(b)
Back to top