IT 61 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
4 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 61
Investment allowance - helicopters
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100887
Facts
The question of whether the investment allowance applied to helicopters used both for ordinary business purposes and for joy flights has been considered.
2. The circumstances of their use were that three aircraft were acquired by one company which runs an ordinary charter service and on occasions they were chartered (with pilots) to an associated company who then in turn used them for normal business activities and for joy flights for the general public.
Ruling
3. The actual flight records were examined and it
was evident that the use of two of the aircraft in amusement or
recreation (i.e. joy flights) was substantial in degree and it was
considered by virtue of section 82AF(2)(f)(i) that both aircraft would
not be eligible for the allowance.
4. With regard to the third aircraft it was evident
from the facts that prior to the unforeseen damage to one of the other
aircraft the third aircraft was not used at all in amusement or
recreation. It was considered in the circumstances that this aircraft
was not acquired with the intention of being used in, or primarily and
principally in connection with, amusement or recreation and accordingly
section 82AF(2)(f)(i) did not apply to deny the investment allowance on
this aircraft.
5. On a more general note it is considered
consistent with the policy that led to the sub-paragraph 82AF(2)(f)(i)
exclusion, that the provision not be applied narrowly and that for this
purpose "use" should be read as "sole or dominant use". It will follow
therefore that plant used in amusement or recreation is to be excluded
from the allowance only if its use or intended use in amusement or
recreation is substantial in degree. Merely incidental use in amusement
or recreation should not be taken as invoking the excluding function of
the provision to deny an investment allowance deduction. In other
words, use in pleasure-related activities (as evidence of intended use
on acquisition) may be ignored for purposes of applying sub-paragraph
82AF(2)(f)(i) if that use is insignificant or not substantial in
degree.
6. It should be noted that paragraph (f) of
sub-section 82AF(2) was repealed with effect from 1 October
1980.
Commissioner of Taxation
16 May 1979
References
ATO references:
NO 77/3599 F140
Date original memo issued:
16.05.79
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 59
Subject References:
helicopter
amusement or recreations
investment allowance
sole or dominant use
Legislative References:
82AF(2)(f)(i)
Back to top