IT 64 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 64
Investment allowance - mushroom growing units and associated plant and equipment
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100144
Facts
Representations were made concerning the availability of investment allowance in respect of controlled environment mushroom growing units and associated plant and equipment.
2. The complex consists of growing, peak heat and spawn running rooms and the new type bulk pasteurising and spawn running tunnels which are erected within a "shed" consisting of a roof, open walls and a concrete raft floor, that, apart from the special double floor structure in the bulk pasteurising and spawn running tunnels, the concrete floor the shed forms the floor of the rooms and tunnels and, in some cases, a concrete block wall is built on the outer edge of the floor of the shed to protect the rooms and tunnels from direct sunlight.
Ruling
3. The whole of the shed (its roof, concrete raft floor,
walls (if any) and any concrete block shielding wall) would be regarded
as a structural improvement and not eligible for the investment
allowance.
4. On the other hand, the growing, peak heat and spawn
running rooms, and the bulk pasteurising and spawn running tunnels,
including those rooms erected out of insulated concrete blocks, and
Rudnev type rooms and tunnels, including those with an exposed end built
of insulated concrete blocks, would each be regarded as a separate unit
of property that is not excluded from the investment allowance as a
structural improvement. Subject to other conditions being satisfied, it
is considered that these rooms and tunnels would qualify for the
investment allowance. In this regard, the special double floor, the
walls and the celling of a bulk pasteurising tunnel would be treated as
a unit of property.
5. The investment allowance would, of course, also be
available in respect of associated items of plant such as
air-conditioning including pipes and ducting, heating equipment
installed in the rooms and tunnels as well as mechanical loaders,
harvesters, etc. The growing platforms ("shelving") in the growing
room, the associated nylon nets and motor/gearbox would also qualify. It
is considered that each unit of shelving, each net and each
motor/gearbox would constitute a unit of property for investment
allowance purposes.
6. It will be appreciated that the investment allowance
conditions include the requirement that the deduction is available only
in respect of separate units of property costing more than $500. The
foregoing comments, in particular those relating to plant and equipment
set up in or associated with the use of the rooms and tunnels, should be
read with this minimum cost limit on an eligible unit of property in
mind.
7. In some cases the walls of a room would be replaced
several times before its ceiling needs replacement. It is relevant to
mention in this regard that the investment allowance would not be
available unless a whole unit of property is replaced, e.g., all four
walls and ceiling of a growing room or all four walls and ceiling and
special double floor of a bulk pasteurising room.
8. The decision that these various rooms and tunnels are
plant that are not structural improvements of a kind excluded from the
investment allowance is based on the following considerations -
(a)
they are first and foremost items of plant and function wholly
and exclusively as plant structures;
(b)
they are not -
(i)
structures made primarily to improve the land;
(ii)
structures or parts of buildings that are regarded as plant only
because they are integral with attached items of plant; or
(iii)
buildings or structures whose main function is to support plant
or provide a setting for the operation of
plant.
Commissioner of Taxation
9 November 1977
References
ATO references:
NO 77/3503 F27
Date original memo issued:
09.11.77
Subject References:
mushroom growing unit
structural improvements
investment allowance
plant
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AB
ITAA 82AF(1)(b)
ITAA 82AE
ITAA 82AA