IT 68 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
10 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 68
Investment allowance - aircraft
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100396
Preamble
The question of eligibility for investment allowance of aircraft was considered.
Ruling
2. It is considered that where a new aircraft is
required to be ferried from an overseas manufacturer and then undergo
Australian inspection, including test flights, the aircraft would be
accepted as new for the purposes of the investment allowance at the
conclusion of the tests.
3. The question of elibility where the aircraft is
used on demonstration flights is one where it is difficult to set any
general ruling. Each case would have to be judged on its own
facts.
4. However, where a new aircraft constitutes trading
stock of the vendor and is demonstrated for a prospective purchaser who
buys it at the new price, it is considered that the aircraft would
qualify as new for the purposes of the investment allowance.
5. On the other hand, where an aircraft, or any
other item of plant, is used for demonstration purposes over a
significant period, it is considered that it would not qualify as new to
a prospective purchaser. Of course, in this type of case, the allowance
may be available to the owner/demonstrator.
6. On the question relating to the requirement that
the aircraft must be used wholly and exclusively in Australia, it is
considered that the investment allowance would not be forfeited where an
aircraft that is normally used for regular scheduled operations in
Australia is used for the occasional flight on an irregular basis to
nearby Pacific Islands.
7. In clarification of the words "occasional flight
on an irregular basis to nearby Pacific Islands" this is considered to
apply only in the sense of an unforeseen emergency situation such as
that undertaken recently by a Queensland company to convey an air pilot
victim of a P.N.G. native axe attack to Australia for
hospitalisation.
8. In particular, it has been determined that, in
the undermentioned circumstances section 82AA(a)(i) operated to
disqualify the expenditure upon an aircraft from investment allowance:
(i)
The use some 4 or 5 times annually to transport technicians
and/or directors to P.N.G. to supply technical and management expertise
to a P.N.G. associate.
(ii)
Charter of the jet between Australia and P.N.G. through the owner
company's charter branch.
Commissioner of Taxation
9 February 1977
References
ATO references:
NO 77/3115 F5
Date original memo issued:
09.02.77
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 77
IT 93
IT 94
IT 95
IT 96
Subject References:
aircraft
investment allowance
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AA
ITAA 82AB