IT 63 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 63
Investment allowance - reticulation systems
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100139
Preamble
Representations were made concerning whether certain reticulation systems would be treated as units of eligible property for investment allowance purposes.
Ruling
Unit of property
Electrical
2. Transformers, switchgear and starters would be treated
as units of eligible property for investment allowance purposes. The
cost of new cabling necessary for the installation and operation of
electrical systems which also qualify as eligible expenditure, is to be
allocated as appropriate to the relevant units of property, e.g.,
cabling connecting a number of individual units to a central unit would
be treated as part of the individual units rather than as part of the
central unit. Cabling which cannot be reasonably allocated to an
individual unit, will be treated as a unit of property. Light fittings
are specifically excluded from investment allowance unless installed in
areas which provide amenities or meals for employees or care of
employees' children.
Water
3. Pumps used in the reticulation of water would be
regarded as separate units of property while piping and valves would be
treated collectively as a unit of property. The laying of pipes
underground would not render them ineligible for the investment
allowance although the cost of associated earthworks would not
qualify.
4. Individual metal tanks performing a plant function as
part, for example, of a manufacturing process, and not forming part of a
building would not be excluded from the allowance as structural
improvements, whether located above or below ground. Whether or not a
tank performs a plant function is a question of fact that could only be
answered by considering the particular functions of the tank
concerned.
Sewage
5. The same comments apply in relation to piping and
pumps as for water reticulation.
Compressed Air
6. The compressor unit would be treated as an eligible
unit of property while the piping, valves and outlet fittings would
collectively be regarded as a unit of property.
Telephone and Internal Communication
7. The switchboard and each hand set would be regarded as
separate units of property; cabling connecting a hand-set to the
switchboard would be treated as part of the hand set. Cabling which is
not capable of identification with a particular unit of property in the
system would be treated itself as a unit of property.
Fire Systems
8. Fire alarm systems and sprinkler systems would each be
regarded as units of eligible property. In a large fire fighting system
the valves, take-off valves, hydrants and piping would be regarded as
one unit while the pumps would be regarded as separate units.
Trailings and Other Effluent Disposal
9. Pumps would be regarded as individual units of
property, while a permanent pipe line would generally constitute
another. Where, however, the system is one where additional lengths of
pipe are continually being added or removed or where after a time the
pipe is dismantled and relocated in a new area it is considered that
each length of pipe should be treated as a separate unit of property. If
it were established, on the other hand, that the made up pipeline was a
functionally complete unit that could not operate without any one or
more of its component parts, the whole pipeline would constitute a
separate unit of property.
Exhaust Fume Disposal
10. Chimney stacks used solely for the purpose of
discharging fumes and smoke would not be eligible for the investment
allowance. However, a chimney stack performing a positive plant
function such as the control of drafts to blast furnaces or the
collection, treatment and disposal of noxious gases would qualify
provided it was not excluded as a structural improvement. In this
context, any chimney which forms an integral part of a building would be excluded as a structural improvement. So too would a chimney
constructed of concrete, brick or masonry. The steel section of a
concrete and teel chimney may qualify if the steel section performs a
positive plant function. Chimney footings and foundations would not
qualify for the allowance.
11. Pollution monitoring and control equipment or other
plant such as fans installed in chimneys would generally qualify for the
allowance.
Extensions v initial system
12. Major extensions would generally qualify on the same
basis as the initial systems. Details would need to be considered
before a firm view could be expressed in relation to any particular
system. Expenditure on new items which are in the nature of repairs to,
or replacements of, existing equipment would not qualify for the
allowance.
Commissioner of Taxation
9 March 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 77/3518 F19
Date original memo issued:
09.03.78
Subject References:
reticulation systems
investment allowance
mining industry
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AA
ITAA 82AB