IT 72 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 72
Investment allowance - orders for plant placed prior to 1 July 1978
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100900
Preamble
The practice of taxpayers entering non-binding agreements for the purchase of plant before 1 July 1978, so that they may be eligible for investment allowance on that plant at the rate of 40 per cent was considered.
Ruling
2. Taxpayers are generally accepted as having
contracted to purchase plant at the time they order it unless it is
established that the "order" is only tentative, that is, it is made on
the understanding that the "purchaser" is not legally bound by the
order, or is made subject to later confirmation in certain
circumstances, for example, if the would-be purchaser has a good year,
etc. It is understood that plant may also be "ordered" in some cases by
means of an unsigned order initiated by a salesman who has discussed a
possible purchase with a prospective purchaser and that plant may be
held at the request of a person while he considers an alternative
purchase. It is in circumstances such as these that the "order" would
not be accepted as a contract entered into before 1 July 1978 for
investment allowance purposes.
3. It is a question of fact whether ordering
arrangements entered into before 1 July 1978 constitute a binding
contract to purchase eligible investment allowance property. It may be
difficult to discover the true facts where the purchaser and supplier
tacitly agree that, on the happening of some circumstance or event, the
purchaser may withdraw from what is otherwise a seemingly binding
purchase agreement.
4. The significant aspect of all this is, however,
that orders placed with suppliers would need to be accepted as effective
for investment allowance purposes unless it is established that there
are associated agreements or understandings that the purchaser may
withdraw from the arrangement. This guarantees to taxpayers who have
placed genuine orders that the investment allowance deduction will
follow the kind of purchase arrangements that they have made with their
suppliers. The possibility that some taxpayers may cheat and perhaps
may obtain 40 per cent investment allowance deductions to which they are
not entitled should not be permitted to disturb the procedures relating
to genuine ordering arrangements. This is best left to be resolved in
the light of such facts as can be established in relation to irregular
ordering arrangements.
5. It appears that the most practical approach to
this matter is for interested parties to be advised that the 40 per cent
rate of investment allowance cannot be expected to be available under
any ordering arrangement entered into before 1 July 1978 unless it gives
rise to a firm commitment to purchase the ordered
equipment.
Commissioner of Taxation
4 April 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 78/425 F12
Date original memo issued:
04.04.78
Subject References:
investment allowance
plant - purchase of
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AB
Back to top