IT 77 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 77
Investment allowance - aircraft
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100937
Preamble
The eligibility for investment allowance of an aircraft used in an air service between mainland Australia and an external Territory of Australia has been considered. Questions arose concerning whether the aircraft was being used to derive exempt income (if the taxpayer is a Territory resident or a Territory company all or part of its airline income may be exempt - section 24G) and whether the aircraft was being used outside Australia.
Ruling
2. To qualify for the investment allowance, two
relevant conditions that the aircraft must satisfy are that it be for
use wholly and exclusively in Australia and wholly and exclusively for
the purpose of producing assessable income. The investment allowance
deduction will not be available if either of these tests is not
satisfied.
3. If the taxpayer operating the air service between
Australia and an external Territory is a Territory resident (section
24C) or a Territory company (section 24D), all or part of its airline
income may be exempt (section 24G). In that event, eligibility for the
investment allowance in respect of the aircraft operating on that
service would be lost. On the other hand, if all income derived from
operating the aircraft is assessable to Australian tax, the arguable
question whether an aircraft flying between Australia and an external
Territory is being used outside Australia may be ignored and, all other
conditions of the allowance being satisfied, the investment allowance
deduction allowed in respect of the aircraft.
4. In considering similar cases the availability of
the investment allowance should be decided on the basis of whether all
income from use of the aircraft is assessable. If the aircraft is used
to derive exempt income, the investment allowance will not be available. If disallowance of an investment allowance deduction on this basis were
to be challenged for any reason, consideration should be given to
developing a secondary argument in defence of the assessment that, in
flying over international waters between the Australian mainland and the
external Territory, the aircraft is being used outside
Australia.
Commissioner of Taxation
29 September 1977
References
ATO references:
NO 76/3982 F9
Date original memo issued:
29.09.77
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT's 68
93
94
95
96
Subject References:
aircraft
investment allowance
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AA