IT 79 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
5 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 79
General insurance companies: unexpired risks reserve
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1070852
Preamble
Consideration has been given to the method of calculation of the unexpired risks reserve allowed in the assessments of general insurance companies as a result of these companies adopting the 'twenty-fourths" method.
Ruling
2. Where a company does not ask to change to the
twenty-fourths basis, the existing method of calculation should be
continued; the deferment would be 40% of premiums (total premiums less
reinsurances), or whatever other percentage is established as more
appropriate for the taxpayer.
3. Where a company seeks to change to the
twenty-fourths basis, that basis may be approved, subject, generally, to
its being applied to 80% of premiums (total less reinsurance).
4. In any case where it is specifically claimed that
the formula should be applied to more than 80% of premiums and the claim
is adequately supported, the claim may be approved.
5. In those unusual cases where there are virtually
no outgoings related directly to the receipt of premiums, the formula
may be applied to 100% of premiums less reinsurances.
6. In calculating the proportion of premiums to be
excluded as applying to commission and reinsurances, the commission
element should be regarded as including administration expenses relating
directly to the employment of agents and payment of the commission.
These expenses are in the same category as the commission itself and
should be taken into account if representations are made to vary the
amount of premiums to be excluded from the calculations to a proportion
of less than 20%.
Commissioner of Taxation
23 May 1974
References
ATO references:
NO 74/3380 F13
Date original memo issued:
23.05.74
Subject References:
general insurance companies
unexpired risks reserve
twenty-fourth method
40% method
Legislative References:
ITAA 51(1)