IT 82 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 82
Subscriptions to the Australian Association of Independent Businesses Ltd
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1070708
Preamble
Consideration was given to the question of whether subscriptions paid by members qualify for deduction under section 51(1).
Ruling
2. The deductibility of a subscription to the
Association will be primarily governed by the general deduction
provision (section 51) of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The section
authorises the allowance of a deduction to a taxpayer for the outgoings
he incurs in gaining or producing his assessable income or necessarily
incurs in carrying on a business for that purpose, to the extent that
they are not of a capital, private or domestic nature.
3. The question whether taxpayers would be able to
establish the necessary nexus between their subscriptions and the
conduct of their business activities is one for decision on the facts of
each particular case, having regard to the nature of the activities of
the Association and the manner in which it is conducted. In this latter
respect, of course, it could not be conceded that a subscription paid by
a member to an association formed primarily to represent to Government
the majority private political beliefs of its members would qualify for
deduction under section 51.
4. On the other hand, subscriptions paid to a
non-party- political association of businessmen formed to co-ordinate
the attempts of its members to bring to the attention of the Government
and its members generally the problems, and the need for improvements,
in conditions affecting the day-to-day conduct of their businesses might
well qualify for deduction under the section. The information so far
presented regarding the actual issues raised by the Association,
suggests that the activities of the Australian Association of
Independent Businesses would fall within this latter category. On this
assumption, the view is taken that, if called upon to do so, members
should generally be able to demonstrate their entitlement to a deduction
under section 51 for their subscriptions to the
Association.
Commissioner of Taxation
18 August 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 77/4088 F13
Date original memo issued:
18.08.78
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 82W
Subject References:
subscriptions
association of businessmen
Legislative References:
ITAA 51(1)