IT 89 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 89
Depreciation - plant used in excess of normal hours
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1101301
Preamble
Since the publication of the 1974 Revision of Income Tax Order No. 1217, which omitted the formula which appeared in paragraphs 43 and 44 of Pt. 2 of the 1960 Revision, several enquiries were received regarding the manner in which the deduction for depreciation was to be calculated in future where plant was used in excess of normal hours.
Ruling
2. It is evident that the formula contained in the
previous edition of the Order has led to the presumption, for which
there is no foundation in law, that plant used on a multiple shift basis
can be subject to a depreciation rate ascertained simply by applying a
mathematical formula to the rates specified in the Order. The
application of the formula in this manner has given rise to claims for
unrealistically high rates of depreciation, particularly in cases where
the plant is of a type designed for continuous use. It has therefore
been decided that the formula should no longer be used and that
depreciation rates applicable to new plant used in excess of normal
hours should be fixed in accordance with the relevant provision of the
law.
3. Section 55(1) of the Assessment Act requires the
Commissioner in the first calculation of depreciation to base his
determination upon an estimate of the effective life of the plant. The
extent to which plant is used, or to be used, continuously or in excess
of one working shift is an element which could have a bearing on the
effective life of the unit. In respect of plant acquired during the year
ended 30 June 1975 the standard depreciation rates specified in the 1974
Order should, subject to section 57AC, normally be applied in the
absence of information indicating that the rate is inadequate and an
application for an automatic increase in the standard rate based simply
on the score of excess working time should be rejected.
4. Where a taxpayer claims that excess working time or
other unusual conditions of use will reduce normal effective life of a
new unit of property, full details should be referred to Head Office for
consideration.
5. It is considered that the Commissioner is empowered to
make only the one calculation for the purposes of section 55.
Consequently, where a rate of depreciation on plant currently in use has
been fixed by reference to the excess working time formula content in
earlier Orders, the rate so determined should continue to be applied to
that unit until it has been scrapped, sold or wholly written-off. The
fact that the plant in question was not subject to abnormal use in a
year after the original determination was made does not provide grounds
for a reduction in the rate of depreciation.
Commissioner of Taxation
8 October 1975
References
ATO references:
NO J36/4 P10 F76
Date original memo issued:
08.10.75
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 89W
Subject References:
depreciation
plant used continuously
Legislative References:
ITAA 55
Back to top