IT 85 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
14 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 85
Telephone rental - 'on-call' employees
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
edited for FOI purposesFOI number:
I 1101267
Facts
The deductibility of a proportion of telephone rental in relation to "on-call" employees was considered.
2. It had been advised previously that a deduction may be allowed for a proportion of telephone rental paid by a nursing sister whose duties of employment involve her (or him) in being on call by the employing hospital. In this regard, claims of up to were to be accepted without the need for substantiation.
3. The question has now arisen as to the application of this arrangement to other classes of taxpayers whose particular employment or income producing activities involve the taxpayer either being on call or being required to contact his or her employer on a regular basis.
Ruling
4. In either situation, it is considered that the
taxpayer could be entitled to a deduction for some portion of the cost
of the telephone rental. Accordingly, it has been decided to accept
that the arbitrary limit may also be applied in other cases where
the taxpayer must, as a matter of routine, be on call or be required to
telephone the employer for purposes of his or her employment.
5. Where the taxpayer is on call, and outward calls
are not generally made, the limit will apply to both rental charges
and the cost of any isolated outward calls. The limit for rental
charges will be an additional deduction where the taxpayer is required
to ring in and thus incurs the cost of outwards calls. These calls are,
of course, also an allowable deduction.
6. Arbitrary limits have already been set for some
classes of taxpayers who are required to use the telephone in the course
of their employment (airline personnel, waterside workers, etc). At
this stage it is not proposed to disturb the limits already set. These
will be reviewed periodically to determine whether any increase is
warranted.
7. The arbitrary limit is to be applied only in
respect of the cost of telephone rental and will not apply to any
installation costs which are expenses of a capital
nature.
Commissioner of Taxation
15 October 1980
References
ATO references:
NO 80/789 F11
Date original memo issued:
15.10.80
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 85W
Subject References:
telephone expenses
'on-call' employees
Legislative References:
ITAA 51