IT 81 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
4 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 81
Trading stock: hire and rental business
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1070684
Preamble
Consideration was given to the question of whether stocks held for rental by garment and linen hire service firms were trading stock for the purposes of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Ruling
2. It was decided that goods acquired for the
purpose of hire or rental do not constitute trading stock. Consequently,
a deduction by way of the trading stock valuation adjustment based on
the value of those goods on hand at the commencement of the year of
income will not be allowable.
3. A further matter considered was whether a
percentage of the rental stocks on hand at the end of a year of income
could be accepted as trading stock on the basis that on many occasions
some of the goods purchased are sold outright to customers or are,
subsequent to purchase, allocated to retail sales stock. It has been
decided that as the trading stock provisions of the Assessment Act
require that the value of "each article" of trading stock be taken into
account for assessment purposes, such an arbitrary approach was
unacceptable.
4. It should be noted that stocks of goods purchased
for hire/rental are not to be regarded as trading stock for any of the
purposes of the Assessment Act, i.e. for the purposes of sections 28-31
as well as those dealing with TSVA.
5. This decision is not restricted to garment and
linen hirers but applies to hirers of all descriptions.
Commissioner of Taxation
18 October 1977
References
ATO references:
NO 77/3872 F29
Date original memo issued:
18.10.77
Subject References:
trading stock
hire/rental business
stock held for hire/rental
trading stock valuation adjustment
Legislative References:
ITAA 28
ITAA 31
ITAA 82D
Back to top