IT 94 (Withdrawn) Taxation Ruling
IT 94
Investment allowance - aircraft
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1100958
Preamble
The eligibility for the investment allowance of aircraft used in a variety of situations was considered.
Ruling
2. The first situation concerned the possibility of
a company entering into maintenance contracts with owners of aircraft.
It is considered that the owner of the aircraft would not forfeit
entitlement to the investment allowance by reason of contracting with
the company to service and maintain the aircraft.
3. The second situation related to the use by a
company of its own aircraft for charter work involving the carriage of
passengers within Australia. It is confirmed that the carriage of
passengers is not seen as giving the passengers a right to use the
aircraft within the meaning of the investment allowance
provisions.
4. The third situation related to a case where
company x purchases an aircraft for use wholly in its own business and
uses pilots made available by the vendor company on an annual contract
basis. It is understood that, although the pilots would continue their
association with the vendor company they would, during the contract
period, be working to the directions of company x in the normal running
of the aircraft. It is considered there is nothing in this form of
arrangement that would cause the loss of the investment
allowance.
5. The fourth situation related to a case where
company x uses the aircraft in its own business and also engages in some
charter work using pilots working for it under contract from the vendor
company. Again, it is considered that this use of the aircraft would
not disqualify the company from entitlement to the investment allowance
provided it maintains control of the use of the aircraft in carrying out
the charter operations.
6. The final situation related to companies owning
aircraft engaging either partly or wholly in charter operations that are
organised by the vendor company. The particular concern here was
whether any distinction would be drawn between a company that invoiced
its charter passengers and one that permitted the vendor company to
manage the charter operations. In the latter case, the vendor company
would bill the passengers and pay a final net figure to the owner of the
aircraft periodically.
7. The essential aspect here is the same as that
mentioned in relation to the fourth situation - that is, the company
that owns the aircraft must use its own pilots and must control the use
of the plane in the charter operations. Accordingly, if during the
first year after the time the aircraft were first put into service an
owner permitted the vendor company to use its plane for charter
operations that were arranged and controlled by the vendor, the owner
would automatically lose his entitlement to the investment allowance
deduction in respect of the acquisition of the aircraft. If the charter
arrangement was put into effect after the end of the first year, the
question whether the allowance would then be withdrawn would have to be
decided on the facts of the individual case.
Commissioner of Taxation
17 May 1978
References
ATO references:
NO 77/3115 F15
Date original memo issued:
17.05.78
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 94W
IT 68
IT 77
IT 93
IT 95
IT 96
Subject References:
aircraft
maintenance contracts
contracted pilots
charter operations
demonstration use
investment allowance
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AA