IT 99 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
2 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 99
Investment allowance - leased plant
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1101553
Preamble
The following advice was given concerning the eligibility for the investment allowance of equipment leased by a company and used on a sub-lease basis by related companies under arrangements entered into with those related companies before the leases were in force.
Ruling
2. On the basis that the equipment has been leased
to the company on long-term leases, and that suitable section 82AD
declarations have been lodged by the leasing companies concerned,
investment allowance deductions would be available, in terms of section
82AA(b), if the company has used the equipment wholly and exclusively in
Australia and solely for the purpose of producing assessable
income.
3. But for the possible application of sub-section
82AG(3), those conditions would have been satisfied by the company using
the equipment solely to derive income, in the form of cross charges for
rental, by granting the related companies rights to use the
equipment.
4. It is considered that sub-section 82AG(3) has no
application if the sequence of events relating to the sub-leasing of
plant to the related companies can be substantiated. More specifically,
if it can be shown that, before it leased the equipment from the leasing
company the company entered into contracts or arrangements with its
related companies for them to use the equipment, it is considered that
those contracts or arrangements could not be treated as having been
entered into "while the lease was in force" for the purposes of
paragraph 82AG(3)(d).
5. The decision should be applied in similar cases.
Note
Sub-section 82AG(4), effective from 20 August 1979, provides that
the investment allowance will not now be available in the circumstances
outlined above.
Commissioner of Taxation
5 June 1979
References
ATO references:
NO J153/119/10 P16 F54
Date original memo issued:
05.06.79
Related Rulings/Determinations:
IT 99W
Subject References:
investment allowance
leased plant
Legislative References:
ITAA 82AA
ITAA 82AG
Back to top