IT 91 (Withdrawn) | Legal database
Legal database
Legal database
Contents
Download
Email
Print
Back to browse
3 related documents
Taxation Ruling
IT 91
Shares acquired as retirement benefits: inter-relationship of sec 26(d) and 26AAC
Please note that the
PDF version
is the authorised consolidated version of this ruling and amending notices.
This document is no longer current as has been Archived.
View the
Archival notice
for this document.
This document has been Withdrawn.
View the
Withdrawal notice
for this document.
FOI status:
may be releasedFOI number:
I 1101322
Preamble
A question was raised whether section 26AAC of the Income Tax Assessment Act, which governs the taxation of benefits acquired after 17 September 1974 under schemes for the acquisition of shares by employees, would be regarded as covering shares acquired under superannuation arrangements that provide for members to receive shares in employer companies when they retire.
Ruling
2. In cases where parcels of shares are acquired as a
consequence of retirement and in such circumstances that the other
prerequisites for the operation of section 26(d) of the Act are clearly
satisfied, it is considered that a proper construction of the Act as
whole would require the income tax liability in respect of the
acquisition of share to be determined in accordance with section 26(d)
without the simultaneous application of section 26AAC.
3. An example of cases where all of the prerequisites of
section 16(d) were not satisfied would be where arrangements associated
with an employee's retirement provide for acquisitions of separate
parcels of shares at intervals following the retirement with a resultant
failure of the "lump sum" test in section 26(d). Section 26AAC could
well have application in such cases.
Commissioner of Taxation
29 May 1975
References
ATO references:
NO 75/3366 F6
Date original memo issued:
29.05.75
Subject References:
shares
retirement benefits
share acquisition schemes
Legislative References:
ITAA 26(d)
ITAA 26AAC