TR 2022/2 - Income tax: the games and sports
exemption
This cover sheet is provided for information only. It does not form part of TR 2022/2 - Income
tax: the games and sports exemption
There is a Compendium for this document: TR 2022/2EC .
Generated on: 19 February 2026, 10:46:00 AM
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 1 of 17 
Taxation Ruling 
Income tax: the games and sports exemption 
 
Relying on this Ruling 
This publication is a public ruling for the purposes of the Taxation Administration Act 1953. 
If this Ruling applies to you, and you correctly rely on it, we will apply the law to you in the way set 
out in this Ruling. That is, you will not pay any more tax or penalties or interest in respect of the 
matters covered by this Ruling. 
 
Table of Contents 
Paragraph 
What this Ruling is about 
1 
Ruling 
7 
Society, association or club 
7 
Example 1 – not a society, association or club 
9 
Not-for-profit 
11 
Game or sport 
17 
Sporting or game-like activities 
22 
Example 2 – minor sporting activity incidental to club’s main purpose 
26 
Examples of games or sports 
27 
Main purpose established for the encouragement of a game or sport 
30 
Other purposes 
34 
Factors to be considered for determining main purpose 
36 
Activities and purpose 
38 
Surplus funds and purpose 
44 
Example 3 – surplus funds and purpose 
49 
Main purpose can change over time 
61 
Example 4 – change in purpose over time 
63 
Main purpose is encouraging a game or sport 
69 
Example 5 – no secondary purpose – incidental fundraising activities 
69 
Example 6 – incidental or secondary purpose – clubhouse activities 
73 
Example 7 – incidental and ancillary to main purpose – significant 
non-member clubhouse use 
77 
Example 8 – multi-factorial – main purpose of encouraging a game or sport 
82 
Main purpose is not encouraging a game or sport 
99 
Example 9 – multi-factorial – main purpose is not encouraging a game or sport 
99 
Date of effect 
105 
 
 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 2 of 17 
What this Ruling is about 
1. 
This Ruling applies to societies, associations or clubs (referred to collectively as 
‘clubs’) seeking to determine whether they are exempt from income tax under table 
item 9.1(c) of section 50-45 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997. In this Ruling, we 
call this the ‘games and sports exemption’. 
2. 
All legislative references in this Ruling are to the Income Tax Assessment 
Act 1997, unless otherwise indicated. 
3. 
A club qualifies for the games and sports exemption where it: 
• 
is established for the main purpose of the encouragement of a game or 
sport 
• 
is not carried on for the purposes of its individual members’ profit or gain, 
and 
• 
meets other special conditions under section 50-70. 
4. 
This Ruling does not cover the special conditions. For more information, refer to: 
• 
Taxation Ruling TR 2015/1 Income tax: special conditions for various 
entities whose ordinary and statutory income is exempt, and 
• 
Taxation Ruling TR 2019/6 Income tax: the ‘in Australia’ requirement for 
certain deductible gift recipients and income tax exempt entities. 
5. 
As part of good governance practices, it is recommended that clubs self-review 
their entitlement to income tax exemption each year or when there is a major change in the 
structure or activities of the club. When conducting self-review, clubs should consider how 
the law explained in this Ruling applies to their circumstances. From 1 July 2023, clubs 
with an active Australian business number will need to complete an annual online 
self-review form. 
6. 
This Ruling replaces Taxation Ruling TR 97/22 Income tax: exempt sporting clubs, 
which was withdrawn from 7 October 2021. This Ruling does not reflect a change in the 
Commissioner’s view on the application of the games and sports exemption; rather, it 
refreshes the view expressed in TR 97/22 to make it more contemporary. This Ruling also 
takes into account relevant case law1 that has occurred since TR 97/22 published. 
 
Ruling 
Society, association or club 
7. 
The phrase ‘society, association or club’ refers to a voluntary organisation of people 
associated together for a common or shared purpose.2 This description is consistent with 
the Macquarie Dictionary3 definition of each word: 
• 
Society ‘… an organisation of persons associated together for religious, 
benevolent, literary, scientific, political, patriotic or other purposes’. 
 
1 Specifically, Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Word Investments Limited [2008] 
HCA 55 (Word Investments). 
2 Douglas, Douglas Hector v Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia [1997] FCA 724, 97 
ATC 4722 at [4726]. 
3 Macmillan Publishers Australia, The Macquarie Dictionary online, www.macquariedictionary.com.au, 
accessed 5 September 2022. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 3 of 17 
• 
Association ‘… an organisation of people with a common purpose and 
having a formal structure’. 
• 
Club ‘… a group of persons organised for a social, literary, sporting, 
political, or other purpose, regulated by rules agreed by its members’. 
8. 
A society, association or club may be constituted as an unincorporated association4 
or be formally recognised by incorporation.5 
 
Example 1 – not a society, association or club 
9. 
Sporting Foundation is a private discretionary trust established in July 2021. The 
duties and powers of the trustee, and objects of the trust, are decribed in the trust deed. 
10. 
Neither Sporting Foundation nor its trustee qualify as a society, association or club 
as neither satisfies the description of a voluntary organisation of people that have 
associated together for a common or shared purpose. 
 
 
Not-for-profit 
11. 
To qualify for the games and sports exemption, a club must be not-for-profit (the 
‘not-for-profit requirement’ in this Ruling). The club must not be carried on for the purposes 
of individual members’ profit or gain, either while the club is operating or on its winding up.6 
12. 
Club members may receive communal membership benefits, such as the use of the 
facilities, that are incidental to the club’s objects. This will not prevent the club meeting the 
not-for-profit requirement. The club may also pay members reasonable remuneration for 
services they perform for the club. 
13. 
Clubs can use various mechanisms to ensure they meet the not-for-profit 
requirement. ‘Not-for-profit’ clauses in governing documents are the most common way. 
These prevent the distribution of profits or assets for the benefit of particular persons while 
the club is operating and on winding up.7 
14. 
Examples of suitable not-for-profit clauses are: 
• 
Not-for-profit clause – the assets and income of the club shall be applied 
solely in furtherance of its objects and no portion shall be distributed directly 
or indirectly to the members of the club except as bona fide compensation 
for services rendered or expenses incurred on behalf of the club. 
• 
Dissolution clause – in the event of the club being dissolved, the amount 
that remains after dissolution and the satisfaction of all debts and liabilities 
of the club shall be transferred to any organisation that is carried on for a 
similar purpose, which is not carried on for the profit or gain of its individual 
members. 
 
4 An unincorporated association usually shows that their group has associated for a common or shared 
purpose by adopting a constitution, set of rules or other governing document. 
5 For instance, as an incorporated association under the various associations incorporation acts of the States 
and Territories (for example, the Associations Incorporation Act 2009 (NSW)) or as a company limited by 
guarantee under the Corporations Act 2001. 
6 For example, Cremation Society of Australia Ltd v Commissioner of Land Tax (NSW) [1973] 2 NSWLR 704 
and Repromed Pty Ltd v Lucas and Anor (2000) 76 SASR 575. 
7 This includes where a club adopts the model rules for an incorporated association and these rules contain 
not-for-profit clauses. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 4 of 17 
15. 
If a club is prohibited by statute from distributing profits or assets (for example, 
state or territory laws for incorporated associations) for the benefit of particular persons 
while the club is operating and on winding up8, the club’s governing documents are taken 
to contain the appropriate not-for-profit clauses. 
16. 
To meet the not-for-profit requirement, a club’s actions must also be consistent with 
its not-for-profit clauses which prohibit distributions for the private benefit of its members. 
 
Game or sport 
17. 
‘Game’ and ‘sport’ are not defined terms and take their ordinary meaning, shaped 
by the statutory context in which they appear. Some activities are obviously games or 
sports; for example, netball or football. For other activities, characterisation as a game or 
sport can be demonstrated by evidence of a competitive9 element and by participants’ 
compliance with the conventions and rules of the activity. 
18. 
The meanings of game or sport also extend to: 
• 
non-athletic activites, such as chess or bridge 
• 
activities where people use machines to participate, such as motor racing, 
and 
• 
non-competitive activities, such as mountaineering.10 
19. 
A common feature of a game or sport is a set of conventions, expectations and 
rules. This contributes to the element of organisation that is commonly indicative of a game 
or sport. While written or defined rules are not essential, the imposition of such rules and 
conventions in an organised group of participants can convert an otherwise ordinary 
leisure activity into a game or sport (for example, hunting, fishing and walking). 
20. 
While competition is a very common feature of a game or sport, it is not essential or 
determinative. The presence of competition can be an important indicator where the 
activity is not obviously a game or sport.11 
21. 
To qualify as a game or sport, participants must share a common understanding 
that the activities they perform are the activities of a particular game or sport.12 
 
Sporting or game-like activities 
22. 
Games and sports can be contrasted with activities where a thing, object or animal 
is the essential focus, or where the activities are merely a means to some other end. 
23. 
Activities such as stamp and coin collecting, body building and train modelling are 
not games or sports. The activities that give rise to the desired results lack the features of 
competitions or rules and are not games or sports by their nature. Similarly, keeping 
guinea pigs or fish is not a game or sport. The activities of participants in car owner clubs 
are not participation in sports for similar reasons. Those participants’ focus is on their 
common interest in a type or make of motor vehicle and not on any sport or game-like 
activity. 
 
8 For example, the club is an incorporated association and the state or territory law that applies to incorporated 
associations includes not-for-profit clauses. 
9 Following the amendments in the Taxation Laws Amendment Act (No. 2) 1990, competition is not always a 
required element for the definition of a game or sport. 
10 Notes on Clauses in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1990. 
11 Adcock and Others v Wilson [1967] 1 All ER 1028, as per Widgery J at [1037]. 
12 Adcock and Others v Wilson [1967] 1 All ER 1028. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 5 of 17 
24. 
Activities that could appear to be a game or sport may be merely a means to other 
ends. Where the activities are not organised in a sport or game-like way, and some other 
purpose is predominant, the activity will not be a game or sport. For example, dancing can 
be organised in a game or sport-like way but it is often a means of promoting sociability, 
participation and relaxation. In such cases, it does not constitute a game or sport. 
25. 
The fact that a game or sport is undertaken by club members or within a club does 
not mean that the club is established for the encouragement of that game or sport. The 
activity must also be considered in the context of determining the club’s main purpose. For 
example, a fishing competition can be a sport. However, a fishing competition conducted 
by a club may be a minor activity incidental to its main purpose, such as promoting 
sociability, communal activities or some other purpose. 
 
Example 2 – minor sporting activity incidental to club’s main purpose 
26. 
The One That Got Away Club provides services and amenities for people who like 
to fish in the bay near the clubhouse and in surrounding watercourses. The services 
provided include weather and boating information, guest speakers and a bar and canteen 
which open daily. Members-only competitions are held once a month. While a fishing 
competition might of itself be a sport, it is conducted as a part of The One That Got Away 
Club’s wider activities. As The One That Got Away Club was not formed for the main 
purpose of encouraging a game or sport, the fishing competition held is not a game or 
sport. 
 
 
Examples of games or sports 
27. 
The following non-exhaustive list provides examples of activities that would be 
considered a sport13 if they satisfy the features of a game or sport14: 
• 
athletic activity – aerobics (if competitive); amateur wrestling; athletics 
including hurdling, jumping, running and walking; boxing; dancing, such as 
ballroom dancing (if competitive); ‘field games’, including discus, javelin, 
shot put and hammer throwing; martial arts such as judo, kung fu, ju-jitsu 
and karate; mountaineering; orienteering; rogaining; water-based sports 
including diving, swimming, surfing, surf life-saving, synchronised swimming 
and water polo 
• 
played with ball or projectile – badminton; baseball; basketball; bocce; 
bowling (ten-pin); bowls; cricket; croquet; football (all codes); golf; handball; 
hockey; ice hockey; lacrosse; marbles; netball; softball; squash; table 
tennis; tennis; underwater hockey; volleyball 
• 
involving animals – equestrian activities; polo; pony club activities; rodeo 
activities 
• 
using equipment to achieve mobility – canoeing; cycling; dragon-boat 
racing; drag racing; go-kart racing; hang gliding; kayaking; motor-car racing 
(circuit, rally); motor cross; motorcycle racing; mountain-bicycle riding; 
rowing; yachting 
 
13 For the purposes of section 50-45. 
14 See paragraphs 18 to 21 of this Ruling. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 6 of 17 
• 
using other equipment – abseiling; archery; billiards; darts; fencing; 
gymnastics; pool; power lifting; snooker; skateboarding; snow sports 
including bobsled, luge, skiing, ski-jumping and snowboarding; target 
shooting; water skiing; weightlifting; windsurfing; woodchopping; e-sports 
• 
contests involving combinations of activities – swimming/running/cycling; 
swimming/surf-ski/running; Highland Games; Olympic Games; any outdoor 
sport when played indoors; any indoor sport when played outdoors. 
28. 
Similarly, the following non-exhaustive list provides examples of activities that 
would be considered a game, provided they satisfy the features of a game or sport15: 
• 
card games – such as bridge 
• 
board games – such as backgammon, chess and mah-jong. 
29. 
The following non-exhaustive examples are activities that would not be considered 
a game or sport: 
• 
bird-raising, bird-keeping and bird-watching 
• 
bodybuilding 
• 
car owners’ clubs/associations 
• 
dancing as a social activity (including ballroom dancing, line dancing, 
square dancing and Highland dancing) 
• 
modelling of railways 
• 
stamp and coin collecting 
• 
playing of gaming or gambling machines and gambling generally, and 
• 
breeding and showing of animals. 
 
Main purpose established for the encouragement of a game or sport 
30. 
For a club to be established for the encouragement of a game or sport, the main 
purpose of the club in the relevant income year must be the encouragement of a game or 
sport.16 ‘Encouragement’ is not a defined term and takes its ordinary meaning.17 The 
ordinary meaning of encouragement (or the act of encouraging) has been described as 
stimulating by assistance or approval, including through direct or indirect means.18 
31. 
Determining the main purpose of a club requires an objective evaluation of all 
material facts and circumstances. There is no set formula for weighing up the 
characteristics of a club to determine its main purpose. 
32. 
The subjective motives or intentions of the founders or members of the club are 
relevant but do not necessarily determine the main purpose of the club. The stated 
purpose of a club is also significant but not decisive. Other important considerations 
include the activities and history of the club and how the club is controlled.19 
 
15 See paragraphs 18 to 21 of this Ruling. 
16 Cronulla Sutherland Leagues Club Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation [1990] FCA 108 (Cronulla Sutherland), 
per Lockhart J. 
17 South Sydney Junior Rugby League Club Limited and Commissioner of Taxation [2006] AATA 265 (South 
Sydney) at [4]. 
18 South Sydney at [4]. 
19 Cronulla Sutherland, per Lockhart J at [23] FCR 95-96. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 7 of 17 
33. 
It is the main purpose of the club in the year under examination that is the relevant 
consideration. It is not enough to examine the purpose of a club at the time of formation (or 
in past years), as its main purpose may change from year to year. 
 
Other purposes 
34. 
A club that has both sporting and non-sporting purposes will not qualify for the 
games and sports exemption unless the non-sporting purpose is: 
• 
merely ancillary and incidental to its sporting purpose (that is, a purpose that 
is related to carrying out its sporting purpose), or 
• 
secondary to its sporting purpose (that is, a purpose that is independent to, 
but less important or less significant than, the sporting purpose).20 
35. 
A club can have both sporting and independent non-sporting purposes and still 
qualify for the games and sports exemption. For example, a club that provides secondary 
non-sporting related services or facilities to members will not automatically be disqualified 
for the games and sports exemption. 
 
Factors to be considered for determining main purpose 
36. 
No one factor on its own will determine the main purpose of a club. A weighing of 
all the factors is needed. When considering the factors together, an objective conclusion 
must be reached that a club has a main purpose of encouraging a game or sport. 
37. 
The following factors have been identified by courts and tribunals as relevant when 
considering purpose: 
• 
emphasis in the club’s constituent documents that the main purpose is to 
encourage a game or sport21 
• 
extent of sporting activities22 
• 
the conduct of activities directly related to the game or sport23 
• 
a high level of member participation in the game or sport24 
• 
promotion of the organisation to patrons and the public as one that 
encourages a game or sport25 
• 
involvement of the committee of management in the promotion of sport26 
 
20 Notes to Clauses of the Explanatory Memorandum to the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1990; 
Cronulla Sutherland; South Sydney; North Suburban Club Inc and Commissioner of Taxation [1999] 
AATA 463. An organisation will not be disqualified from the games and sports exemption where the 
non-sporting purpose is just a collateral or independent purpose. It must also be the main purpose: Cronulla 
Sutherland, as per Lockhart J; “The Waratahs” Rugby Union Football Club v Federal Commissioner of 
Taxation 79 ATC 4337 at [4341], per Waddell J. 
21 Terranora Lakes Country Club Limited v Commissioner of Taxation [1993] FCA 80 (Terranorra Lakes); Re 
Tweed Heads Bowls Club v FC of T 92 ATC 2087 (Tweed Heads); St Marys Rugby League Club Ltd v 
Commissioner of Taxation [1997] FCA 581 (St Marys). 
22 Terranorra Lakes; Tweed Heads; St Marys. 
23 Terranorra Lakes; Tweed Heads; St Marys. 
24 Case W114 89 ATC 891 at [894]; AAT Case 5452 (1989) 20 ATR 4125 at [4133]; Terranorra Lakes; Tweed 
Heads; St Marys. 
25 Terranorra Lakes; Tweed Heads; St Marys. 
26 AAT Case 8267 (1992) 24 ATR 1068; Tweed Heads; St Marys. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 8 of 17 
• 
the use of surplus funds for encouraging the game or sport27, and 
• 
the provision of financial and in-kind support for encouraging the game or 
sport.28 
 
Activities and purpose 
38. 
The activities undertaken by a club are an important consideration in determining 
whether it qualifies for the games and sports exemption. However, activities considered in 
isolation do not demonstrate the purpose of a club. 
39. 
Activities are commonly a means to an end. Activities can serve the purpose of 
encouraging a game or sport and other independent non-sporting purposes. All of the 
club’s activities must be objectively weighed against the objects, history and control of the 
club to determine the main purpose for which it is established in a particular year. 
40. 
An activity like the organisation of, or participation in, sporting competitions can be 
readily understood as advancing a purpose of encouraging a game or sport. 
41. 
Where a club derives its revenue from commercial operations, the club needs to 
objectively determine the extent to which commercial operations are a means to the end of 
advancing the sporting purpose, or are advancing some other purpose.29 
42. 
A club can demonstrate a purpose of encouraging a game or sport where it 
provides financial and in-kind contributions to other organisations that directly conduct 
those activities.30 To demonstrate a main purpose of encouraging a game or sport, a club 
that does not directly conduct any games or sports will need to objectively show that the 
activities it carries out are a means to that end. 
43. 
Direct or indirect activities that indicate the encouragement of a game or sport can 
include: 
• 
forming, preparing and entering teams and competitors in competitions in 
the game or sport 
• 
coordinating activities 
• 
organising and conducting tournaments 
• 
improving the abilities of participants 
• 
improving the standard of trainers and coaches 
• 
providing purchased or leased facilities for the activities of the game or sport 
for the use of club members and visitors 
• 
encouraging increased and wider participation and improved performance 
• 
marketing 
• 
initiating or facilitating research and development, and 
• 
facilitating the activities listed in this paragraph by making a financial or 
in-kind contribution to an organisation that performs them. 
 
27 Cronulla Sutherland at 90 ATC 4226, 36 ATR 313; Terranorra Lakes; Tweed Heads; St Marys. 
28 Cronulla Sutherland. 
29 Word Investments; Terranora Lakes. 
30 Word Investments; Inland Revenue Commissioners v Helen Slater Charitable Trust Ltd [1982] Ch 49, per 
Oliver LJ at [56]. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 9 of 17 
Surplus funds and purpose 
44. 
The use of surplus funds from a club’s activities is also a factor to consider when 
determining the club’s main purpose. Surplus funds can serve both the purpose of 
encouraging a game or sport and other independent non-sporting purposes. When 
considering purpose, it is how the surplus funds are used, or retained for future use, in line 
with the objects, activities and other characteristics of the club that matters. 
45. 
Using surpluses from commercial activities to support the conduct of sporting 
activities is a factor that would support a conclusion that the main purpose of the club is 
encouraging a game or sport. However, where a club uses surpluses to undertake 
commercial activities which provide services to members, the extent of those activities, 
which do not achieve a sporting end, may result in the club’s main purpose not being about 
encouraging a game or sport. It is necessary to carefully consider all relevant factors when 
determining the main purpose of a club. 31 
46. 
Where a club uses surplus funds to undertake a commercial activity that does not 
directly provide services to any of its members, the undertaking of this commercial activity 
is likely to be a neutral factor.32 
47. 
Putting aside surpluses as a contingency fund for unexpected future events is also 
likely to be neutral when weighing up the factors to determine the main purpose of a club, 
provided the club can reasonably show the need for such a fund and at the time it is 
accumulated, the fund serves all the club’s purposes indifferently. When the club uses the 
contingency fund, consideration will need to be given to how that use impacts the main 
purpose of the club. 
48. 
It is a matter of objectively weighing the facts and circumstances in each case to 
determine whether the club has a main purpose of encouraging a game or sport.33 Actions 
of a club to obtain and retain surplus funds, without further consideration of how surplus 
funds will serve the club’s purposes, is not determinative. 
 
Example 3 – surplus funds and purpose 
49. 
Local Club is an incorporated association which is not carried on for the profit or 
gain of its individual members. 
50. 
Local Club has a long history of fielding Australian Rules football teams in 
competitions in their region and has been described as a nursery for the development of 
the professional sport. 
51. 
Membership of Local Club includes football members and social members. 
52. 
The objects of Local Club include the promotion of Australian Rules football in the 
region, as well as independently providing social facilities for members. 
53. 
Local Club provides extensive social facilities to its members which include a bar, 
bistro and gaming venue. 
54. 
Local Club has been accumulating surplus funds for a number of years and has a 
detailed business plan to develop land it acquired a number of years ago as a football oval 
for its junior football competition. The development plans received local council approval 
 
31 In Word Investments, the High Court found that there was only one purpose and commercial activities were 
a means to the end of serving that purpose. In Cronulla Sutherland, the majority of the Full Federal Court 
found that there were both sporting and non-sporting purposes, and that objectively the activities of the club 
involving members served a non-sporting end in themselves. 
32 Word Investments. 
33 Cronulla Sutherland; St Marys. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 10 of 17 
and the club is currently negotiating with contractors for the proposed works on the 
development. 
55. 
Local Club has also put aside some of its surplus funds as a contingency for 
unexpected future events. Local Club can reasonably show the need for such a fund and 
that, when accumulated, it serves Local Club’s purposes indifferently. 
56. 
These facts show that Local Club has a mixed purpose, being the encouragement 
of Australian Rules football and the provision of facilities for its members who do not 
participate in football. 
57. 
Given Local Club can show detailed plans to use its surplus funds to support the 
football games by building further playing fields, its retention of surplus funds is consistent 
with a conclusion that its main purpose is to encourage Australian Rules football. 
58. 
The contingency fund is likely to be neutral when weighing up the factors to 
determine Local Club’s main purpose. This is because Local Club can reasonably show 
the need for a contingency fund and, at the time the fund is accumulated, it serves all 
Local Club’s purposes indifferently. If Local Club uses the contingency fund, it will need to 
consider how the use of the contingency fund impacts on its main purpose at that time. 
59. 
If, instead of the facts in this example, Local Club retains surplus funds with a plan 
to provide additional facilities for social members who do not participate in football, the 
significance of these plans would need to be considered objectively in light of the objects 
of Local Club (and its other activities) to ascertain whether there would be a material 
impact to its main purpose. 
60. 
In all instances, any surplus funds retained by Local Club will just be one factor of 
many that must be objectively weighed up to determine its main purpose. Local Club 
should keep appropriate records (for example, meeting minutes for important decisions or 
a business plan which relates to surplus funds) so it can show its plans for surplus funds 
and how surplus funds will serve a main purpose of encouraging a game or sport. 
 
 
Main purpose can change over time 
61. 
The main purpose of a club can change over time and there is an ongoing 
requirement to make an objective evaluation of all of the facts and circumstances that 
apply to that club to determine its main purpose.34 
62. 
Isolated events that happen in the life cycle of a club do not necessarily mean that 
the main purpose of the club has changed. However, when these events are significant, 
the club should consider how they might impact its main purpose. 
 
Example 4 – change in purpose over time 
63. 
Green Links Country Club (Green Links) was founded in 1996. Its constitution 
states that its objects are to provide sporting and social facilities for its members and 
visitors. 
64. 
Green Links is not carried on for the profit or gain of its individual members. 
 
34 Cronulla Sutherland, per Lockhart J at [23] FCR 95-96, confirmed by Greenwood J in Study and Prevention 
of Psychological Diseases Foundation v Commissioner of Taxation [2015] FCA 1117 at [35], [102] 
and [181–182], citing Word Investments and Cronulla Sutherland. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 11 of 17 
65. 
For many years, Green Links provided a golf course as well as a clubhouse with 
social, gaming and entertainment facilities for its members and visitors. As time 
progressed, it became increasingly expensive to maintain the golf course. In 2021, the 
management committee decided to sell the golf course to a residential property developer. 
66. 
While a substantial body of the club’s membership still maintain an interest in 
playing golf, they now play at other golf courses not associated with Green Links. After the 
golf course was sold in 2021, Green Links’ main activities centre on providing social 
facilities for its members but it also donates to other golf clubs in the region from time to 
time, when they have sufficient funds. 
67. 
The determination of a club’s main purpose is periodic and a club’s main purpose 
may change from time to time. For the games and sports exemption to apply in an income 
year, Green Links must be established for the main purpose of the encouragement of a 
game or sport for that year. When it was set up in 1996, Green Links was established for 
the encouragement of golf and its activities were mainly centred on providing a golf course 
for members. 
68. 
After it sold the golf course, its activities changed to such an extent that in 2021 it 
can no longer be said that Green Links is established for the main purpose of the 
encouragement of a game or sport. For 2021, Green Links will not qualify for the games 
and sports exemption. 
 
Main purpose is encouraging a game or sport 
Example 5 – no secondary purpose – incidental fundraising activities 
69. 
Kids Soccer Club is a locally-based club that fields junior soccer teams in all 
Under-18 leagues in their region. Kids Soccer Club has junior members who are under 18 
and adult members who are either the parents of the junior members, soccer coaches or 
former junior members. 
70. 
Kids Soccer Club’s objects stated in its constitution are to promote junior soccer at 
all levels, to enter competitions and field teams at all junior levels. It is managed by a 
committee of members with an active involvement in advancing soccer in the region. It has 
a long history of entering competitions and has been successful over the years winning 
several premierships. To raise funds, Kids Soccer Club runs raffles, hosts fundraising 
dinners and receives sponsorship from local organisations. 
71. 
The following factors all lead to the conclusion that Kids Soccer Club is established 
for the main purpose of the encouragement of a game or sport: 
• 
its constitution, with emphasis on the promotion of soccer 
• 
its extensive soccer activities 
• 
the high level of its member participation in soccer 
• 
its promotion to the public as a sporting club, and 
• 
the active involvement of its management committee in soccer. 
72. 
Kids Soccer Club does not have any independent secondary purposes as its 
fundraising activities are incidental and ancillary to its main purpose for the encouragement 
of a game or sport. 
 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 12 of 17 
Example 6 – incidental or secondary purpose – clubhouse activities 
73. 
Bowls Inc is a bowls club that owns and maintains a local bowling green. It has 
bowling members and social members. Bowling members can use the club’s green and 
participate in competitions with other bowls clubs. Social members can use the clubhouse 
and green when open to social members but are not entitled to enter competitions or 
access the green when reserved for bowling members or competition. 
74. 
Bowls Inc has a clubhouse located on its bowling green. The clubhouse has a 
licensed bar, dining facilities and gaming machines. The clubhouse is open to 
non-members. Bowls Inc members regularly participate in competition and have been 
successful over the years. Bowls Inc’s objects stated in its constitution are to provide a 
bowling facility for members, enter and host competitions and provide social facilities for 
members. Bowls Inc is managed by members who actively play bowls. 
75. 
The following factors all lead to the conclusion that Bowls Inc is established for the 
main purpose of the encouragement of a game or sport: 
• 
emphasis in Bowls Inc’s constitution on promoting bowls 
• 
its bowls activities and competitions 
• 
its member participation (by both bowling and social members) in playing 
bowls 
• 
the promotion of Bowls Inc to the public as a bowls club 
• 
the active involvement of the management committee in bowls, and 
• 
the relative scale of the member clubhouse activities compared to the larger 
scale of member sporting activities. 
76. 
The extent of the non-bowls activities (such as the operation of the clubhouse with 
a licensed bar, dining facilities and gaming machines) when objectively considered with all 
of its bowls activities support a conclusion that these activities are incidental and ancillary 
or secondary to its main purpose of encouraging a game or sport. 
 
Example 7 – incidental and ancillary to main purpose – significant non-member 
clubhouse use 
77. 
Golf Lincs is a golf club that owns and maintains a local golf course. The club has 
golfing members and social members. Golfing members can use the club’s course and 
participate in golf competitions with members of other clubs. Social members can use the 
clubhouse and green when open to social members but are not entitled to enter 
competitions or access the green when reserved for golfing members or competitions. 
78. 
Golf Lincs has a clubhouse located on its golf course and a pro-shop that sells 
golfing equipment. The clubhouse has a licensed bar, dining facilities and gaming 
machines (clubhouse activities). The clubhouse is open to non-members and hosts a 
significant number of functions for non-members. Golf Lincs members regularly participate 
in competitions and have been successful over the years. Golf Lincs’ objects stated in its 
constitution are to provide a golf course for members, enter and host golfing competitions 
and provide social facilities for members. Golf Lincs is managed by members who actively 
play golf. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 13 of 17 
79. 
The following factors all objectively lead to the conclusion that Golf Lincs is 
established for the main purpose of the encouragement of a game or sport: 
• 
Golf Linc’s constitution with emphasis on the promotion of golf 
• 
its extensive golfing activities 
• 
its member participation in playing golf 
• 
the promotion of Golf Lincs to the public as a golf club 
• 
the active involvement of the management committee in golf, and 
• 
the relative scale of member clubhouse activities compared to the larger 
scale of member sporting activities. 
80. 
The pro-shop supports members with their golfing activities and raises funds for 
Golf Lincs. This activity is incidental and ancillary to carrying out Golf Lincs’ purpose of 
encouraging golfing. 
81. 
The operation of the clubhouse activities are incidental and ancillary or secondary 
to Golf Lincs’ main purpose of encouraging a game or sport. On the facts of this example, 
the conduct of clubhouse activities that involves the provision of social amenities to 
members is not of an extent that would cause that purpose to be other than secondary to 
the main sporting purpose. 
 
Example 8 – multi-factorial – main purpose of encouraging a game or sport 
82. 
Multi-Club is a company limited by guarantee which is not carried on for the profit or 
gain of its individual members. 
83. 
Multi-Club’s objectives stated in its constitution are to: 
• 
promote and assist in the promotion, conduct and propagation of football 
and sport generally 
• 
assist in the provision of training, conditioning and teaching facilities for 
football 
• 
encourage, assist and support sport in the district, and 
• 
provide a sporting and social club for members and members’ guests, 
including providing all the usual club facilities. 
84. 
In the past, Multi-Club has fielded a senior football team and, later, fielded 3 junior 
football teams which now operate separately from Multi-Club. They have not fielded 
sporting teams in any competitions for a number of years. 
85. 
Multi-Club has closely-affiliated sporting clubs to which it has a history of providing 
substantial financial and in-kind support. Its audited accounts and other documented 
evidence demonstrate that Multi-Club actively supports (both financially and in-kind) the 
following sporting clubs: 
• 
Football Club One – which fields both a men’s and women’s team in local 
competition 
• 
Football Club Two – which fields a number of local under-age teams, 
comprising approximately 300 children 
• 
Cricket Club – which uses the changing rooms and other facilities in the 
Multi-Club clubhouse free of charge. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 14 of 17 
86. 
The management committee of Multi-Club is comprised of a diverse group of 
individuals with marketing, management and football knowledge. Some of the 
management committee members are current or former footballers and coaches. 
Contemporaneous emails show that the management committee has a deliberate, 
implemented policy of having representative members from the management committees 
of its affiliated sporting clubs. 
87. 
Multi-Club’s website: 
• 
has a prominent sporting club logo 
• 
provides sports information about the club including its history and awards 
for teams and players 
• 
provides games information 
• 
has links to the websites of the affiliated sporting clubs 
• 
advertises its merchandise and social activities, and 
• 
details its facilities. 
88. 
Two of Multi-Club’s full-time employees and one of its part-time employees spend 
most of their time supporting the affiliated sporting clubs. 
89. 
Multi-Club’s clubhouse includes a licenced bar and bistro, meeting rooms, a 
gaming room, a function room, sports-betting machines, pool tables and video screens. It 
is also home to the club’s administration offices and to the administrative functions of the 
affiliated sporting clubs (which is provided free of charge). 
90. 
Multi-Club arranges transport and pick-up points to bring spectators to games 
played by the club’s affiliated sporting clubs at their home ground, as well as coordinating 
seating at, and advertising these games. 
91. 
Multi-Club has contributed to the funding of structures near the council-owned oval 
used by its affiliated sporting clubs, including infrastructure on the main pavilion and 
sealing the car park. 
92. 
An analysis of Multi-Club’s financial statements shows that member receipts always 
exceed expenditure relating to members and that more than 50% of its annual surplus 
funds from non-member sources is used to provide support to its affiliated sporting clubs. 
93. 
Multi-Club has invested in residential and commercial properties over the years and 
now holds a substantial portfolio. These properties are leased on commercial terms. 
94. 
Whether the games and sports exemption applies to Multi-Club requires an 
objective weighing of all the factors. 
95. 
Factors that work in favour of the conclusion that Multi-Club’s main purpose is the 
encouragement of a game or sport include: 
• 
an emphasis in its constitution to promote and assist in the promotion, 
conduct and propagation of sport, and assist in the provision of training, 
conditioning and teaching facilities for football 
• 
assistance and support for sport in the district 
• 
a history of fielding sporting teams and participation in competition 
• 
close affiliations with other sporting clubs, including a history and evidence 
of substantial financial and in-kind support including in the current income 
year 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 15 of 17 
• 
a management committee with a diverse skill set and involvement in the 
management committee of current footballers and football coaches 
• 
a deliberate policy to include members of its affiliated sporting clubs in the 
management committee 
• 
a prominent sporting logo on its premises, in its marketing material and on 
its website, and 
• 
encouragement of spectators by arranging transport, pickup points, seating 
and advertising to bring them to games played by the affiliated sporting 
clubs. 
96. 
Factors that work against the conclusion that Multi-Club’s main purpose is the 
encouragement of a game or sport include: 
• 
an emphasis in its constitution to provide a social club for its members 
• 
the provision of social facilities to its members, and 
• 
no direct involvement in fielding sporting teams or entering into 
competitions. 
97. 
Factors that are neutral when considering Multi-Club’s main purpose include: 
• 
the provision of its facilities to non-members on a commercial basis, and 
• 
its passive investments in residential and commercial properties. 
98. 
An objective evaluation of the factors would lead to a conclusion that Multi-Club is 
established for the main purpose of the encouragement of a game or sport. Multi-Club 
should document how it has reached this conclusion and should re-evaluate whenever any 
material changes occur in its operations. 
 
Main purpose is not encouraging a game or sport 
Example 9 – multi-factorial – main purpose is not encouraging a game or sport 
99. 
Supporters Club is a club that provides social facilities to members and supports 
football. It was established by a number of supporters and former players. Its objects are to 
provide a social facility for members and raise funds for local football clubs. 
100. 
Supporters Club does not field any football teams, enter any competitions or 
directly participate in playing football. It conducts trading activities in a licenced bar, dining 
facility and gaming area. It is open to members, as well as the public. Supporters Club is 
managed by members who are former players or have an interest in football. It provides 
financial support to local football clubs through sponsorships and the provision of in-kind 
support on an inconsistent basis when its members’ needs are met. 
101. 
For Supporters Club to qualify for the games and sports exemption, an objective 
conclusion must be made that it is established for the main purpose of the encouragement 
of a game or sport. This requires an objective weighing of all the factors that apply to 
Supporters Club. 
102. 
Factors that work in favour of the conclusion that Supporters Club’s main purpose 
is the encouragement of a game or sport include: 
• 
an emphasis in its objects that it will raise funds for local football clubs 
• 
the provision of financial and in-kind support to local football clubs, and 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 16 of 17 
• 
its management is by former players and people with an interest in football. 
103. 
Factors that work against the conclusion that Supporters Club’s main purpose is 
the encouragement of a game or sport include: 
• 
an emphasis in its objects to provide a social facility for members 
• 
funding and in-kind support are only provided on an inconsistent basis with 
its members taking priority 
• 
no direct involvement in fielding football teams, entering competitions or 
direct participation in playing football, and 
• 
the relative size and extent of social facilities provided for the benefit of its 
members compared to the financial and in-kind support provided to local 
football clubs. 
104. 
An objective evaluation of the factors would lead to a conclusion that Supporters 
Club is not established for the main purpose of the encouragement of a game or sport. 
 
 
Date of effect 
105. 
This Ruling applies to years of income commencing both before and after its date 
of issue. However, this Ruling will not apply to taxpayers to the extent that it conflicts with 
the terms of a settlement of a dispute agreed to before the date of issue of this Ruling (see 
paragraphs 75 and 76 of Taxation Ruling TR 2006/10 Public Rulings). 
 
 
Commissioner of Taxation 
14 September 2022 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2022/2 
Status: not legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2022/2 
Page 17 of 17 
References 
Previous draft: 
TR 2021/D6 
 
Related Rulings/Determinations: 
TR 2006/10, TR 2015/1, TR 2019/6 
 
Previous Rulings/Determinations: 
TR 97/22 
 
Legislative references: 
- ITAA 1997 50-45 
- ITAA 1997 50-70 
- Corporations Act 2001 
- Taxation Laws Amendment Act (No. 2) 
1990 
- Associations Incorporation Act 2009 
(NSW) 
 
Cases relied on: 
- AAT Case 5452 20 ATR 4125 
- Adcock and Others v Wilson [1967] 1 All 
ER 1028 
- Case W114 89 ATC 891 
- Commissioner of Taxation of the 
Commonwealth of Australia v Word 
Investments Limited [2008] HCA 55; 236 
CLR 204; 83 ALJR 105; 251 ALR 206 
- Cremation Society of Australia Ltd v 
Commissioner of Land Tax (NSW) [1973] 
2 NSWLR 704 
- Cronulla Sutherland Leagues Club Ltd v 
Commissioner of Taxation [1990] FCA 
108; 23 FCR 82; 90 ATC 4215; 21 AIR 
300 
- Douglas, Douglas Hector v Commissioner 
of Taxation of the Commonwealth of 
Australia [1997] FCA 724; 77 FCR 112; 97 
ATC 4722; 36 ATR 532 
- Inland Revenue Commissioners v Helen 
Slater Charitable Trust Ltd [1982] Ch 49 
- North Suburban Club Inc and 
Commissioner of Taxation [1999] AATA 
463; 99 ATC 2254, 42 ATR 1111 
- Re Tweed Heads Bowls Club v FC of T 92 
ATC 2087 
- Repromed Pty Ltd v Lucas and Anor 
(2000) 76 SASR 575 
- South Sydney Junior Rugby League Club 
Limited and Commissioner of Taxation 
[2006] AATA 265; 2006 ATC 2150; 62 
ATR 1123 
- St Marys Rugby League Club Ltd v 
Commissioner of Taxation [1997] 
FCA 581; 1997 ATC 4528; 36 ATR 281 
- Study and Prevention of Psychological 
Diseases Foundation v Commissioner of 
Taxation [2015] FCA 1117; 330 ALR 1117 
- Terranora Lakes Country Club Limited v 
Commissioner of Taxation [1993] FCA 80; 
93 ATC 4078; 25 ATR 294 
- “The Waratahs” Rugby Union Football 
Club v Federal Commissioner of Taxation 
79 ATC 4337; 10 ATR 33; 37 FLR 413 
 
Other references: 
Explanatory Memorandum to the Taxation 
Laws Amendment Bill (No 2) 1990 
Macmillan Publishers Australia, The 
Macquarie Dictionary online, 
www.macquariedictionary.com.au 
 
 
 
ATO references 
NO: 
1-B4KCNQE 
ISSN: 
2205-6122 
BSL: 
PW 
ATOlaw topic: 
Exempt entities ~~ Sport, culture and recreation ~~ Games 
Exempt entities ~~ Sport, culture and recreation ~~ Sport 
 
 
© AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE FOR THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 
 
You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as you wish (but not in any 
way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth endorses you or any of your services or 
products).