TR 2023/1 - Income tax: residency tests for
individuals
This cover sheet is provided for information only. It does not form part of TR 2023/1 - Income
tax: residency tests for individuals
There is a Compendium for this document: TR 2023/1EC .
Generated on: 18 February 2026, 08:49:35 AM
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 1 of 28 
Taxation Ruling 
Income tax: residency tests for individuals 
 
Relying on this Ruling 
This publication is a public ruling for the purposes of the Taxation Administration Act 1953. 
If this Ruling applies to you, and you correctly rely on it, we will apply the law to you in the way set 
out in this Ruling. That is, you will not pay any more tax or penalties or interest in respect of the 
matters covered by this Ruling. 
 
Table of Contents 
Paragraph 
What this Ruling is about 
1 
Previous rulings 
9 
Ruling 
10 
Statutory definition of residency for tax purposes 
10 
Ordinary concepts test 
17 
Period of physical presence in Australia 
26 
Intention or purpose of presence 
31 
Behaviour while in Australia 
41 
Family, and business or employment ties 
46 
Maintenance and location of assets 
51 
Social and living arrangements 
53 
Domicile test 
55 
Domicile 
56 
Permanent place of abode 
63 
Length of overseas stay 
73 
Nature of accommodation 
79 
Durability of association 
81 
183-day test 
83 
Working out the 183 days 
86 
Usual place of abode outside of Australia 
88 
Intention to take up residence in Australia 
92 
Commonwealth superannuation fund test 
96 
Temporary workers and working holiday makers 
98 
Temporary workers 
99 
Working holiday makers 
102 
Part-year residency 
105 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 2 of 28 
Dual residency 
108 
Self-assessment 
109 
Examples 
111 
Example 1 – person in Australia for 4 months – resident under ordinary 
concepts 
111 
Example 2 – person in Australia for 8 months – resident 
114 
Example 3 – person in Australia for 12 months – resident 
116 
Example 4 – person in Australia for 12 months – non-resident for the first 
3 months, resident for a further 9 months under ordinary concepts 
118 
Example 5 – person in Australia for 9 months – non-resident 
123 
Example 6 – person leaving Australia – non-resident when they 
depart Australia 
127 
Example 7 – person out of Australia for 2 years – resident under ordinary 
concepts and domicile test 
131 
Example 8 – person out of Australia for 2 years – non-resident 
134 
Example 9 – person out of Australia for 5 years – non-resident 
137 
Example 10 – person out of Australia indefinitely – non-resident 
141 
Example 11 – person out of Australia indefinitely – resident under 
domicile test 
145 
Example 12 – person out of Australia for 6 months every year – resident 
151 
Example 13 – business migrant coming to Australia – resident 
154 
Example 14 – person in Australia for 9 months – non-resident 
157 
Example 15 – working holiday maker in Australia for 12 months 
 – non-resident 
159 
Example 16 – working holiday maker planning to live in Australia – resident 
161 
Example 17 – person in Australia takes a holiday overseas – resident 
163 
Example 18 – working holiday maker stays in Australia – non-resident 
165 
Date of effect 
170 
 
 
What this Ruling is about 
1. 
This Ruling outlines the residency tests for individuals for tax purposes as set out in 
subsection 6(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) and when the 
Commissioner considers that a person will be a resident of Australia. 
2. 
All legislative references in this Ruling are to the ITAA 1936, unless otherwise 
indicated. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 3 of 28 
3. 
This Ruling explains that the definition of ‘resident of Australia’ has 4 alternative 
tests. You1 are a resident if you meet any one (or more) of the tests but a non-resident2 if 
you do not meet any of the tests. 
4. 
This Ruling further explains that residency under the first 3 tests is determined by 
considering all of your relevant facts and circumstances. No single fact determines the 
outcome and the significance of facts varies from case to case. Because of this, there are 
no ‘bright-line rules’ or any single factor that can be said to be paramount. 
5. 
This Ruling also explains: 
• 
residency is about your connection to Australia, and 
• 
you can be a resident for tax purposes of more than one country at the 
same time. 
6. 
This Ruling does not address or discuss in detail: 
• 
the Commonwealth superannuation fund test (the fourth residency test for 
individuals) 
• 
dual residency 
• 
double-tax agreements 
• 
temporary residency, and 
• 
the residency of companies.3 
7. 
Each residency decision turns on its facts.4 While Court and Tribunal decisions 
provide illustrations of how the Court or Tribunal has considered and weighted facts, an 
outcome in one case does not govern the outcome in a different case, even where the 
facts are similar. 
8. 
Similarly, the examples in this Ruling are provided to illustrate a point. Having 
similar facts to those in an example will not always result in the same outcome. Differences 
in intention, motivations and life circumstances may produce different outcomes. 
 
Previous rulings 
9. 
This Ruling consolidates and replaces the material in withdrawn Taxation Rulings 
IT 2650 Income tax: residency – permanent place of abode outside Australia, IT 2681 
Income tax: residency status of business migrants and TR 98/17 Income tax: residency 
status of individuals entering Australia on residency for individuals. It also updates the 
views reflected in those Rulings to take into account developments in case law (including 
 
1 ‘You’ means the individual to whom the relevant section applies. 
2 The terms ‘non-resident’ and ‘foreign resident’ are used interchangeably within this Ruling and are taken to 
mean the same thing. ‘Non-resident’ means a person who is not a resident of Australia as stated in 
subsection 6(1). Subsection 995-1(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997) defines ‘foreign 
resident’ to mean a person who is not a resident of Australia for the purpose of the ITAA 1936. The definition 
of foreign resident in subsection 995-1(1) of the ITAA 1997 also applies for the purposes of the Taxation 
Administration Act 1953 (TAA) as per section 3AA of that Act. 
3 Taxation Ruling TR 2018/5 Income tax: central management and control test of residency and Practical 
Compliance Guideline PCG 2018/9 Central management and control test of residency: identifying where a 
company’s central management and control is located provide the ATO’s view on the central management 
and control test of corporate residency. 
4 Commissioner of Taxation v Miller [1946] HCA 23 (Miller), per Rich J: 
 … the question whether a person is a resident … depends not upon the applicability of some definite rule 
of law, but upon … whether he comes within a field which is very loosely defined. The question is 
ordinarily one of degree, and therefore of fact. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 4 of 28 
but not limited to Harding v Commissioner of Taxation [2019] FCAFC 29 (Harding), Pike v 
Commissioner of Taxation [2019] FCA 2185 (Pike)5 and Addy v Commissioner of Taxation 
[2019] FCA 1768 (Addy)6). IT 2650 and TR 98/17 were withdrawn with effect from the date 
this Ruling was issued as a draft for public comment, being 6 October 2022. Taxation 
Ruling IT 2681 has been withdrawn with effect from the date of issue of this Ruling, being 
7 June 2023. 
 
Ruling 
Statutory definition of residency for tax purposes 
10. 
Residency for tax purposes is a question of fact based on an individual’s 
connection to Australia. 
11. 
The terms ‘resident’ and ‘resident of Australia’ are defined in subsection 6(1).7 
These definitions contain 4 alternative tests for residency of individuals. A ‘resident’ or 
‘resident of Australia’ is: 
(a) 
a person, other than a company, who resides in Australia [ordinary concepts 
test]8 and includes a person: 
(i) 
whose domicile is in Australia, unless the Commissioner is satisfied that the 
person’s permanent place of abode is outside Australia; [domicile test] 
(ii) 
who has actually been in Australia, continuously or intermittently, during 
more than one-half of the year of income, unless the Commissioner is 
satisfied that the person’s usual place of abode is outside Australia and that 
the person does not intend to take up residency in Australia; [183-day test] 
or 
(iii) 
who is: 
(A) 
a member of the superannuation scheme established by deed 
under the Superannuation Act 1990; or 
(B) 
an eligible employee for the purposes of the Superannuation 
Act 1976; or 
(C) 
the spouse, or a child under 16, of a person covered by 
sub-paragraph (A) or (B) … [Commonwealth superannuation 
fund test] 
12. 
The ordinary concepts test is generally relevant when you are physically present in 
Australia and considers residency according to ordinary concepts. The other 3 tests 
(domicile test, 183-day test and Commonwealth superannuation fund test) expand the 
definition beyond the ordinary concept of residency.9 
13. 
The domicile and Commonwealth superannuation fund tests are generally relevant 
if you have been living in Australia but are not currently present in Australia, or present 
only intermittently during the relevant income year. The domicile test considers whether 
your domicile is in Australia and whether your permanent place of abode is outside 
Australia. 
 
5 And, on appeal, Commissioner of Taxation v Pike [2020] FCAFC 158 (Pike appeal). 
6 And, on appeal, Commissioner of Taxation v Addy [2020] FCAFC 135 (Addy appeal). 
7 'Australian resident', as defined in subsection 995-1(1) of the ITAA 1997, means a person who is a resident of 
Australia for the purposes of the ITAA 1936. 
8 Also known as the ‘resides test’. 
9 As per Derrington J in Harding v Commissioner of Taxation [2018] FCA 837 at [6]. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 5 of 28 
14. 
The 183-day test is generally relevant if you were not previously a resident and 
entered Australia during the income year. This test considers your length of stay in 
Australia, your usual place of abode and your intention to take up residency in Australia. 
For example, those on an extended holiday in Australia are not treated as residents merely 
based on the number of days present in Australia. 
15. 
You are a resident if you meet any one of the tests. It does not matter if you do not 
meet any of the other tests. You are not a resident if you do not meet any of the tests. This 
means that you must consider all applicable tests before concluding you are a 
non-resident. 
16. 
To determine your residency status, it is appropriate to look beyond the period you 
have spent in (or out of) Australia. Factors from the entire income year and surrounding 
income years10 provide more information to help determine whether you meet one of the 
residency tests. 
 
Ordinary concepts test 
17. 
Under the ordinary concepts test, you are a resident if you reside in Australia. 
18. 
The term ‘reside’ is not defined in the Australian income tax law and has its 
ordinary meaning. 
19. 
The ordinary meaning has been expressed as ‘to dwell permanently or for a 
considerable time, to have one’s settled or usual abode, to live, in or at a particular 
place’.11 
20. 
The ordinary concepts test is asking whether your presence in Australia is usual 
and settled in contrast to temporary and casual. This is informed by both the nature, 
duration and quality of the person’s physical presence and an intention to treat Australia as 
home.12 Factors that commonly inform the relevant association with Australia are: 
• 
period of physical presence in Australia 
• 
intention or purpose of presence 
• 
behaviour while in Australia 
• 
family, and business or employment ties 
• 
maintenance and location of assets, and 
• 
social and living arrangements. 
21. 
No single factor is necessarily decisive. The weight given to each factor varies 
depending on individual circumstances. 
 
10 The Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Applegate, Geoffrey David [1979] 
FCA 66 (Applegate); Clemens and Commissioner of Taxation [2015] AATA 124 (Clemens); Jaczenko and 
Commissioner of Taxation [2015] AATA 125 (Jaczenko); Koustrup and Commissioner of Taxation [2015] 
AATA 126 (Koustrup). 
11 See Commissioner of Taxation v Miller [1946] HCA 23; 73 CLR 93 at [99], per Latham CJ, citing Viscount 
Cave LC in Levene v Inland Revenue Commissioners [1928] AC 217 at [222], who cited the Oxford English 
Dictionary. 
12 Addy appeal at [76] per Derrington J; Hafza v Director-General of Social Security (1985) 6 FCR 444 (Hafza) 
at [449] per Wilcox J. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 6 of 28 
22. 
Many of the factors outlined in paragraph 20 of this Ruling are interrelated. For 
example, continued family connections are often also accompanied by assets in Australia 
(such as a house, furniture or a motor vehicle) and behaviour consistent with a familiar 
routine while in Australia. Temporary visitors often have few assets and few social 
connections. 
23. 
For these reasons, it is important to consider all the relevant connections together 
to inform the question of whether you reside in Australia. 
24. 
Because the ordinary concepts test asks whether you reside in Australia, having a 
connection to, or being a resident of another country does not necessarily diminish any 
connection to Australia.13 For this reason, the ordinary concepts test is not about 
dominance or exclusivity of residence in one place versus another. Nonetheless, continued 
connections overseas will inform the nature of your connection to Australia.14 
25. 
While physical presence is an important consideration, physical absence does not 
necessarily result in non-residence.15 It is well established in case law that a person does 
not cease to be a resident simply by absence; rather, the question is whether they have 
maintained a ‘continuity of association’ with Australia which is in turn established by 
considering their other connections to Australia.16 
 
Period of physical presence in Australia 
26. 
The period of physical presence or length of time in Australia is an important factor 
when considering whether you reside here, but it is not a determinative factor.17 
Importantly, there is a distinction between ‘staying’ in Australia and residing in it.18 Merely 
staying in Australia is normally insufficient. You must have some connection to Australia 
that characterises your presence as ‘residing’ in it. This will be informed by the other 
factors set out in paragraph 20 of this Ruling. 
27. 
Where your physical presence overlaps more than one income year, consider the 
full period of your physical presence in Australia. For example, if you arrive in Australia on 
1 April you may be regarded as a resident from the day of your arrival despite being in 
Australia for only 3 months of an income year if you exhibit the characteristics of a person 
residing here over the entire period of your physical presence in Australia. This may be the 
case where you are a migrant moving to Australia and your behaviour supports your 
intention to settle in Australia from the day you arrived.19 
28. 
Any limitations on your stay in Australia that are imposed by visas are relevant. 
Shorter visits to Australia will be less consistent with establishing residency, particularly if 
you hold a short-term visa. 
29. 
In many cases, a visit to Australia of less than 6 months is not sufficient time to be 
regarded as residing here. This is because a person does not usually establish a durable 
connection to Australia in this time. 
30. 
This, however, can be contrasted with a situation where a person has previously 
spent a long time in Australia despite only spending short periods in Australia in the 
relevant income year. In such a case, the shorter period of physical presence in Australia 
assumes less relevance if the person has retained a continuity of association with 
 
13 Pike at [57] and confirmed in Pike appeal at [16]. 
14 Addy appeal at [78], per Derrington J. 
15 Sneddon and Commissioner of Taxation [2012] AATA 516 at [49]. 
16 Hafza at [449]; see also Addy appeal at [74–75], per Derrington J. 
17 Case 35 14 TBRD 346 at [350]. 
18 Addy appeal at [83], per Derrington J. 
19 Gurney and Commissioner of Taxation [2020] AATA 3813. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 7 of 28 
Australia, or a particular place within Australia, together with an intention to return to 
Australia and an attitude that Australia remains their home.20 
 
Intention or purpose of presence 
31. 
Your intention, purpose or reason for being in Australia helps to determine whether 
you reside here.21 While you may have multiple reasons, there is usually a main purpose 
to your presence. 
32. 
A resident will usually have an intention to treat Australia, or a place within 
Australia, as a home at least for the time being, though not necessarily forever.22 
33. 
Thus, a settled purpose, such as pre-arranged long-term employment or a course 
of education, may support an intention to reside in Australia, particularly when coupled with 
other connections to Australia that are consistent with residing here.23 
34. 
Staying for the purpose of a short period of work is normally insufficient to establish 
that you are a resident of Australia.24 This would not normally demonstrate a connection to 
Australia that is consistent with residing here. Likewise, coming to Australia for a holiday 
would not normally demonstrate a connection to Australia that is consistent with residing 
here, even when supplemented by casual or short-term employment, and even when you 
spend considerable time in Australia. 
35. 
Subjective intention, while important, is not decisive and its weight will depend on 
the circumstances including the contemporaneity of the statement.25 Residency is not 
established merely by asserting an intention to live in Australia permanently. Similarly, 
residency is not shed when departing Australia, merely by asserting an intention to never 
live in Australia again. 
36. 
In assessing your intention or purpose for being in Australia, objectively observable 
factors and behaviours and contemporaneous statements about intent, such as those 
included on passenger cards26 and visa documents, are relevant (but not determinative). 
The type of visa you hold can also be evidence about your purpose for being in Australia.27 
37. 
We will also consider and give weight to objective circumstances surrounding your 
arrival or departure. This includes what pre-existing arrangements you had, what you take 
with you and what you leave behind. 
38. 
There may be a transition period. For example, you may hold a longer term 
intention to ultimately live overseas with your family, but circumstances mean your family 
will remain living in Australia and you will split your time between working overseas and 
regularly returning to Australia to live with them until those circumstances change.28 In 
such a case, you might remain a resident until the relocation is complete. 
 
20 Addy appeal at [76], per Derrington J. 
21 Gregory v Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation (WA) [1937] HCA 57; 57 CLR 774 (Gregory). 
22 Wilcox J in Hafza, M. v Director-General of Social Security [1985] FCA 201; (1985) 6 FCR 444 at [449], 
applying the concept explained by Williams J. in Koitaki Para Rubber Estates Limited v Federal 
Commissioner of Taxation [1941] HCA 13 (a business residency case for taxation purposes). 
23 Miesegaes v Commissioners of Inland Revenue (1957) 37 TC 493 – residency in the United Kingdom was 
found to be not only a part of but the central and essential feature during that phase of the appellant's life. 
24 Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Pechey 5 ATR 322; 75 ATC 4083. 
25 See for example Harding v Commissioner of Taxation [2018] FCA 837 at [43], confirmed in Harding at [61]. 
26 Addy appeal at [82]. 
27 Note, however, the criteria for determining residency for tax purposes are not the same as the criteria used 
to determine whether a person is an Australian resident for social security purposes as per the Social 
Security Act 1991 and those used by the Department of Home Affairs for the purposes of the Migration 
Act 1958. 
28 For example, while children are finishing school or your spouse completes an employment contract. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 8 of 28 
39. 
Where your intention changes, and you stay longer in Australia than initially 
intended, the facts surrounding the entire stay in Australia must be considered, not merely 
the original intended length of stay. For example, if during your stay in Australia you decide 
to migrate to Australia, you are regarded as resident from the time that your behaviour 
becomes consistent with residing here. 
40. 
Similarly, if you stay in Australia because you cannot or do not depart when you 
initially planned, you may continue to be a resident, or become a resident, while your 
behaviour is consistent with residing here.29 
 
Behaviour while in Australia 
41. 
Your behaviour relevantly includes the way you live as part of the regular order of 
your life. If the way you live reflects a degree of continuity, routine or habit, coupled with 
other factors such as intention, it may be consistent with residing in Australia. 
42. 
For example, if you enter Australia and take up long-term accommodation, 
employment, enrol children in school and take part in regular extracurricular activities, this 
would demonstrate behaviour consistent with residing here, particularly when coupled with 
other factors such as an intention to make your home here. 
43. 
Conversely, if you usually live overseas and, while in Australia, you travel around or 
display no settled routine or behaviour, or you have only a short period, or short periods, of 
settled routine or behaviour coupled with an intention to holiday in Australia before 
returning home to another country, you will likely not be regarded as a resident under the 
ordinary concepts test. 
44. 
Some individuals work in a number of countries during their careers. They often 
maintain a house in their country of domicile. However, for the period of their assignment 
in Australia, they live and work here. Their family often accompany them, their children 
attend school here and they may become involved in social activities while present in 
Australia. Although these individuals regard themselves as residing or permanently 
resident in their home country or may be regarded as residents of their home country for 
its tax purposes, their behaviour while in Australia may mean they are also residing here 
for Australian income tax purposes. 
45. 
When behaviour consistent with residing in Australia is demonstrated over a 
considerable time, you are regarded as a resident from the time the behaviour 
commences. 
 
Family, and business or employment ties 
46. 
The presence (or absence) of your family also informs the nature of your 
connection to Australia.30 The presence of immediate family in Australia is often 
accompanied by increased connections to Australia (including period of physical presence, 
assets such as a family home and motor vehicles, and an intention to return to a place you 
consider to be your home) and a settled routine consistent with residing in Australia.31 
 
29 Case 104 10 TBRD 299. 
30 Reid v The Commissioners of Inland Revenue (1926) 10 TC 673, Peel v The Commissioners of Inland 
Revenue (1927) 13 TC 443. 
31 See, for example, the facts in Pike appeal. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 9 of 28 
47. 
The term and type of employment or business association you may have will also 
be relevant, particularly as these will usually be accompanied by other factors such as 
physical presence and assets in Australia. For example, entering Australia to take up an 
employment contract or to set up a business often results in behaviour that indicates you 
reside here. 
48. 
While the test is about whether you reside in Australia, the presence or absence of 
family, and the extent of business or employment ties in the overseas country will be 
relevant in giving context to your connection to Australia. Business or employment ties 
overseas may be less significant if they can be, and are, performed from anywhere in the 
world. 
49. 
Generally speaking, working overseas but returning to Australia at intervals to an 
established family and social life will often mean you are still residing in Australia.32 This is 
the case even if you spend more time overseas than in Australia in any given income year. 
Usually, such an arrangement indicates you are residing in Australia and another country. 
Having an ongoing, deliberate connection to Australia even though you have a connection 
to another country through your work does not make you a mere visitor to Australia. In 
such a case, Australia is your home and you are properly regarded as residing here. 
50. 
This can be contrasted with a situation where you leave Australia to work overseas 
and shift your life overseas. For example, if you, and your family (if you have one), relocate 
overseas for work for some years establishing a permanent base and a routine overseas 
consistent with ‘living’ there, returning only occasionally for short stays while taking leave 
from work, then, depending on other facts and circumstances, you might not be a resident 
under the ordinary concepts test. 
 
Maintenance and location of assets 
51. 
Living in a property in Australia that you own or are purchasing suggests 
establishment of a home in Australia consistent with residing here. Other assets in 
Australia, such as motor vehicles, superannuation investments and bank accounts, add 
further weight to you having established behaviour consistent with residing here. 
52. 
The relevance and weight given to assets must be considered in your individual 
context. Both the significance of the assets to you and the reasons why they were acquired 
or maintained will be relevant. For example, opening a bank account in Australia may be 
no more than a mere convenience in which to deposit locally acquired earnings to fund a 
holiday. Australian bank accounts held open while you are located overseas could be 
consistent with maintaining a continuity of association with Australia, but could also be the 
result of there being no pressing reason to close them. 
 
Social and living arrangements 
53. 
Your social and living arrangements may indicate you are a resident, particularly 
when coupled with other factors. Social and living arrangements are the way you interact 
with your surroundings during your stay in Australia. These arrangements may include 
joining sporting or community organisations, enrolling children in school, redirecting mail to 
Australia or committing to a residential lease. 
 
32 Pike appeal. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 10 of 28 
54. 
It is the routine and habit associated with the social and living arrangements33 that 
is indicative of residency rather than the existence of hobbies and recreational pursuits 
themselves. 
 
Domicile test 
55. 
Under the domicile test, you are an Australian resident when your domicile is in 
Australia, unless the Commissioner is satisfied that your permanent place of abode is 
outside Australia. 
 
Domicile 
56. 
In Australia, the concept of domicile is governed by common law as modified by the 
Domicile Act 1982 (DA 1982).34 
57. 
Domicile considers whether there is a legal relationship between a person and 
Australia. There are 3 types of ‘domicile’: 
• 
A ‘domicile of origin’, which is attributed to each individual at birth.35 
• 
A ‘domicile of dependence’, which is relevant where a person (such as a 
minor) lacks capacity to acquire their own domicile and their domicile is 
determined by reference to someone else’s domicile (such as a parent). 
• 
A ‘domicile of choice’, which is the domicile a person, with the capacity to do 
so, acquires voluntarily. 
58. 
You always have a domicile and you can only have one domicile at any point in 
time. Your particular domicile continues until you acquire a different one, either by choice 
or operation of the law.36 You cannot abandon a domicile of origin without replacement.37 
59. 
To acquire a domicile of choice you must have both lawful physical presence in a 
foreign country and an intention to make your home indefinitely in that country.38 
60. 
When considering intention, we have regard to objectively observable conduct. 
While assertions of intention will always be relevant, if there is a difference between that 
assertion and the conduct, we may rely on the conduct.39 
61. 
Obtaining a visa to migrate to a particular country would be consistent with an 
intention to make your home indefinitely in that country. A working visa, even for a 
substantial period of time, would usually not be sufficient evidence of an intention to 
acquire a new domicile of choice. 
 
33 In Gregory, Dixon J said at [778]: 
The matters on which I place most stress in deciding this question of fact are his business interests and 
the necessity of his presence in Darwin and the fact that in dividing his attention between two businesses 
he gave as much or more attention to Darwin and the kind of social and living arrangements that he made 
in Darwin. 
34 For example, section 6 of the DA 1982 abolished the former common law rule whereby a married woman 
had at all times the domicile of her husband. 
35 In many cases, a person’s domicile of origin will be uncontroversial. The common law rule is that a person 
acquires the country of their father’s permanent home or their mother’s, if the father is deceased or unknown. 
36 Section 7 of the DA 1982. See also Henderson v Henderson [1965] 1 All ER179; Udny v Udny (1869) L.R.1 
Sc.& Div. 441; Bell v Kennedy (1868)] L.R.1 Sc.& Div. 307 (H.L.). 
37 Section 7 of the DA 1982, which abolished the rule whereby the domicile of origin revives upon the 
abandonment of a domicile of choice without a new domicile of choice. 
38 Section 10 of the DA 1982 states ‘[t]he intention that a person must have in order to acquire a domicile of 
choice in a country is the intention to make [their] home indefinitely in that country’. 
39 Hyland v Hyland (1971) 18 FLR 461 at [467]. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 11 of 28 
62. 
If you have an Australian domicile and you are living outside Australia, you will 
retain your Australian domicile if you intend to return to Australia on a clearly foreseen and 
reasonably anticipated contingency (for example, at the end of your employment contract), 
even if you stay overseas for a substantial period. This is because you lack the necessary 
intention to settle in that country indefinitely. On the other hand, if you only have in mind a 
vague possibility of returning to Australia, such as making a fortune or some sentiment 
about dying in the land of your forebears, such a state of mind is consistent with the 
intention required by law to acquire a domicile of choice in the foreign country.40 
 
Permanent place of abode 
63. 
An Australian-domiciled person is not a resident where the Commissioner is 
satisfied that the person’s ‘permanent place of abode’ is outside Australia. A person will 
have their permanent place of abode overseas where they have retained their Australian 
identity (as reflected in their Australian domicile), but: 
• 
have definitely abandoned their residency in Australia, and 
• 
commenced living permanently overseas.41 
64. 
It is not sufficient to have a place of abode outside of Australia; the relevant test is 
whether your permanent place of abode is outside Australia. 
65. 
The word ‘permanent’ does not have the meaning of everlasting or forever, but is 
used in the sense of being contrasted with temporary or transitory.42 
66. 
In this test, the expression ‘place of abode’ refers to the physical surroundings in 
which you live, extending to a town or country.43 Therefore, it is not necessary to be living 
in a particular dwelling in a certain way for your place of abode to be considered 
permanent, provided that the nature of your presence in a town or country is consistent 
with both abandoning residency in Australia and living in that town or country in a 
permanent way. 
67. 
The structure of the domicile test means you cannot have your permanent place of 
abode both in Australia and overseas.44 If you are living in both Australia and overseas, it 
is unlikely that it could be said that your permanent place of abode is overseas. 
68. 
However, if you move from country to country45 such that it cannot be said that you 
are living in a particular country in a permanent way, your permanent place of abode will 
not be overseas and you will remain a resident of Australia. This is regardless of whether 
or not you have any dwellings in Australia, or whether Australia more generally can be 
described as your place of abode. 
69. 
While the expression ‘place of abode’ may extend to a country, a pattern of 
frequently moving around within a country can indicate that you are travelling or have 
otherwise not commenced living permanently in that country. 
 
40 In the Estate of Fuld, decd. (No. 3) [1968] P 675, per Scarman J at [675] and [684–685] and Buswell v Inland 
Revenue Commissioners [1974] 2 All ER 520 at [526]. 
41 Harding at [40]. 
42 Applegate 79 ATC 4307 at [4314]; 9 ATR at [907]. Note, in this case the Federal Court found that the 
taxpayer's intention regarding the duration of the taxpayer’s stay overseas was only one relevant factor to be 
taken into account. Of more importance is the nature and quality of use which the taxpayer makes of a 
particular place of abode overseas. 
43 Harding at [40]. 
44 However note that in the context of the tie-breakers in the Double Tax Agreements, it is possible to have 
more than one ‘permanent home’. 
45 Handsley and Commissioner of Taxation [2019] AATA 917. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 12 of 28 
70. 
Working out your permanent place of abode is a question of fact determined in light 
of all your circumstances. It does not involve the application of any ‘hard and fast’ rules.46 
71. 
Relevant factors as to whether your permanent place of abode is overseas include: 
• 
length of overseas stay 
• 
nature of accommodation, and 
• 
durability of association. 
72. 
These factors should be considered together. As with the ordinary concepts test, 
the entire collection of facts and circumstances, including intention, conduct, actions and 
objective connections, must be considered holistically. 
 
Length of overseas stay 
73. 
The longer you stay in any one particular place, the more permanent it is likely to 
be. This is because of the practical reality that extended periods will usually and naturally 
lead to the formation of durable connections overseas and loosening of connections with 
Australia. 
74. 
Generally, a departure from Australia with an intention to return to Australia after a 
finite period would not result in you having your permanent place of abode overseas. This 
is consistent with the legislative intent of the definition.47 However, if some time through 
the period overseas your intentions changed, all the factors would need to be reconsidered 
at that point to determine whether your permanent place of abode is overseas. 
75. 
Similarly, if you take up an employment opportunity overseas or commence living 
overseas with no fixed timeframe in mind but as a tentative venture, you are unlikely to 
have your permanent place of abode overseas. This is because you are likely to retain 
Australia as your home, for a time at least, maintaining connections that are not consistent 
with an abandonment of Australia as your place of residency. Again, as intentions and 
situations evolve, the circumstances may later point to you having your permanent place of 
abode overseas. 
76. 
On the other hand, if you depart for an unspecified or substantial period, pack up 
your home in Australia, set up a home in a foreign country and live there with your family 
returning only occasionally such as for cultural events, special celebrations or annual 
leave, you are likely to meet the description of someone who has abandoned Australia as 
a place of residency and commenced living permanently overseas. This is despite the fact 
that you may at some point intend to return to Australia. 
77. 
For practical purposes, it is convenient to set some ‘rule of thumb’ on what 
substantial means. Broadly, 2 years is considered to be a substantial period of time. What 
this means is that if your intended length of stay is less than 2 years, you are unlikely to be 
able to establish that your permanent place of abode is outside of Australia. Whether a 
stay of precisely 2 years or longer means you fall within the proviso will depend on the 
circumstances. The critical question is whether a person has in fact abandoned Australian 
residency and commenced to live in a permanent way overseas. 
78. 
In each case there must be a careful consideration of the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the stay to assess the durability of the connection overseas, acknowledging 
 
46 Applegate and Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Jenkins (1982) 12 ATR 745; 82 ATC 4098. 
47 Explanatory Notes on Amendments contained in a Bill for an Act to amend the Income Tax Assessment Act 
1922-1929, page 10. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 13 of 28 
that ‘permanent’ does not mean forever and few people depart Australia with the intention 
of never returning. 
 
Nature of accommodation 
79. 
The type of accommodation and conditions upon which it is occupied will be 
relevant in ascertaining whether any place of abode overseas is your permanent place of 
abode. While it is not necessary to live in a particular dwelling in a permanent way, the 
accommodation provides a relevant indication of whether your presence overseas is 
permanent.48 Staying in temporary accommodation such as hotels, campsites, barracks, 
dongas, a ship cabin49, or accommodation arranged or owned by an employer on a non-
exclusive basis for the duration of your overseas stay usually indicates the presence 
overseas is not permanent.50 
80. 
Retaining your dwelling in Australia does not necessarily mean that you remain a 
resident. It will depend on the circumstances and reasons for its retention. To illustrate: 
• 
where you retain your home but lease it out to an arm’s length party, its 
retention will assume less significance 
• 
where you retain your home but only so your family can remain living in it 
while they make arrangements to join you overseas shortly, it will also 
assume less significance 
• 
however, the home in Australia will assume more significance where it is 
kept available for your use, you do in fact return to it and the 
accommodation overseas is consistent with a transitory stay. 
 
Durability of association 
81. 
The relative strength of the connections established and maintained overseas and 
of those retained in Australia will be relevant. As noted in this Ruling, the retention of the 
family home and a consistent return to it may indicate behaviour inconsistent with 
abandoning Australia and commencing to live permanently overseas. The location of 
family and social ties and their significance to you will also be relevant. 
82. 
Other factors, such as the location and maintenance of bank accounts, location of 
other assets, maintenance of professional registrations and licences, and recreational 
activities, will be relevant as forming part of the matrix of circumstances to be considered. 
 
 
48 For example, see Sanderson and Commissioner and Taxation [2021] AATA 4305 where the taxpayer was 
not found to have their permanent place of abode overseas. On each occasion the taxpayer returned to 
Malaysia (the overseas place), their assistant booked different hotels or serviced apartment 
accommodations according to the best rate available. The taxpayer would then stay there, vacating it each 
time at the time they left Malaysia. 
49 For example, see Duff and Commissioner of Taxation [2022] AATA 3675 where the taxpayer worked on a 
cruise ship on a basis of 4 months on, 2 months off. The taxpayer was found not to have their permanent 
place of abode overseas as that requires the identification of a single country in which the taxpayer is living 
or residing permanently as was established in Harding. 
50 A stay in short-term temporary accommodation as a precursor to finding suitable long-term or permanent 
accommodation would not normally indicate that the presence is not permanent. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 14 of 28 
183-day test 
83. 
Under the 183-day test, you are a resident if you have been present in Australia for 
183 days or more in an income year51, unless the Commissioner is satisfied that both: 
• 
your usual place of abode is overseas, and 
• 
you do not have an intention to take up residency in Australia. 
84. 
The proviso to the 183-day test reveals the purpose of this residency test. That 
purpose is to allow a certain length of presence to be relied upon to establish residency 
unless you are properly regarded as a visitor. A person on an extended holiday would 
ordinarily be regarded as such a visitor and not treated as a resident. 
85. 
While this is a separate test to the ordinary concepts test, it is often the case that if 
you are not residing in Australia under ordinary concepts, your usual place of abode will be 
outside Australia. 
 
Working out the 183 days 
86. 
In applying the 183-day test, it does not matter whether your presence in Australia 
is continuous or intermittent; rather, the total number of days in Australia are added 
together. For administrative ease, presence in Australia for part of a day counts as a whole 
day. 
87. 
The 183 days applies in relation to an income year (that is, 1 July to 30 June), not a 
calendar year. 
 
Usual place of abode outside Australia 
88. 
Your usual place of abode is the place you usually live or would live but for being 
absent from it due to, for example, a transient lifestyle or other temporary circumstances. 
Despite spending the majority, or even the whole, of the income year in Australia, you may 
still have your usual place of abode overseas. For example, if you have lived overseas for 
most of your life, travel to Australia to spend 18 months experiencing Australia in transient 
accommodation and employment, and then return overseas, you will still have your usual 
place of abode overseas. 
89. 
Given the more common situations in which this test applies, a person will usually 
have an ‘abode’ in the sense of a dwelling overseas. However, as with the domicile test, it 
is not necessary for a person, while in Australia, to have and maintain a physical dwelling 
overseas in order for their usual place of abode to be outside Australia. For example, if you 
rented accommodation overseas and terminated your rental agreement before coming to 
Australia, but you intend to return to the same town or country after your stay in Australia, 
your usual place of abode is likely to be outside Australia. Ultimately, it is a question of 
fact. In different circumstances, relinquishing a dwelling overseas may indicate an 
abandonment of the usual place of abode overseas. Therefore, in determining whether you 
have your usual place of abode outside Australia, examine the nature and quality of the 
use made of any place of abode you may have overseas52 and compare it with your living 
arrangements in Australia in deciding which is your usual place of abode.53 
 
51 184 days or more in a leap year. 
52 Commissioner of Taxation v Executors of the Estate of Santha Thevy Subrahmanyam [2001] FCA 1836 
(Subrahmanyam); Applegate. 
53 Subrahmanyam. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 15 of 28 
90. 
Relevant factors in considering whether your usual place of abode is outside 
Australia include: 
• 
where you lived before and after your time in Australia 
• 
the availability of your overseas dwelling to you (if you have one) while you 
were in Australia 
• 
where your possessions and assets are 
• 
the type of visa you have and the length of your intended stay 
• 
your purpose of coming to Australia, and 
• 
the travel arrangements you made, including whether you departed from 
and returned to the same place outside Australia.54 
91. 
If you come to Australia and sell your home and personal possessions in the 
country you came from intending to remain in Australia, it is unlikely your usual place of 
abode remains outside Australia. However, this needs to be considered in conjunction with 
the other factors outlined in paragraph 90 of this Ruling.55 Conversely, if you come to 
Australia for a certain period and have your overseas home available to you upon your 
return, and you do return to it, you are likely to have your usual place of abode outside 
Australia.56 
 
Intention to take up residence in Australia 
92. 
Even if the Commissioner is satisfied that your usual place of abode is outside 
Australia, you will still be a resident under this test unless the Commissioner is satisfied 
that you do not intend to take up residence in Australia. 
93. 
The term ‘residence’ in this part of the provision means tax residency. Therefore, 
‘intend to take up residence’ is a test concerning your future intentions to make Australia 
your home. 
94. 
It will commonly be the case that if your usual place of abode is overseas, you do 
not have the necessary intention regarding taking up residency in Australia. This aspect of 
the 183-day test does not treat as residents people who stay in Australia for longer than 
6 months but whose presence is as a visitor – that is, they do not intend to stay in Australia 
for a long period or to live in a way that would characterise them as residents. 
95. 
The Full Federal Court in Harding observed that even if a person stayed in 
Australia for a number of years, they may still not be a resident under this test.57 This 
illustrates that ‘intend to take up residence’ does not merely mean intend to stay for a long 
time. It means intending to live here in such a manner that you would reside here. 
 
Commonwealth superannuation fund test 
96. 
This test treats some Australian government employees working at Australian posts 
abroad (such as diplomats and officials of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade), 
and their spouses and children under 16 years old, as Australian residents. The test only 
applies to make resident members who are active members (that is, contributing, or are 
 
54 Jaczenko; Koustrup; Clemens. 
55 Subrahmanyam. 
56 Stockton v Commissioner of Taxation [2019] FCA 1679 (Stockton). 
57 Harding at [39]. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 16 of 28 
having contributions made on their behalf), to the Public Sector Superannuation Scheme 
(PSS)58 or the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme (CSS)).59 
97. 
The PSS and CSS schemes are now closed to new members. If you are no longer 
employed by the Australian Public Service, or you are engaged or appointed under an 
employment arrangement where superannuation contributions are made to a fund other 
than the PSS and CSS, then this test will not apply to make you a resident. 
 
Temporary workers and working holiday makers 
98. 
The residency tests set out in subsection 6(1) apply in the same way to temporary 
workers and working holiday makers. While residency turns on its facts, some 
observations can be made specific to these groups. 
 
Temporary workers 
99. 
Consistent with the observations outlined in paragraph 20 of this Ruling on the 
ordinary concepts and 183-day tests, short-term temporary workers (such as those 
working under the former Seasonal Worker Program (SWP)60 or the seasonal (short-stay) 
Pacific Australia Labour Mobility (PALM) scheme) are not usually residents of Australia 
under any of the residency tests. This is because they only stay in Australia for a short 
time and they do not establish a connection with Australia consistent with residing here 
during this time. 
100. 
Temporary workers in Australia working in the former Pacific Labour Scheme 
(PLS)61 or the long-stay PALM scheme may be resident depending upon each workers 
individual facts and circumstances. 
101. 
As noted in this Ruling, an extended stay of itself does not necessarily lead to the 
conclusion that a temporary worker is a resident under the ordinary concepts or 183-day 
tests. The domicile test would rarely be relevant to temporary workers. 
 
Working holiday makers 
102. 
A working holiday maker is not usually a resident of Australia under any of the 
residency tests, particularly where they enter and remain in Australia on a working holiday 
visa, or work and holiday visa, and leave at the end of (or before) that visa expiring.62 
103. 
As noted in paragraph 25 of this Ruling, it is not sufficient to merely ‘stay’ in 
Australia or even within one location in Australia for a certain period and with a certain 
routineness to be a resident under either the ordinary concepts or 183-day test. The 
entirety of a person’s facts and circumstances must be taken into account. Those facts and 
circumstances include the terms and conditions imposed by the visa and the purpose of 
the stay in Australia. Consistent with the purpose of the visa and the declarations made 
when applying for it, a working holiday maker’s purpose is to enter or remain in Australia 
 
58 For this purpose, the PSS does not include the Public Sector Superannuation Accumulation Plan (PSSAP). 
59 Second Reading Speech to the Income Tax Assessment Bill 1939. 
60 Workers in the SWP could stay in Australia and be employed for up to 9 months under the Temporary Work 
(Industrial Relations) visa sub-class 403. 
61 Workers in the PLS can stay in Australia and be employed for up to 3 years under the Temporary Work 
(Industrial Relations) visa sub-class 403. 
62 As was noted by Derrington J in Addy appeal at [81], having a holiday is generally antithetical to residency. 
This is also consistent with Steward J’s conclusion in that case at [305] ‘… I note that a holiday maker, even 
someone on a very extended holiday, would, generally speaking, be considered to be a visitor’. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 17 of 28 
as a genuine visitor with the principal purpose of having a holiday and while they may 
undertake employment, it is short-term employment to support that holiday. They usually 
have a home overseas to which they intend to return and do return. Their stay in and 
connection with Australia is usually temporary and associated with a break or a ‘gap year’ 
from their normal life overseas. Their accommodation is deliberately flexible, the work 
necessarily casual and their movements and behaviours are consistent with being a visitor. 
This behaviour and connection to Australia is not consistent with residing here according to 
the ordinary concepts test and would usually also result in the person falling within the 
proviso to the 183-day test.63 The domicile test would rarely be relevant to a working 
holiday maker. 
104. 
For a working holiday maker to be a resident further things which would make their 
connection to Australia more durable are required. This could include forming an intention 
and taking action to be able to remain in Australia permanently by obtaining sponsorship 
and obtaining a temporary activity visa. The working holiday maker would only become a 
resident when their intention and behaviours changed to live in Australia. 
 
Part-year residency 
105. 
If you are a resident under the ordinary concepts test, domicile test or 183-day test, 
and only spend part of the income year in Australia, you are not necessarily a resident for 
the entire income year.64 The commencement and cessation of residency depends on your 
facts and circumstances. 
106. 
The tax-free threshold will be pro-rated based on your part-year residency period.65 
This means the amount of the tax-free threshold will change. For example, if you became 
a resident during August and ceased to be a resident in March in the same income year, 
for the purposes of the tax-free threshold your part-year residency period is the period from 
the beginning of August until the end of March (a period of 8 months).66 
107. 
If you were a resident for at least one day during the income year, your income will 
be assessed at the rates applicable to residents.67 
 
Dual residency 
108. 
It is possible to be a resident for tax purposes of more than one country at the 
same time in respect of an income year or part of an income year. A double-tax agreement 
(DTA) may apply to allocate income to one or both countries and it may do this by 
allocating residency to one country for an income year or part of an income year, but only 
for that purpose under ‘tie-breaker’ tests.68 Even if a DTA allocates your residency to 
 
63 This is consistent with the Full Federal Court’s view in Addy appeal and the Federal Court’s view in Stockton. 
They are also consistent with a number of other Administrative Appeals Tribunal cases which held that a 
person on a working holiday visa was not a resident. This includes Dapper Coelho and Commissioner of 
Taxation [2020] AATA 2474, where 4 separate applications were heard together; MacKinnon and 
Commissioner of Taxation [2020] AATA 1647; Schiele and Commissioner of Taxation [2020] AATA 286; 
Clemens; Jaczenko and Koustrup. 
64 Addy appeal at [243] and [322]. 
65 Division 4 of Part II of the Income Tax Rates Act 1986. 
66 Apportionment of the tax-free threshold occurs on a monthly basis. 
67 Refer to the definitions of resident taxpayer and prescribed non-resident in subsection 3(1) and Part I of 
Schedule 7 to the Income Tax Rates Act 1986. 
68 The tie-breaker tests in Australia’s treaties are modelled on Article 4(2) of the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) Model Tax Convention though there are variances between treaties. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 18 of 28 
another country, you remain a resident of Australia for Australian tax purposes and will be 
taxed on that basis to the extent it is not inconsistent with the allocation rules in the DTA.69 
 
Self-assessment 
109. 
The structure of both the domicile and 183-day tests is such that a person is a 
resident unless the Commissioner is satisfied as to certain matters in the relevant provisos 
within the tests. While this reserves to the Commissioner the role of reaching the relevant 
state of satisfaction, in self-assessing your residency status, you should consider how the 
provisos would apply to you. Australia’s self-assessment system places responsibility on 
you to comply with taxation laws and in certain situations, such as this, you will need to 
make an assumption about the way in which the Commissioner would apply the residency 
tests based on your particular facts and circumstances. 
110. 
You should take a reasonable view of how the Commissioner will regard the 
matters in the proviso in accordance with the guidance provided in this Ruling.70 Where, 
for example, you have been in Australia for more than 183 days in an income year but you 
are on a holiday and will return to your home overseas at the conclusion of your holiday, 
you should self-assess as a non-resident. Where you are domiciled in Australia but 
consistent with the views expressed in this Ruling, it is likely that the Commissioner would 
consider that you definitely abandoned your Australian residency and commenced living in 
a permanent way in an overseas town or country, you should self-assess as a non-
resident. 
 
Examples 
Example 1 – person in Australia for 4 months – resident under ordinary concepts 
111. 
Bjorn, a promising mid-fielder from Sweden, is offered an 18-month contract to play 
soccer in Australia for a club in the National Soccer League. The club provides 
accommodation for Bjorn and his family. As Bjorn intends to remain in Australia for the full 
term of his contract, he leases his house in Sweden, sells his car and redirects the family 
mail to Australia. His children attend an Australian school and his wife and children 
become involved in sporting activities. 
112. 
However, Bjorn is having trouble acclimatising to Australian conditions. After 
withdrawing from yet another torrid session, Bjorn is put on notice to perform ‘or else’. 
Bjorn’s form continues to slide to the point that management seeks to terminate his 
contract on the grounds of non-performance. Bjorn’s contract is paid out for an agreed 
sum. Four months after arriving in Australia, Bjorn and his family return to Sweden. 
113. 
As Bjorn established that he intended to live in Australia for 18 months with his 
family and his behaviour over the 4 months is consistent with that intention, Bjorn resided 
in Australia from the day he arrived in Australia until the day he left. 
 
 
69 See section 4 of the International Tax Agreements Act 1953. 
70 Subsection 284-15(2) in Schedule 1 of the TAA provides that where the application of the law involves the 
exercise of a discretion by the Commissioner, the taxpayer has a reasonably arguable position if it is about 
as likely as not that the Court will decide that the discretion could be exercised in the way contemplated by 
the taxpayer. Taking this view will protect the taxpayer from penalty. This provision and its predecessor (the 
former subsection 222C(2) of the ITAA 1936) were introduced as a result of self-assessment. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 19 of 28 
Example 2 – person in Australia for 8 months – resident 
114. 
Giovanna, a solicitor, comes to Australia for 8 months on a secondment to a large 
law firm. Giovanna is single. While in Australia, Giovanna is under the direction of, and is 
paid by, the Australian entity. Giovanna enters a fixed lease for 6 months with an option to 
extend on a month-by-month basis near her workplace and joins the local bushwalking 
club. During her secondment, her sister visits Australia and stays with her. Giovanna joins 
her sister on a short break in Australia taking paid leave from her employment. 
115. 
Giovanna exhibits behaviour that is consistent with residing here. She establishes a 
connection to Australia during her 8 months in Australia. Her accommodation, work, social 
and hobby arrangements demonstrates that she resides in Australia according to the 
ordinary concepts test. 
 
Example 3 – person in Australia for 12 months – resident 
116. 
Michael is a South African orchestral conductor. He takes up the opportunity of a 
12-month contract with a professional orchestra in Adelaide. Michael’s wife and children do 
not accompany him to Australia but stay at the family home in South Africa. Michael brings 
his clothes, personal effects and a keyboard with him to Adelaide. While in Australia, 
Michael enters into a 12-month tenancy of a townhouse in the city. He spends his days 
rehearsing with the orchestra and going to the gym, and weekends performing concerts 
and playing the organ at a local church. His wife and children visit him over Christmas and 
they go on a short holiday to a beachside town. At the end of the 12 months, Michael 
returns to his family home in South Africa as he intended. 
117. 
Michael exhibits behaviour that is consistent with residing in Australia. He 
establishes a connection to Australia during his 12 months in Adelaide. His 
accommodation arrangements, work, social and sporting commitments demonstrate he 
resides in Australia according to the ordinary concepts test despite the fact that his wife 
and children stay in South Africa. 
 
Example 4 – person in Australia for 12 months – non-resident for the first 3 months, 
resident for a further 9 months under ordinary concepts 
118. 
Peta is an accountant living in and from Hong Kong. Her work does not involve 
travel. She is single and lives in Hong Kong with her parents. She accepts an offer from 
her employer to travel for 3 months to Australia to provide business advice to former Hong 
Kong residents setting up businesses in Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane. 
119. 
Peta enters Australia on 5 April, intending to spend 3 months travelling between the 
3 cities, staying in various motels. Toward the end of the 3 months, Peta’s employer asks 
her to take up a position in Sydney for a further 9 months. 
120. 
Peta accepts and, in early July, she leases a serviced executive apartment (near 
her workplace in Sydney) for 9 months. The apartment is her home base during her stay 
here. She freights more clothing and some personal effects to Australia. Her parents visit 
her on 2 occasions. Peta joins the local yoga studio. Although she is based in Sydney, her 
commitments require some limited travel. On average, Peta travels at least once a week to 
meet clients outside of Sydney. 
121. 
From 5 April until early July, Peta has not established a connection with Australia 
that is consistent with residing here under the ordinary concepts test. 
122. 
From early July, Peta’s connection to Australia alters. The lease of more permanent 
accommodation, as well as her new position in Sydney, indicates a more settled purpose 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 20 of 28 
for being in Australia compared to her first 3 months in Australia. Peta is regarded as a 
resident under the ordinary concepts test from early July. 
Example 5 – person in Australia for 9 months – non-resident 
123. 
Conchita is a wealthy businesswoman domiciled and living in Mexico. Each year 
she travels to Australia to inspect her numerous properties on the Gold Coast and to have 
a holiday. Depending on other business commitments, her stay varies from one month to 
3 months. During her recent visit, she decides to stay in Australia for 9 months at various 
resorts around the Gold Coast and the Great Barrier Reef. Her family does not accompany 
her and remains in their family home in Mexico. She uses the stay as an opportunity to 
recharge her batteries after experiencing an extended period of family problems. In 
addition, she is contemplating making some major investments and wants some 
preparation time. 
124. 
The main purpose of Conchita’s stay is to relax by having a holiday at various 
resorts around Queensland. This is a definite change or break in the ordinary habits of 
Conchita’s way of life. During her 9 months in Australia, she does not establish a 
connection with Australia consistent with residing in Australia under the ordinary concepts 
test. Her purpose and pattern of living are not to settle here for a period but to be a 
traveller on a holiday. She therefore is not a resident under the ordinary concepts test. 
125. 
Conchita’s domicile is Mexico, so the domicile test does not apply. 
126. 
While Conchita is in Australia for more than 183 days, her usual place of abode is 
in Mexico and she has no intention to take up residency in Australia, so she is not a 
resident under the 183-day test. 
 
Example 6 – person leaving Australia – non-resident when they depart 
127. 
Sophie, an Australian resident for tax purposes, decides to start her own business 
in Singapore. Sophie has spent several years researching Singapore and has spent a 
number of months there over the last few years meeting with prospective clients and 
investors and deciding if it is the right move for her. On one of these trips she locates 
suitable business accommodation and takes all the necessary steps to legally commence 
her business in Singapore. It is Sophie’s intention to live in Singapore with no set plans to 
return to Australia. She maintains a bank account and superannuation in Australia and 
sells or gifts her possessions to her adult children. One of her adult children will live in the 
family home rent-free. Sophie is accompanied by her spouse who runs a global consulting 
business from their home. 
128. 
They initially stay in short-term accommodation until they find a suitable long-term 
home. After 6 weeks, they purchase a home to live in. In the 2 years after leaving, Sophie 
and her spouse return to Australia only to attend the funeral of a close friend. 
129. 
Sophie is not a resident of Australia under the ordinary concepts test from the date 
of her departure. Her intention is to leave Australia indefinitely and her observable 
behaviours are consistent with this. Sophie’s remaining connection with Australia (her 
superannuation and assets) are not, in Sophie’s circumstances, consistent with continuing 
to reside in Australia. 
130. 
Sophie is not a resident under the domicile test because, although domiciled in 
Australia, she has abandoned residency in Australia and commenced living permanently 
overseas. 
 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 21 of 28 
Example 7 – person out of Australia for 2 years – resident under ordinary concepts 
and domicile tests 
131. 
Mark, an Australian-resident employee of a mining company, is transferred 
overseas to Brazil for a temporary work assignment for a period of 2 years. He intends to 
return to Australia at the end of that period. The purpose of the assignment is for Mark to 
gain wider work experience. Mark is initially accompanied by his wife and children to 
enable them to experience the sights and culture of Brazil. However, as originally intended, 
his wife and children return to the family home in Australia so the children can continue 
their schooling. Mark spends as much time in Australia as his leave arrangements permit 
with his family and friends. He also returns for short periods to celebrate family birthdays 
and other milestone events. While in Brazil, he stays in a serviced apartment provided by 
his employer, maintains bank accounts in Australia and continues to contribute to his 
Australian superannuation. He makes no investments in the overseas country and remits 
all money in excess of living requirements to Australia for his family to use or for 
investment. 
132. 
Mark is considered to be a resident of Australia under the ordinary concepts test as 
he has maintained a connection with Australia consistent with residing here, albeit being 
absent for a substantial period. 
133. 
Mark is also considered to be a resident under the domicile test because he has a 
domicile in Australia and his permanent place of abode is not outside Australia. Mark has 
not abandoned his residence in Australia given his continued presence to maintain his 
family life, his assets remaining in Australia and the finite period of his overseas 
assignment. His ties with Brazil are limited to his employment and his way of life reflects 
this. 
 
Example 8 – person out of Australia for 2 years – non-resident 
134. 
Matthew, an Australian-resident employee of the same mining company as Mark, is 
also transferred to Brazil in January for a temporary work assignment for a period of 2 
years, intending to return to Australia at the end. He is not accompanied by his wife as 
they have been having marriage difficulties and they have decided to spend some time 
apart. One month after Matthew’s departure, the marriage breaks down. Matthew is 
attracted to the culture and lifestyle of Brazil and decides to start a new life there, with no 
immediate plans to return to Australia to live. He starts exploring opportunities to gain a 
permanent position in Brazil and, in July, obtains a promotion to a permanent role in Rio de 
Janeiro. The role requires some regional travel but he spends the majority of his time at 
the office in Rio de Janeiro. In July, he also sells his car in Australia and starts the process 
of selling the family home in Australia that he owned with his wife. This takes 12 months to 
resolve. He remains in employer-provided accommodation until his Australian home sells 
and then uses his proceeds to purchase an apartment in Brazil, which he lives in. Matthew 
joins a Latin dance class in the evenings. He returns to Australia twice in 2 years – the first 
time is 3 months after his initial departure to collect his belongings after the separation 
from his wife. He takes most of these with him to Brazil but leaves a few keepsakes at his 
parents’ house. The second time, he returns for his father’s funeral, 2 years after his initial 
departure. His father leaves behind a family business and Matthew stays in a hotel in 
Australia while deciding what to do with the business. He works for his Brazilian employer 
remotely from the hotel. After a month in Australia, Matthew decides to resign from his job 
in Brazil and stay permanently in Australia to run the business. 
135. 
Matthew ceased to be a resident of Australia according to ordinary concepts once 
his intention regarding returning to Australia changed and his connections to Australia 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 22 of 28 
were severed. He then resumed Australian residency a month after his return to Australia 
following his father’s death. 
136. 
Matthew has an Australian domicile. Once his intentions changed and he 
purchased an apartment in Rio de Janeiro, he had definitely abandoned residency in 
Australia and commenced living in Brazil in a permanent way. He was therefore a 
non-resident under the domicile test from July until a month after his return to Australia 
following his father’s death. 
 
Example 9 – person out of Australia for 5 years – non-resident 
137. 
Alicia was born and grew up in Australia and is a professor at a university in 
Sydney. She takes up an opportunity as the head of the School of Economics at a 
university in Krakow, Poland on a 5-year contract, starting in September. Alicia intends to 
extend the contract if circumstances allow. Her husband and children join her in Poland in 
August. Prior to leaving, they sell their cars and some belongings and rent out their house 
on a year-by-year tenancy. They are given one month’s temporary accommodation on 
campus upon moving but soon purchase an apartment near the university which they 
move into. 
138. 
Alicia’s husband finds work at an accounting firm in Krakow and her children attend 
the local international school. Alicia and her family return to Australia each Christmas for 
one month to escape the cold weather in Krakow and visit extended family in Sydney, with 
whom they stay. 
139. 
Alicia is not a resident according to ordinary concepts from the time she leaves in 
August, as she severs her connection to Australia by making a long-term move overseas 
with her family. 
140. 
She is also not resident under the domicile test. Despite having an Australian 
domicile, she has definitely abandoned residency in Australia and her permanent place of 
abode is in Krakow. Although she has retained her house in Sydney, she has rented it out 
long term and has no access to it. Her trips to Australia are holidays to visit extended 
family rather than a resumption of living in her house in Australia. 
 
Example 10 – person out of Australia indefinitely – non-resident 
141. 
Brian, an Australian resident, is unhappy with his current lifestyle and wants to 
move overseas, closer to his extended family in Vietnam. In July, he applies for and is 
successful in gaining a permanent full-time position in Nha Trang, Vietnam and departs 
Australia to take up his new position. Brian’s family agrees to follow Brian to Vietnam in 
December when the children finish the school year, after which they will attend the 
international school in Nha Trang. Brian sells his car and other belongings and leaves his 
house for his wife and children to use until they move to Vietnam in December, after which 
he puts it on the market. In Vietnam, Brian rents an apartment that will accommodate his 
family when they move over to Vietnam. In the first 6 months away, Brian returns twice for 
a week at a time to visit his wife and children and help get the house ready for sale. During 
these visits, he resides with the family at their family home. 
142. 
Brian is not considered to be a resident of Australia from when he departs under 
the ordinary concepts test as he is not residing here and intended to leave Australia 
indefinitely. While Brian’s wife and children remain here, it is for a finite period of 6 months 
only and Brian’s return visits are limited and specific and not consistent with ongoing 
residency. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 23 of 28 
143. 
Brian is not a resident under the domicile test because, although domiciled in 
Australia, he has abandoned residency in Australia and commenced living permanently in 
Vietnam. 
144. 
Brian is not in Australia for 183 days so the 183-day test does not apply. 
 
Example 11 – person out of Australia indefinitely – resident under domicile test 
145. 
Stuart was born and raised in Australia. He separates from his spouse and moves 
out of the family home, leaving his 4 children in the care of his former spouse. He meets 
and forms a relationship with a Chinese national and visits her in China on many 
occasions. In time, he resigns from his employment in Australia and moves to Nanning, 
China, to take up a 3-month short-term employment contract and advance his new 
relationship. When this contract ends, Stuart takes up the following further fixed term, short 
to medium-term, employment contracts in various countries in Asia and moves apartments 
under the arrangements as outlined, to fulfil these roles: 
• 
Vientiane, Laos – 5 months – living in employer-provided furnished 
accommodation 
• 
Bangkok, Thailand – 18 months – living in a furnished apartment Stuart 
rents on a fixed 12-month term and then on a month-to-month basis, and 
• 
Phom Penh, Cambodia – 9 months – living in a furnished apartment Stuart 
rents on an initial 6-month term and then on a month-to-month basis. 
146. 
Stuart does not form any social or other ongoing connections in the places in which 
he undertakes the contracts. Once he leaves a country, he does not return other than for 
work. Sometimes his partner visits him and sometimes he visits her or spends time with 
her in the one to 2-months break he had between contracts. 
147. 
From time to time, Stuart returns to Australia, usually for his children’s birthdays or 
special events. On average, these visits are for a length of a week. When in Australia, he 
stays with his parents or friends as he no longer has any assets in Australia. 
148. 
Stuart is not considered to be a resident of Australia under the ordinary concepts 
test as he is not residing here and intended to leave Australia indefinitely. Stuart has not 
maintained a connection with Australia consistent with residing here and has worked and 
lived outside of Australia for most of the income year. 
149. 
Stuart is domiciled in Australia so he will still be a resident of Australia unless his 
permanent place of abode is outside Australia. Even though Stuart has abandoned his 
residency in Australia, he has not established his permanent place of abode outside of 
Australia, as evidenced by his shifting between a number of countries for employment 
purposes. Therefore, he is an Australian resident under the domicile test. 
150. 
Stuart is not in Australia for 183 days in any income year since his original 
departure so the 183-day test does not apply. 
 
Example 12 – person out of Australia for 6 months every year – resident 
151. 
Corey has an Australian domicile and an established home in Noosa, when he and 
his spouse establish a second home in Valencia, Spain. Corey and his family spend just 
over 6 months at the Spanish home and the rest of each year in their Australian home. 
152. 
Corey is a resident of Australia under the ordinary concepts test despite being 
absent for a large part of each year. This is because his intention and presence in 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 24 of 28 
Australia demonstrate a continued connection to Australia consistent with the regular order 
of his life. 
153. 
Under the domicile test, Corey is also a resident of Australia. He has an Australian 
domicile and it is not possible to say that his permanent place of abode is outside Australia 
as he has not abandoned residing in Australia. 
 
Example 13 – business migrant coming to Australia – resident 
154. 
Aiko applies for and is subsequently granted a 5-year Business Innovation and 
Investment (Provisional) visa enabling her to come to Australia to set up a new business. 
Her husband and children accompany her. On arrival in Australia in early January, Aiko 
sets up a bank account, acquires a car and rents an unfurnished home for 12 months for 
her, her husband and her 3 children to reside in. Her furniture and belongings are sent 
over from Japan and the children commence school in February. Aiko is an engineer and 
became a member of a professional association for engineers in Australia. 
155. 
To finalise business dealings with her former business in Japan, Aiko returns to 
Japan in February for 4 months to finish her contract. Her husband and children remain in 
Australia during this time. Aiko visits them twice in Australia for a one week visit. When she 
returns from Japan, Aiko commences an engineering business, involving her providing 
professional services to a range of clients in Australia. 
156. 
Aiko is considered to be a resident of Australia from when she arrives in Australia 
as she ordinarily resides here. It does not matter that she does not satisfy the 183-day test 
as she was in Australia for less than 183 days during the income year. 
 
Example 14 – person in Australia for 9 months – non-resident 
157. 
Alani comes to Australia from Papua New Guinea on a short-term visa to undertake 
seasonal work for 9 months. Under the terms of her visa, she will work picking fruit for 
short periods with a number of employers. Her employers provide her with 
accommodation. Alani’s family is not able to come to Australia with her and she does not 
establish social connections or routines while in Australia. When her visa expires, Alani 
intends to, and does, return to Papua New Guinea. 
158. 
Alani is not a resident for the period she is in Australia. She does not satisfy the 
ordinary concepts test as she does not form a sufficient connection with Australia 
consistent with residing here. She does not have an Australian domicile and although she 
is in Australia for more than 183 days, her usual place of abode is outside Australia and 
she does not intend to take up residency in Australia. 
 
Example 15 – working holiday maker in Australia for 12 months – non-resident 
159. 
Grace comes to Australia from the United Kingdom (UK) on a working holiday visa 
for 12 months. Under the terms of her visa, Grace can do short-term work to subsidise her 
holiday while in Australia. During her time in Australia, Grace takes up part-time positions 
at local cafés and pubs for 2 to 3 weeks at a time before moving to a different town to 
explore Australia. Grace intends to, and does, return to her home in the UK at the end of 
her working holiday. 
160. 
Grace is not a resident for the period she is in Australia. She does not satisfy the 
ordinary concepts test. Her behaviour is itinerant and consistent with being a visitor. She 
does not have an Australian domicile and although she is in Australia for more than 183 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 25 of 28 
days, her usual place of abode is in the UK and she does not intend to take up residency 
in Australia. 
 
Example 16 – working holiday maker planning to live in Australia – resident 
161. 
Megan is a nurse who comes to Australia in July on a working holiday visa. Once in 
Australia, Megan bases herself in Melbourne where she joins a share house and gains 
casual employment in hospitality. Megan meets a partner in Melbourne who is an 
Australian citizen and, in October, she decides she wants to remain in Australia 
permanently to pursue the relationship. Megan takes steps to satisfy the requirements to 
apply for a permanent skilled worker visa on the basis of her nursing skills so that she can 
live and work permanently in Australia. She also enters into a long-term lease of a 
townhouse with her partner and purchases furnishings for the home. 
162. 
Megan is a resident under the ordinary concepts test from October because her 
intention changes and from that date she forms a connection with Australia that is 
consistent with residing here, supported by objective factors. She also satisfies the 
183-day test from December because she is in Australia for more than 183 days in the 
income year, does not have a usual place of abode overseas and from October intends to 
take up residency in Australia. 
 
Example 17 – person in Australia takes a holiday overseas – resident 
163. 
Maria comes to Australia on a temporary activity visa and in time becomes a 
resident of Australia for tax purposes because her intention and circumstances changes. 
Soon after becoming a resident, Maria travels to Europe for 65 days to visit friends and 
family. When she returns, Maria continues to live in Australia. 
164. 
Maria is a resident from the time her intention and circumstances changes. The trip 
to Europe to visit friends and family does not alter her residency. 
 
Example 18 – working holiday maker stays in Australia – non-resident 
165. 
Ryan is a construction worker and comes to Australia from Ireland on a working 
holiday visa for 12 months. Under the terms of his visa, Ryan can do short-term work in 
Australia to subsidise the holiday. Prior to coming to Australia, Ryan was renting a home 
close to his work and parents. When his lease expired, he packed up his things, put them 
in storage and took 12 months unpaid leave from work. When he arrives in Australia, he 
stays in a hostel in Sydney for 2 weeks. Ryan moves into a house with work colleagues 
and has his name put on the lease agreement. Ryan quickly obtains employment as a 
labourer on a construction site where he works on a casual basis for 6 months. After this, 
Ryan travels to regional South Australia where he obtains work picking fruit for 3 months. 
He then spends the remaining 3 months of the year back in Sydney, working on-and-off for 
different construction companies. Nearing the end of his visa, Ryan decides to stay 
another year and is successful in applying for a second working holiday visa. Ryan keeps 
his belongings in storage but cannot get any further leave from his previous employment in 
Ireland so resigns from his job in Ireland. 
166. 
In his second year, Ryan bases himself in the South Australian riverland in a share 
house, which he rents with a friend on a 12-month lease and purchases the necessary 
items to furnish and live in a house. He works picking fruit and doing various other casual 
jobs, exploring the riverland and the coast in his time off. Ryan contemplates staying in 
Australia from time to time and makes some enquiries but does not apply for any other 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 26 of 28 
type of visa or otherwise seek to make his stay more permanent. At the end of the second 
visa, he decides to return to Ireland because he misses his family and friends. 
167. 
Ryan is not a resident of Australia under the ordinary concepts test. He does not 
establish a connection with Australia consistent with residing here as his purpose of being 
in Australia is not to settle here for a period but to be a traveller on a holiday albeit for an 
extended period of time. His pattern of living is consistent with being on an extended 
holiday. 
168. 
Ryan does not have an Australian domicile so this test does not apply. 
169. 
Although Ryan is in Australia for more than 183 days, his usual place of abode is 
Ireland and he does not intend to take up residency in Australia. Although Ryan has not 
maintained a physical dwelling overseas, he intends to return to the same town as 
evidenced by storing his belongings there and taking unpaid leave from his employment 
(while he could). 
 
 
Date of effect 
170. 
This Ruling applies to arrangements both before and after its date of issue. 
However, the Ruling will not apply to taxpayers to the extent that it conflicts with the terms 
of settlement of a dispute agreed to before the date of issue of the Ruling (see 
paragraphs 75 to 76 of Taxation Ruling TR 2006/10 Public Rulings). 
 
 
Commissioner of Taxation 
7 June 2023 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: not legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 27 of 28 
References 
Previous draft: 
TR 2022/D2 
 
Related Rulings/Determinations: 
TR 2006/10; TR 2018/5 
 
Previous Rulings/Determinations: 
IT 2650 (withdrawn); IT 2681 (withdrawn); TR 98/17 
(withdrawn) 
 
Legislative references: 
- ITAA 1936 6(1) 
- ITAA 1936 former 222C(2) 
- ITAA 1997 995-1(1) 
- TAA 1953 4 
- TAA 1953 3AA 
- TAA 1953 Sch 1 284-15(2) 
- Domicile Act 1982 6 
- Domicile Act 1982 7 
- Domicile Act 1982 10 
- Income Tax Rates Act 1986 3(1) 
- Income Tax Rates Act 1986 Sch 7 Pt 1 
- Income Tax Rates Act 1986 Pt II Div 4 
- International Tax Agreements Act 1953 4 
- Migration Act 1958 
- Social Security Act 1991 
- Superannuation Act 1976 
- Superannuation Act 1990 
 
Cases relied on: 
- Addy v Commissioner of Taxation [2019] FCA 
1768; 2019 ATC 20-719; 110 ATR 839 
- Bell v Kennedy (1868) 1 LR (NSW) 1Sc 
- Buswell v I.R.C [1974] 2 All ER 520; [1974] 1 
WLR 1631 
- Case 35 14 TRDB 346 
- Case 104 10 TBRD 299 
- Clemens and Commissioner of Taxation [2015] 
AATA 124 
- Commissioner of Taxation v Addy [2020] FCAFC 
135; 280 FCR 46; 2020 ATC 20-756; 382 ALR 
68; 171 ALD 144 
- Commissioner of Taxation v Executors of Estate 
of Subrahmanyam [2001] FCA 1836; 116 FCR 
180; 2002 ATC 4001; 49 ATR 29; 189 ALR 666 
- Commissioner of Taxation v Miller [1946] HCA 
23; 73 CLR 93; 8 ATD 146 
- Commissioner of Taxation v Pike [2020] FCAFC 
158; 280 FCR 429; 2020 ATC 20-764; 112 ATR 
285 
- Dapper Coelho and Commissioner of Taxation 
[2020] AATA 2474; 2020 ATC 10-543; 111 ATR 
926 
- Duff v Federal Commissioner of Taxation [2022] 
AATA 3675; 2022 ATC 10-652 
- Federal Commissioner of Taxation 
v Applegate [1979] FCA 66; 79 
ATC 4307; 9 ATR 899; 38 FLR 1; 
27 ALR 114 
- Federal Commissioner of Taxation 
v Jenkins 82 ATC 4098; 12 ATR 
745; 59 FLR 467 
- Federal Commissioner of Taxation 
v Pechey 75 ATC 4083; 5 ATR 
322; 5 ALR 352 
- Gregory v Deputy Federal 
Commissioner of Taxation (WA) 
[1937] HCA 57; 57 CLR 774; 4 
ATD 397 
- Gurney and Commissioner of 
Taxation [2020] AATA 3813; 2020 
ATC 10-549 
- Hafza v Director-General of Social 
Security [1985] FCA 201; 6 FCR 
444; 60 ALR 674 
- Handsley v Federal Commissioner 
of Taxation [2019] AATA 917; 2019 
ATC 10-495 
- Harding v Commissioner of 
Taxation [2018] FCA 837; 2018 
ATC 20-660; 108 ATR 137 
- Harding v Commissioner of 
Taxation [2019] FCAFC 29; 269 
FCR 311; 2019 ATC 20-685; 109 
ATR 579; 365 ALR 286 
- Henderson v Henderson [1965] 1 
All ER 179 
- Hyland v Hyland 18 FLR 461 
- In the Estate of Fuld, decd. (No. 3) 
[1966] 2 WLR 717 
- Jaczenko v Commissioner of 
Taxation [2015] AATA 125 
- Koitaki Para Rubber Estates 
Limited v Federal Commissioner of 
Taxation [1941] HCA 13; 64 CLR 
241; (1941) 6 ATD 82; [1941] ALR 
125 
- Koustrup v Commissioner of 
Taxation [2015] AATA 126 
- Levene v Inland Revenue 
Commissioners [1928] 1 AC 217 
- MacKinnon and Commissioner of 
Taxation [2020] AATA 1647; 2020 
ATC 10-534; 111 ATR 708 
- Miesegaes v Inland Revenue 
Commissioners (1957) 37 TC 493 
- Peel v The Commissioners of 
Inland Revenue (1927) 13 TC 443 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2023/1 
Status: not legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2023/1 
Page 28 of 28 
- Pike v Commissioner of Taxation [2019] FCA 
2185; 2019 ATC 20-730 
- Reid v The Commissioners of Inland Revenue 
(1926) 10 TC 673 
- Sanderson v Federal Commissioner of Taxation 
[2021] AATA 4305; 2021 ATC 10-598 
- Schiele and Commissioner of Taxation [2020] 
AATA 286; 2020 ATC 10-521; 111 ATR 434 
- Sneddon and Commissioner of Taxation [2012] 
AATA 516; 2012 ATC 10-264; 89 ATR 739 
- Stockton v Commissioner of Taxation [2019] FCA 
1679; 2019 ATC 20-713; 110 ATR 772 
- Udny v Udny (1869) LR 1 LR Sc & Div 441 
 
Other references: 
- Explanatory Notes on Amendments 
contained in a Bill for an Act to 
Amend the Income Tax 
Assessment Act 1922-1929 
- Macmillan Publishers Australia, 
The Macquarie Dictionary online, 
www.macquariedictionary.com.au 
- OECD Model Tax Convention on 
Income and on Capital (as it read 
on 21 November 2017) 
- PCG 2018/9 
- Second Reading Speech to the 
Income Tax Assessment Bill 1939 
 
 
 
ATO references 
NO: 
1-QMD7LEE 
ISSN: 
2205-6122 
BSL: 
IAI 
ATOlaw topic: 
Income tax ~~ Assessable income ~~ Residency ~~ Ordinary concept of 
residence 
Income tax ~~ Assessable income ~~ Residency ~~ Statutory tests 
International issues ~~ Residency and source ~~ Assessable income 
 
 
© AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE FOR THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 
 
You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as you wish (but not in any 
way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth endorses you or any of your services or 
products).