TR 2021/4 - Income tax and fringe benefits tax:
employees: accommodation and food and drink
expenses, travel allowances, and
living-away-from-home allowances
This cover sheet is provided for information only. It does not form part of TR 2021/4 - Income
tax and fringe benefits tax: employees: accommodation and food and drink expenses, travel
allowances, and living-away-from-home allowances
There is a Compendium for this document: TR 2021/4EC .
This document has changed over time. This is a consolidated version of the ruling which was
published on 24 April 2024
Generated on: 19 February 2026, 10:45:27 AM
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 1 of 28 
Taxation Ruling 
Income tax and fringe benefits tax: employees: 
• 
accommodation and food and drink 
expenses 
• 
travel allowances, and 
• 
living-away-from-home allowances 
 
 
Relying on this Ruling 
This publication is a public ruling for the purposes of the Taxation Administration Act 1953. 
If this Ruling applies to you and you rely on it, we will apply the law to you in the way set out in this 
Ruling. That is ,you will not pay any more tax or penalties or interest in respect of the matters 
covered by this Ruling. 
 
Table of Contents 
Paragraph 
What this Ruling is about 
1 
Ruling 
5 
Deductibility of accommodation and food and drink expenses – general principles 
5 
Living expenses – not deductible 
14 
Travelling on work – expenses deductible 
16 
Example 1 – no requirement to sleep away overnight – living expenses – food 
and drink expenses not deductible 
22 
Relevant factors – travelling on work versus living expenses 
24 
Personal circumstances 
25 
Example 2 – personal circumstances – living and working in different 
cities – accommodation and food and drink expenses not deductible 
28 
Example 3 – personal circumstances – travel between two regular 
workplaces – accommodation and food and drink expenses not deductible 
31 
Example 4 – travelling on work – work duties require frequent overnight 
travel – accommodation and food and drink expenses deductible 
36 
Living at a location 
38 
Change in regular place of work 
45 
Length of period away 
48 
Nature of the accommodation 
56 
Accompanied by family or visited by family or friends 
60 
Example 5 – living at a location away from usual residence – accommodation 
and food and drink expenses not deductible 
62 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 2 of 28 
Example 6 – travelling on work for three-week period – accommodation and 
food and drink expenses deductible 
66 
Example 7 – extended secondment in Australia – accommodation and food 
and drink expenses not deductible 
69 
Example 8 – period away from home extended unexpectedly – accommodation 
and food and drink expenses deductible for first part of trip – not deductible 
for the remainder of the trip 
72 
Relocation 
79 
Example 9 – employee relocated – accommodation and food and drink 
expenses not deductible 
82 
Example 10 – employee relocated – accommodation and food and drink 
expenses not deductible 
85 
Incidental expenses 
87 
Apportionment 
88 
Example 11 – business and private travel – employee accompanied by 
spouse – apportionment of expenditure 
90 
Accommodation expenses – additional property expenses 
95 
Example 12 – travelling on work – additional property expenses deductible 
103 
Substantiation for deductions claimed for accommodation and food and drink 
expenses under section 8-1 
109 
Exceptions from substantiation – reasonable amounts 
110 
Reimbursements, direct payments and allowances by employer 
113 
Reimbursements and direct payments 
116 
Travel allowances and LAFHAs 
120 
Travel allowances 
123 
LAFHA 
126 
Difference between a travel allowance and a LAFHA 
130 
Example 13 – travel allowance paid to employee 
134 
Example 14 – LAFHA paid to employee 
141 
Date of effect 
145 
 
 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 3 of 28 
What this Ruling is about 
1. 
This Ruling explains: 
• 
when an employee1 can deduct accommodation and food and drink 
expenses under section 8-1 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 
(ITAA 1997)2 when they are travelling on work, including where it is 
necessary to apportion3 
• 
the fringe benefits tax (FBT) implications, including the application of the 
‘otherwise deductible rule’4, where an employee is reimbursed for 
accommodation and food and drink expenses, or where the employer 
provides or pays for these expenses 
• 
the criteria for determining whether an allowance is a travel allowance (as 
defined in subsection 900-30(3)) or a living-away-from-home allowance 
(LAFHA) benefit (see section 30 of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment 
Act 1986 (FBTAA)) and the differences between them. 
2. 
Whether accommodation and food and drink expenses are deductible depends on 
the facts and circumstances of each case. This Ruling uses examples to show how to 
determine the deductibility of these expenses in a range of situations. 
3. 
This Ruling should be read in conjunction with: 
• 
Taxation Ruling TR 2020/1 Income tax: employees: deductions for work 
expenses under section 8-1 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997, which 
provides the foundation of general deductibility principles for work 
expenses5 under section 8-1 
• 
Practical Compliance Guideline PCG 2021/3 Determining if allowances or 
benefits provided to an employee relate to travelling on work or living at a 
location – ATO compliance approach, which sets outs the ATO compliance 
approach to determining if allowances or benefits provided to an employee 
relate to travelling on work or living at a location 
• 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/1 Income tax: when are deductions allowed for 
employees’ transport expenses? which provides guidance on when an 
employee can deduct transport expenses under section 8-1.6 
 
1 The meaning of ‘employee’ is explained in paragraphs 6 and 7 of Taxation Ruling TR 2005/16 Income tax: 
Pay As You Go – withholding from payments to employees: 
6. The term ‘employee’ is not defined in the [Taxation Administration Act 1953 (TAA 1953)]. For the 
purposes of withholding under section 12-35 [of Schedule 1 to the TAA 1953] the word ‘employee’ has its 
ordinary meaning. 
7. Whether a person is an employee of another is a question of fact to be determined by examining the 
terms and circumstances of the contract between them having regard to the key indicators expressed in the 
relevant case law. Defining the contractual relationship is often a process of examining a number of factors 
and evaluating those factors within the context of the relationship between the parties. No one indicator of 
itself is determinative of that relationship. The totality of the relationship between the parties must be 
considered. 
2 All legislative references in this Ruling are to the ITAA 1997 unless otherwise indicated. 
3 See paragraphs 13, 16 to 23 and 88 to 94 of this Ruling. 
4 The ‘otherwise deductible’ rule allows the employer to reduce the taxable value of fringe benefits by the 
amount for which the employee would be able to claim a once only deduction. To the extent that an expense 
is otherwise deductible, the taxable value of the benefit is reduced, which reduces the employer’s potential 
liability to FBT. 
5 As defined in subsection 900-30(1). 
6 Whether transport expenses and accommodation, food and drink expenses are deductible is determined in 
accordance with section 8-1. This Ruling has been developed separately to TR 2021/1 because the case law 
regarding these expenses raises different factors that need to be considered when determining if they are 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 4 of 28 
4. 
This Ruling does not address travel, accommodation and food and drink expenses 
relating to self-education or study. Refer to Taxation Ruling TR 98/9 Income tax: 
deductibility of self-education expenses incurred by an employee or a person in business.7 
 
Ruling 
Deductibility of accommodation and food and drink expenses – general principles 
5. 
An employee can only deduct accommodation and food and drink expenses under 
section 8-1 to the extent that8: 
• 
they incur the expense in gaining or producing their assessable income9 
• 
the expense is not of a capital, private or domestic nature 
• 
the expense is not incurred in gaining or producing exempt income or 
non-assessable non-exempt income, and 
• 
a provision of the Act10 does not prevent it from being deducted.11 
6. 
If the expense an employee incurs on accommodation and food and drink meets 
the requirements of section 8-1, the applicable substantiation requirements12 must also be 
satisfied for the employee to claim the expense as a deduction.13 
7. 
The term ‘incurred in gaining or producing assessable income’ means incurred ‘in 
the course of gaining or producing assessable income’.14 For an expense to be incurred in 
gaining or producing assessable income, it is both sufficient and necessary that the 
occasion of the expense should be found in whatever is productive of assessable 
income.15 
8. 
When determining what is productive of an employee’s assessable income, 
consideration should be given to the scope of the employee’s income-producing 
activities.16 
9. 
Accommodation and food and drink expenses are ordinarily private or domestic in 
nature17 and are generally not deductible under section 8-1.18 This includes the costs an 
 
deductible. There are situations where transport expenses are deductible and the accommodation and food 
and drink expenses are not deductible and vice versa. 
7 Refer to paragraphs 63 to 70, and 88 to 110, of TR 98/9. 
8 See TR 2020/1 for a detailed discussion on when a work expense is deductible under section 8-1. 
9 This Ruling assumes that the income from the employment is assessable income of the employee. 
10 ‘Act’ in this context means the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) and the ITAA 1997. 
11 This Ruling does not address expenses incurred in gaining or producing exempt income, non-assessable 
non-exempt income or provisions of the Act that prevent accommodation and food and drink expenses from 
being deducted. 
12 Division 900, in particular section 900-15. 
13 Refer to paragraphs 109 to 112 of this Ruling. 
14 Commissioner of Taxation v Payne [2001] HCA 3 (Payne). 
15 Payne; Ronpibon Tin NL v Commissioner of Taxation [1949] HCA 15 (Ronpibon); Commissioner of Taxation 
v Day [2008] HCA 53 (Day). If no assessable income is produced, the occasion of the expense should be 
found in what would be expected to produce assessable income. 
16 Refer to paragraph 18 of this Ruling for further information on what to consider when determining the scope 
of an employee’s income-producing activities. 
17 Commissioner of Taxation v. Cooper, R.J. [1991] FCA 190 (Cooper). 
See also paragraphs 46 and 47 of TR 2020/1 for more information on private and domestic expenses. 
18 Cooper; and Commissioner of Taxation v Forsyth (Cth) [1981] HCA 15 (Forsyth). 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 5 of 28 
employee incurs to maintain their usual residence19 and of consuming food and drink to go 
about their daily activities. For the purposes of this Ruling, such expenses will be referred 
to as ‘living expenses’. 
10. 
However, where an employee travels and stays away from their usual residence 
overnight20 in the course of performing their income-producing activities and incurs 
accommodation and food and drink expenses, these expenses will generally be deductible 
under section 8-1.21 For the purposes of this Ruling, an employee who stays away from 
their usual residence overnight in the course of performing their income-producing 
activities will be referred to as ‘travelling on work’. 
11. 
Conversely, a deduction cannot be claimed for food and drink expenses when the 
employee does not travel and stay away from their ordinary residence overnight. This is 
supported by the statements of Hill J in Cooper and Roads and Traffic22. In Cooper, Hill J 
stated: 
Food and drink are ordinarily private matters, and the essential character of expenditure on 
food and drink will ordinarily be private rather than having the character of a working or 
business expense. However, the occasion of the outgoing may operate to give the 
expenditure on food and drink the essential character of a working expense in cases such 
as those illustrated of work related entertainment or expenditure incurred while away from 
home. No such circumstance, however, intervenes here. 
12. 
In Roads and Traffic, Hill J stated the following regarding the deductibility of food 
and drink: 
Where a taxpayer is required by his employer, and for the purposes of his employer, to 
reside, for periods at a time, away from home and at the work site, and that employee 
incurs expenditure for the cost of sustenance, or indeed other necessary expenditure which, 
if the taxpayer had been living at home, would clearly be private expenditure, the 
circumstance in which the expenditure is incurred, that is to say, the occasion of the 
outgoing operates to stamp that outgoing as having a business or employment related 
character. 
13. 
In relying on those leading cases, it was held in Fardell and Commissioner of 
Taxation 23: 
… if the Applicant is entitled to a deduction for meals he can be so entitled only when on a 
trip which required him to sleep away from home. In the absence of such a requirement, the 
expenditure must necessarily be regarded as private in nature. 
Living expenses – not deductible 
14. 
Living expenses are a prerequisite to gaining or producing an employee’s 
assessable income and are not incurred in performing an employee’s income-producing 
 
19 The term ‘ordinary residence’ is used for income tax purposes – see the definition of travel allowance in 
subsection 900-30(3). ‘Normal residence’ is used for FBT purposes – see section 30 of the FBTAA and the 
definition in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA. An ‘ordinary residence’ and a ‘normal residence’ can also be 
described as a ‘usual residence’ or an employee’s home. These terms are interchangeable so for the 
purposes of this Ruling, the term ‘usual residence’ has been used to describe an employee’s ‘ordinary 
residence’, ‘normal residence’, ‘usual residence’ and home. An employee’s ordinary residence, normal 
residence, usual residence or home is the place where they normally reside and is generally located close to 
where they are permanently employed. 
20 Staying away from home overnight includes an employee taking their major rest break away from home. 
This includes employees who do not necessarily sleep while working overnight. 
21 The Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v. Commissioner of Taxation [1993] FCA 445 (Roads 
and Traffic). 
22 [1993] FCA 445. 
23 Fardell and Commissioner of Taxation [2011] AATA 725 at [45] (Fardell). 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 6 of 28 
activities. Living expenses are also private or domestic in nature.24 This means that even if 
these expenses were incurred in gaining or producing assessable income, they still would 
not be deductible due to the application of paragraph 8-1(2)(b). 
15. 
While living expenses must be incurred before any assessable income can be 
derived, a loss or outgoing is not incurred in gaining or producing an employee’s 
assessable income merely because it is necessary. This is particularly relevant to living 
expenses.25 A person must eat and sleep somewhere, whether or not they engage in 
employment.26 
 
Travelling on work – expenses deductible 
16. 
To be deductible, the accommodation and food and drink expenses must have a 
sufficiently close connection to the performance of the employment duties and activities 
through which the employee earns income. It will not be enough to show some general link 
or causal connection between the expenditure and the production of income.27 
17. 
The occasion of the outgoing on accommodation and food and drink must be found 
in the employee’s income-producing activities, rather than in the personal circumstances of 
where the employee lives.28 
18. 
The scope of an employee’s income-producing activities is a question of fact and 
degree and is not confined to the day-to-day activities performed by the employee. It 
requires consideration of the employment contract along with: 
• 
the duties to be observed, and 
• 
the tasks to be performed29 
by the employee (which may extend beyond what is contained in the employment 
contract). 
19. 
If an employee is required by their employer, as an incident of their employment 
(that is, the duties of employment), to stay away from their usual residence overnight for 
relatively short periods of time, the employee will be travelling on work and the occasion of 
the outgoing on accommodation and food and drink will generally be found in the 
employee’s income-producing activities.30 
20. 
Conversely, where the accommodation and food and drink expenses are incurred 
because the employee’s personal circumstances are such that they live far away from 
where they gain or produce their assessable income, the occasion of the outgoing will not 
be found in the employee’s income-producing activities.31 
21. 
Travelling on work does not describe the activities of employees who: 
• 
are not required to sleep away from their usual residence overnight in the 
course of performing their income-producing activities32, or 
 
24 Cooper; Handley v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) [1981] HCA 16 (Handley), and Commissioner of 
Taxation (Cth) v Forsyth [1981] HCA 15 (Forsyth). 
25 Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) v Green [1950] HCA 20 (Green). 
26 Ricketts v Colquhoun [1926] AC 1; Hancox v Commissioner of Taxation [2013] FCA 735 (Hancox). 
27 Roads and Traffic. 
28 See paragraphs 25 to 37 of this Ruling. 
29 Day. 
30 Cooper, per Hill J, and Roads and Traffic. 
31 Cooper, per Hill J, and Roads and Traffic. 
32 Cooper, Roads and Traffic, and Fardell. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 7 of 28 
• 
choose to sleep near their workplace, rather than returning to their usual 
residence between their work shifts (see paragraphs 25 to 37 of this Ruling). 
 
Example 1 – no requirement to sleep away overnight – living expenses – food and 
drink expenses not deductible 
22. 
Mal lives in Hobart and works for an engineering firm. On occasion, Mal flies to 
Melbourne for meetings with clients. When he is required to attend such a meeting, Mal 
catches an early flight to Melbourne and returns to Hobart later the same day. Mal’s 
employer pays him an allowance to cover the cost of his food and drink while he is in 
Melbourne. 
23. 
The allowance Mal receives must be included in his assessable income. The 
expenditure Mal incurs on food and drink is not incurred in the course of gaining or 
producing his assessable income. The expenses are living expenses. Accordingly, Mal is 
not entitled to a deduction for the cost of the food and drink he incurs while he is in 
Melbourne. 
 
 
Relevant factors – travelling on work versus living expenses 
24. 
If any of the following factors apply, the employee will not be travelling on work and 
the accommodation and food and drink expenses incurred will be living expenses: 
• 
The expenses are incurred because the employee’s personal circumstances 
are such that they live far away from where they gain or produce their 
assessable income33 (personal circumstances – see paragraphs 25 to 37 of 
this Ruling). 
• 
The employee incurs the expenses because they are living at a location34 
(living at a location – see paragraphs 38 to 78 of this Ruling). 
• 
The employee incurs the expenses as a result of relocating from their usual 
residence (relocation – see paragraphs 79 to 86 of this Ruling). 
 
Personal circumstances 
25. 
An employee cannot deduct accommodation and food and drink expenses they 
have incurred where, due to their personal circumstances, they live far away from where 
they gain or produce their assessable income.35 These expenses are living expenses and 
are not deductible (see paragraphs 9, 14 and 15 of this Ruling). 
26. 
In these circumstances, the expenses are incurred because the employee’s 
personal circumstances are such that they keep their usual residence, rather than relocate. 
The occasion of the outgoing for accommodation and food and drink is not found in the 
employee’s income-producing activities, meaning that these expenses are not incurred in 
 
33 Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Charlton 84 ATC 4415 (Charlton), Commissioner of Taxation v Toms, 
A.J. [1989] FCA 153 (Toms), Hancox, and Ricketts v Colquhoun [1926] AC 1. 
34 This Ruling refers to the phrase ‘living at a location’ to describe the situations where an employee is living at 
a location away from their usual residence. It is different to the phrase ‘living away from home’ used later in 
this Ruling, which is defined in section 30 of the FBTAA. 
35 Charlton, Toms, and Hancox. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 8 of 28 
the course of gaining or producing the employee’s assessable income. They are private 
and domestic in nature. 
27. 
This also applies where an employee regularly works at a particular location36 for 
one or more days each week. A particular location where an employee works regularly is a 
regular place of work. 
 
Example 2 – personal circumstances – living and working in different cities – 
accommodation and food and drink expenses not deductible 
28. 
Michelle lives in Brisbane with her family. Michelle accepts a job in Canberra. Early 
on a Monday morning, Michelle catches a flight to Canberra and on Friday afternoon she 
returns by plane to Brisbane. On Monday to Thursday nights, Michelle stays in a serviced 
apartment. Sometimes she buys groceries and cooks for herself and sometimes she eats 
out. 
29. 
The occasion of the outgoings is not explained by Michelle’s employment. Rather, it 
is explained by her personal circumstances of living in Brisbane while working in Canberra. 
The expenses Michelle incurs are private and domestic in nature. 
30. 
Accordingly, Michelle is not entitled to a deduction for the amount she spends on 
renting the serviced apartment, the groceries she buys or the food and drink she 
purchases when she eats out.37 
 
Example 3 – personal circumstances – travel between two regular workplaces – 
accommodation and food and drink expenses not deductible 
31. 
Sue lives with her family in Sydney. Sue takes on a leadership role with a company 
that has offices all around Australia. The role is based in Melbourne. Sue’s arrangement 
with her employer is that she must attend the Melbourne office at least three days per 
week, but at her discretion, she can work out of the Sydney office, at another office, or 
from home up to two days per week. Because Sue lives in Sydney, her personal 
circumstances allow her to work at the Sydney office two days per week for her 
convenience. Sue’s duties do not require her to work in the Sydney office. 
32. 
The occasion of Sue’s travel to Melbourne and her accommodation and food and 
drink expenses are not explained by Sue’s employment duties but rather her personal 
circumstances. Instead of relocating her usual residence to Melbourne, Sue’s personal 
circumstances allow her to continue living in Sydney with her family as she has negotiated 
an arrangement whereby she can work from Sydney as a matter of convenience. 
Accordingly, the expenditure that Sue incurs on accommodation, food and drink when she 
travels to and stays in Melbourne is not deductible. 
 
 
33. 
Where the occasion of the expenditure on accommodation and food and drink can 
be found in the employee’s income-producing activities, rather than their personal 
circumstances, the employee will be travelling on work. Expenses incurred by an 
 
36 See footnote 44 of this Ruling for what a ‘regular place of work’ is. 
37 If Michelle received an allowance from her employer for accommodation and food and drink expenses, it 
would not be a LAFHA under section 30 of the FBTAA. It is not Michelle’s duties of employment that require 
her to live away from her usual residence, it is her personal circumstances such that she has accepted a job 
elsewhere. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 9 of 28 
employee travelling on work will be incurred in gaining or producing the employee’s 
assessable income and will be deductible. 
34. 
As stated at paragraph 10 of this Ruling, where an employee travels and stays 
away from their usual residence overnight in the course of performing their 
income-producing activities, they will be travelling on work. Whether an employee travels 
and sleeps away from their usual residence overnight is a question of fact to be 
determined on a case by case basis. 
35. 
The distance between the employee’s usual residence / regular place of work and 
the location they are travelling to for work is just one factor to be considered when 
determining whether an employee travels and sleeps away overnight. Accordingly, the 
distances used in the examples in this Ruling are for illustrative purposes only. 
 
Example 4 – travelling on work – work duties require frequent overnight travel – 
accommodation and food and drink expenses deductible 
36. 
Len lives with his family in Perth and works as a sales manager for a company that 
has offices all around Australia and operates nationally. Under the terms of his 
employment agreement, Len’s regular place of work is his employer’s Perth office, but he 
is also responsible for the other three offices located in Western Australia. Each of those 
other three offices are located at least 200 kilometres from where Len lives so Len travels 
and stays overnight the night before he visits them. Len visits the offices located outside 
Perth regularly for meetings, performance appraisals and to ensure the offices are meeting 
sales targets. He also travels to the head office in Melbourne once a month for meetings 
with sales managers from other regions. Len incurs expenditure on accommodation and 
food and drink when he visits the three offices located outside Perth and when he travels 
to Melbourne. 
37. 
In this case, as Len’s employment duties require him to travel to different offices, 
the expenditure he incurs on accommodation and food and drink while he is travelling to 
those other offices is incurred in the course of performing his employment duties. The 
expenditure is not incurred as a consequence of Len’s personal circumstance that he lives 
in Perth. The occasion of the travel and his expenditure on accommodation and food and 
drink is explained by his income-producing activities. Accordingly, Len is entitled to a 
deduction for his expenditure on accommodation and food and drink when he travels away 
from his usual residence overnight for work purposes.38 
 
 
Living at a location 
38. 
Whether accommodation and food and drink expenses are incurred in gaining or 
producing assessable income is a question of fact. 
39. 
An employee who incurs expenditure on accommodation and food and drink in the 
course of performing their income-producing activities is likely to be travelling on work and 
the expenses will be deductible (see paragraphs 10 and 16 to 23 of this Ruling). 
 
38 If Len receives an allowance from his employer to cover his accommodation and meals, he must declare the 
allowance as assessable income. Len must also obtain and keep substantiation records that meet the 
requirements in Division 900 unless he meets the exception from keeping substantiation records in 
section 900-50. Even if Len does meet the exception from substantiation, he will still need to be able to 
demonstrate that he incurred deductible expenses. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 10 of 28 
40. 
However, where an employee is living at a location away from their usual 
residence39, their accommodation and food and drink expenses are living expenses and 
will not be deductible even if the employee is living at that location due to their employment 
(see paragraphs 9, 14 and 15 of this Ruling). 
41. 
This is because, where the location at which the employee works has become their 
new regular place of work, the accommodation and food and drink expenses are not an 
incident of their income-earning activity. Rather, the employee’s personal circumstances 
are such that their usual residence is not located near their new workplace. Consequently, 
the employee is living at a location away from their usual residence and their 
accommodation and food and drink expenses will not be deductible. 
42. 
The following factors would support a characterisation of an employee as living at a 
location away from their usual residence: 
• 
there is a change in the employee’s regular place of work40 
• 
the length of the overall period the employee will be away from their usual 
residence is a relatively long one41 
• 
the nature of the accommodation is such that it becomes their usual 
residence42 
• 
whether the employee is, or can be, accompanied by family or visited by 
family and friends. 
43. 
An employer will generally provide accommodation and food and drink or pay the 
employee an allowance (see paragraphs 120 to 144 of this Ruling) to cover the additional 
living expenses the employee might reasonably be expected to incur where they are 
required to live at a location away from their usual residence to perform their duties.43 An 
employer may also reimburse the employee for the expenditure they have incurred on 
accommodation and food and drink (see paragraphs 116 to 119 of this Ruling). 
44. 
All the factors in paragraph 42 of this Ruling should be considered and no single 
factor is necessarily decisive. The weight given to each factor will vary depending on the 
employee’s individual circumstances and is not a mathematical process. Reaching a 
conclusion as to whether an employee is living at a location away from their usual 
residence is a matter of judgment which requires a holistic assessment based on a 
consideration of all the factors (see Examples 5, 6, 7 and 8 of this Ruling). 
 
39 See the factors at paragraph 42 of this Ruling. 
40 See paragraph 26 of TR 2021/1 and footnote 44 of this Ruling. Also, in Roads and Traffic, Hill J states: 
An employee who had no private home and was employed indefinitely to work at a particular site and did 
in fact work for the whole of his employment at that site, might be said to have chosen to live at the site so 
that the cost of his accommodation there would be private. 
Of note, whether an employee has, or does not have, a private home is of no weight for the purposes of this 
Ruling. 
41 See Hill J in Roads and Traffic, where one of the factors used in determining that the relevant expenses 
incurred were deductible by the employee was that: 
… they are required, as an incident of their employment, by their employer and for the purposes of the 
employer to live close by their work site for relatively short periods of time. 
Given that a short period of time was a factor Hill J used in making a decision that the relevant expenses 
were deductible, conversely the longer the period of time the employee is living at a location away from their 
usual residence means the more likely relevant expenses will not be deductible. Of note, in Roads and 
Traffic, Hill J was considering whether the amounts in question were deductible amounts such that the 
benefit in question was excluded from the category of LAFHA benefits under subsection 30(1) of the FBTAA. 
42 See footnote 40 of this Ruling. 
43 Where the employer provides such benefits or allowances the taxable value of them may be reduced to nil. 
For example, a LAFHA under section 30 of the FBTAA or the accommodation may be an exempt residual 
benefit under subsection 47(5) of the FBTAA. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 11 of 28 
Change in regular place of work 
45. 
Where there is a change in the employee’s regular place of work44 and the 
employee incurs accommodation and food and drink expenses to be closer to their new 
regular place of work, the employee will be living at that new location away from their usual 
residence (see Examples 5 and 7 of this Ruling). In these circumstances, the expenses 
incurred are living expenses and are not deductible (see paragraphs 9, 14 and 15 of this 
Ruling). 
46. 
Conversely, where there is no change in the employee’s regular place of work and 
the employee incurs accommodation and food and drink expenses when they temporarily 
attend and stay overnight at another location in the course of carrying out their 
income-producing activities, the employee will not be living at the location they visit and 
work at temporarily. In these circumstances the employee will be travelling on work. In 
other words, their regular place of work and usual residence is retained, and the employee 
returns to them after being away for a relatively short period of time to carry out their 
income-producing activities. When travelling on work, the place where the employee works 
does not become their regular place of work and the place where they stay does not 
become their usual residence (see Example 6 of this Ruling). 
47. 
Where an employee relocates their home, the employee is changing their usual 
residence and the expenses are not incurred in performing their income-producing 
activities (see paragraphs 79 to 86 of this Ruling).45 
 
Length of period away 
48. 
The ‘length of period away’ means the overall period of time the employee spends 
living at a particular location for work. Where an employee is living at one location for work 
for an extended period, that period is not broken by short trips they take from that location, 
for example travelling back to their usual residence on weekends or when travelling on 
work from that location (see Examples 5 and 6 of this Ruling). 
49. 
Generally, the longer an employee spends away from their usual residence for 
work, the more likely the employee is living at the location. 
50. 
In contrast, an employee generally will not be living at a location away from their 
usual residence where the overall period that they stay away from their usual residence in 
the course of performing their income-producing activities is reasonably short. 
51. 
Just because an employee is away from their usual residence for an extended 
period does not necessarily mean that they are living at a location away from their usual 
residence. If the employment requires ongoing travel to multiple locations the employee 
may not be in any location long enough to be regarded as living at a location. This may be 
the case, for instance, with a performing artist on tour. 
52. 
Conversely, there may be circumstances where an employee is living at a location 
away from their usual residence even though they stay away for a reasonably short period 
of time. For example, an employee who is required by their employer to work in a location 
which is distant from their usual residence/regular place of work for one year but who, for 
personal reasons, only ends up working at that location for one month. If that employee 
rented out their usual residence in anticipation of being away for a year and rented a unit 
 
44 Most employees have a regular place of work, being a usual or normal place where the employee starts and 
finishes their work duties with a particular employer (see paragraph 26 of TR 2021/1). 
45 If an allowance is paid to an employee who relocates, it will not be a LAFHA under section 30 of the FBTAA 
(because they are not living away from home). 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 12 of 28 
near the new work location, they would still be living away from their usual residence for 
that one-month period even though they did not stay for the entire year.46 
53. 
The Commissioner has provided information regarding their use of compliance 
resources in PCG 2021/3, which outlines the Commissioner’s approach in determining 
whether an employee is travelling on work or living at a location. 
54. 
There is no requirement to follow the guidance in PCG 2021/3 but if it is not 
followed then, as per paragraph 44 of this Ruling, all the factors outlined in paragraph 42 of 
this Ruling must be considered and applied to the facts of an employee’s individual 
circumstances to determine whether they are travelling on work or living at a location. 
55. 
If an employee has no fixed usual residence (for example, they have a transitory 
lifestyle and regularly change employment), the employee will not be living at a location 
away from their usual residence. 
 
Nature of the accommodation 
56. 
The nature of an employee’s accommodation is relevant but does not determine 
whether the employee is living at a location away from their usual residence. 
57. 
An employee may live and make their home in any kind of accommodation. 
58. 
Generally, where an employee works away from home for a considerable period 
and, for that period, stays in accommodation generally used for longer-term 
accommodation (such as a house, unit or apartment, or caravan), this would support a 
view that they are living at a location away from their usual residence. 
59. 
The use of short-term accommodation such as hotels and motels located close to 
the temporary work location is generally an indication that the employee is travelling on 
work. 
 
Accompanied by family or visited by family or friends 
60. 
An employee who is living at a location away from their usual residence can 
generally be accompanied or visited by their family and friends. However, if an employee 
cannot be accompanied by family or visited by family and friends, this tends to indicate that 
the employer retains a degree of control over the employee outside their standard work 
day and which may contribute to an overall impression that the employee is travelling on 
work during this period. 
61. 
An accompanied employee should not always be treated as living at a location 
away from their usual residence. They can be travelling on work (see Example 11 of this 
Ruling). It is more likely that an employee will be living away from their usual residence 
where they are, or can be (but they are not), accompanied by family or visited by family 
and friends (see Examples 5 and 7 of this Ruling). 
 
Example 5 – living at a location away from usual residence – accommodation and 
food and drink expenses not deductible 
62. 
Yumi works as a senior executive for an employer based in Brisbane. Her employer 
is setting up a new office in Townsville and assigns her to the new office for a period of 
 
46 See Example 8 of this Ruling. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 13 of 28 
four months in order to assist in setting it up. After spending four months working at the 
Townsville office, Yumi will return to her usual employment in the Brisbane office. 
63. 
During the period she is in Townsville, Yumi will occasionally travel to other 
locations around Australia (including Brisbane) for one or two days to attend work 
meetings or meet with clients. Yumi will live in a two-bedroom apartment close to the office 
in Townsville and her family will remain in the family home in Brisbane. However, the 
apartment in Townsville is big enough to accommodate Yumi’s family. 
64. 
Yumi will be living in Townsville away from her usual residence for the four-month 
period due to: 
• 
there being a change in Yumi’s regular place of work from the Brisbane 
office to the Townsville office 
• 
the extended period of time she is going to be in Townsville (an overall 
period of four months) 
• 
the longer-term nature of the accommodation that she stays in while she is 
Townsville, and 
• 
the fact that her family could have accompanied her if they had wanted to. 
65. 
The expenses that Yumi incurs on accommodation and food and drink while she is 
in Townsville are living expenses and will not be deductible.47 This would not change even 
if Yumi returned to Brisbane each weekend to be with her family. However, when Yumi 
travels from Townsville to other locations around Australia for work meetings or to meet 
with clients, she will be travelling on work and the amount she incurs on accommodation 
and food and drink will be deductible. 
 
Example 6 – travelling on work for three-week period – accommodation and food 
and drink expenses deductible 
66. 
Mario lives and works in Melbourne. He is employed by a large insurance 
company. Mario’s regular place of work is his employer’s office in Melbourne. One of 
Mario’s duties is to train new staff. When his employer engages some new staff in its 
Warrnambool office (260 kilometres away), Mario is required to travel to Warrnambool to 
train the new staff on site for a three-week period. Mario stays in a motel near the 
Warrnambool office from Sunday to Thursday night for each of the three weeks he is 
giving the training and returns home on Friday evenings for the weekend. 
67. 
Mario is not living in Warrnambool away from his usual residence for the 
three-week period he is giving the training because: 
• 
the Melbourne office remains Mario’s regular place of work for the 
three-week period 
• 
the length of the overall period that Mario is away from his usual residence 
is reasonably short 
• 
Mario stays in short-term accommodation while he is working in 
Warrnambool. 
68. 
The expenditure that Mario incurs on accommodation and food and drink during the 
period of the training is occasioned by Mario’s income-producing activities. Mario is 
 
47 If Yumi is paid an allowance to cover the additional costs of her accommodation and food and drink while 
she is in Townsville, it may be a LAFHA fringe benefit – refer to section 30 of the FBTAA. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 14 of 28 
travelling on work and the expenditure he incurs on accommodation and food and drink 
while he is working at the Warrnambool office is deductible.48 
 
Example 7 – extended secondment to Australia – accommodation and food and 
drink expenses not deductible 
69. 
An Australian-based resident company which is part of a global business sources 
employees with specialist skills from one of their overseas affiliates on a temporary basis. 
The selected overseas-based employees will stay in Australia for a period of between 90 
to 120 days and will be required to work for the entire time in one location in Australia. 
They will: 
• 
continue to be employees of their home-country employer while seconded 
to the Australian-based company 
• 
not bring their family with them 
• 
stay in apartment-style accommodation while they are in Australia which will 
be arranged by the Australian employer. 
70. 
In these circumstances, the employees are living away from their usual residence 
due to: 
• 
there being a change in the employees’ regular place of work from their 
home country to Australia 
• 
the length of time the employees will be away from their usual residence in 
their home country 
• 
the fact that they will be staying in apartment-style accommodation while 
they are working in Australia. 
71. 
These factors combined indicate that the employees are living in Australia (and not 
overseas in their home country). Accordingly, their expenditure on accommodation and 
food and drink are living expenses. They are a prerequisite to earning their assessable 
income and are not incurred in the course of gaining or producing their assessable income. 
The employees are not entitled to a deduction for the accommodation and food and drink 
expenses they have incurred for the period they are working in Australia.49 
 
Example 8 – period away from home extended unexpectedly – accommodation and 
food and drink deductible for first part of trip – not deductible for the remainder of 
the trip 
72. 
Carlos lives in Adelaide and is employed as an information technology (IT) 
designer. Carlos works in his employer’s Adelaide office on projects that are usually based 
in and around Adelaide. Carlos’ employer also has an office in Darwin. One of the projects 
being handled by the Darwin office is behind schedule and the employee working on it has 
resigned. The remaining employees working in the Darwin office are unable to pick up the 
work because they do not have the specialist skills required. 
 
48 If Mario receives an allowance from his employer, he must declare it as assessable income. Mario must also 
obtain and keep substantiation records that meet the requirements in Division 900 unless he meets the 
exception from keeping substantiation records in section 900-50. Even if Mario does meet the exception from 
substantiation, he will still need to be able to demonstrate that he incurred deductible expenses – see 
Taxation Ruling TR 2004/6 Income tax: substantiation exception for reasonable travel and overtime meal 
allowance expenses for further information. 
49 Australia’s double tax agreements may have application depending on the circumstances. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 15 of 28 
73. 
As Carlos has the specialist skills required to work on this project, Carlos’ employer 
sends him to Darwin to get the project back on track. His employer believes that this will 
take two weeks and by the end of that period, they will have someone with the skills 
required employed in their Darwin office to take the project over. 
74. 
During the two-week period Carlos is in Darwin, he stays in a hotel around the 
corner from his office and either eats meals at the hotel or at local restaurants and cafés. 
75. 
Towards the end of the two-week period, Carlos is contacted by his manager and 
advised that they need him to stay in Darwin for a further six months to work on the project 
as they have been unable to replace the employee who has resigned. As Carlos is going 
to be away for a further six months, he finds a serviced apartment with a kitchen, an 
additional bedroom and a separate living area so that he can cook his own meals and 
have family and friends stay with him. 
76. 
For the initial two-week period that Carlos is in Darwin, he is travelling on work due 
to: 
• 
there being no change in his regular place of work, that is, he is working in 
Darwin temporarily and will return to his regular place of work in Adelaide 
when the two-week period ends 
• 
the length of time he will be away from his usual place of residence is 
relatively short, and 
• 
him staying in short-term accommodation. 
77. 
When Carlos is asked by his employer to stay in Darwin for a further six months, he 
is living away from his usual residence due to: 
• 
there being a change in Carlos’ regular place of work, that is, for the 
six-month period, Carlos’ regular place of work will be the Darwin office, not 
the Adelaide office 
• 
the length of time Carlos will be away from his usual place of residence is 
for an extended period, and 
• 
him staying in accommodation that can be used on a longer-term basis and 
which allows him to have his family and friends stay with him. 
78. 
Based on this, Carlos is entitled to a deduction for the cost of his hotel and his 
meals during the initial two-week period. However, when the circumstances change and 
Carlos is required to stay in Darwin for a further six months, he is living away from his 
usual residence and the cost of his accommodation and food and drink will not be 
deductible during that further six-month period. 
 
 
Relocation 
79. 
Where an employee has relocated for work, the cost of accommodation and food 
and drink will be living expenses (see paragraphs 9, 14 and 15 of this Ruling).50 This will 
 
50 Whether an employee is living at a location away from their usual residence, or has relocated, has no impact 
on the deductibility of accommodation, food and drink expenses (in both circumstances they are not 
deductible). However, there may be different tax consequences for an allowance paid to the employee (see 
paragraphs 120 to 144 of this Ruling). 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 16 of 28 
be the case regardless of whether moving to the new location is required by the employer 
or the work.51 
80. 
Whether an employee has relocated is a question of fact. Factors that indicate an 
employee has relocated include: 
• 
they are at the new location for an extended period 
• 
they are required to move to that location permanently or indefinitely in 
order to perform their duties 
• 
their usual residence is no longer available for them to occupy because they 
have either sold it or because it has been leased or rented out long-term52 
• 
they are accompanied by their family and the family’s belongings have been 
transferred to the new location 
• 
their children attend school at the new location 
• 
their spouse or partner obtains employment at the new location 
• 
they change their postal address and electoral role details to their new place 
of residence 
• 
they establish ties to the local community, for example, by taking up 
membership at local sporting and recreational clubs at the new location. 
81. 
It is not necessary for a conclusion to be reached on all of these factors in order to 
determine whether an employee has relocated. These factors are a general guide only. 
 
Example 9 – employee relocated – accommodation and food and drink expenses not 
deductible 
82. 
Rhia lives in Melbourne and works for an accounting company which has offices all 
over Australia and overseas. Given her particular skills, Rhia’s employer transfers her to 
their office in Sydney for a period of two years. Rhia is paid an allowance to cover the cost 
of her move to Sydney. Rhia’s family will accompany her to Sydney so she rents out the 
family home in Melbourne and rents a house for her and her family to live in while she is 
working in Sydney. Rhia’s children are enrolled in school in Sydney and her spouse is also 
granted a transfer to his employer’s office in Sydney. 
83. 
Rhia has relocated to Sydney because: 
• 
she is away for an extended length of time 
• 
she is accompanied by her family 
• 
her spouse is transferred and works at his employer’s Sydney office 
• 
her children attend school in Sydney, and 
• 
she has rented out her usual residence in Melbourne. 
84. 
Rhia must declare the allowance she has received as assessable income. She will 
not be entitled to claim a deduction for the cost of relocating or her accommodation and 
 
51 Where an employee is required to relocate to perform their work duties, and their employer reimburses or 
pays for certain expenses associated with that relocation, the employer may be exempt from FBT. However, 
this exemption does not extend to accommodation and food and drink. See sections 58AA, 58B, 58C and 
58D of the FBTAA. 
52 If the employee has been living in a rented property, their usual residence will no longer be available to them 
when they either sublease it or end their lease for the property. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 17 of 28 
food and drink expenses while she is working in Sydney. The expenditure is not incurred in 
the course of gaining or producing her assessable income. The expenses are a 
prerequisite to her earning her assessable income. Accordingly, Rhia’s accommodation 
and food and drink expenses are living expenses and are private or domestic in nature. 
 
Example 10 – employee relocated – accommodation and food and drink expenses 
not deductible 
85. 
Herman lives in Perth and is employed as a security guard. Herman’s employer 
requires a security guard to work at a site in Broome for an indefinite period and is unable 
to fill the position locally. Herman is advised that he will be required to fill this position for at 
least 12 months. Herman is paid an allowance to cover some of his costs while he is in 
Broome. 
86. 
Herman’s employer is unaware of his domestic arrangements. Given that: 
• 
he will be in Broome for an extended period 
• 
his postal address will be the place he is staying in Broome, and 
• 
he was required to move there indefinitely in order to perform his duties, 
Herman has relocated to Broome. Herman’s expenditure on accommodation, food and 
drink expenses while he is in Broome is not deductible. They are living expenses and are 
private or domestic in nature. 
 
 
Incidental expenses 
87. 
In addition to accommodation and food and drink expenses, an employee who is 
travelling on work may incur expenses that are incidental to the travel (incidental 
expenses). Incidental expenses are minor, but necessary expenses associated with 
travelling on work. This might include a car parking fee, a bus ticket or a charge for using 
the phone or internet for work-related purposes. If an employee is travelling on work and 
incurs incidental expenses, those expenses will be deductible under section 8-1. If the 
accommodation and food and drink expenses an employee incurs while they are travelling 
on work must be apportioned (see paragraphs 88 to 94 of this Ruling), the incidental 
expenses relevant to the same travel should be apportioned on the same basis.53 
 
Apportionment 
88. 
If accommodation and food and drink expenses are only partly incurred in gaining 
or producing assessable income, apportionment is required. Only that portion of the 
expense that relates to the employee’s income-producing activities is deductible. 
89. 
Apportionment is also required to the extent that the expenses have a capital or 
private or domestic nature. In cases where there is no obvious method of apportionment, it 
is to be done on a ‘fair and reasonable’ basis.54 
 
53 Incidental expenses must also be substantiated in the same way accommodation and food and drink 
expenses are, see paragraphs 109 to 112 of this Ruling. 
54 Ronpibon. Refer to paragraphs 37 to 40 of TR 2020/1 and paragraphs 63 to 70 of TR 98/9 for more 
information on apportionment. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 18 of 28 
 
Example 11 – business and private travel – employee accompanied by spouse – 
apportionment of expenditure 
90. 
Therese is employed as the regional manager of a company that operates clothing 
stores. Her regular place of work is in Sydney. Each year, the regional managers attend an 
internal five-day planning workshop held on the Gold Coast in Queensland. Therese would 
not have travelled to the Gold Coast but for her attendance at the workshop. Lunch is 
provided at the workshop each day and Therese’s employer also provides dinner for all the 
regional managers one evening. When she travels to the Gold Coast for the workshop, 
Therese’s husband will join her and they will stay an extra two days to have some leisure 
time together. While Therese is at the workshop, her husband will play golf and go to the 
beach. 
91. 
The room Therese has booked is not influenced by her husband accompanying her 
and the cost of the room is the same whether one or two people stay in it. The cost of the 
room for the seven nights is $1,680. 
92. 
Travel for the period of the workshop is an incident of Therese’s employment and 
the expenditure she incurs on accommodation and food and drink is incurred in the course 
of performing her income-producing activities. Accordingly, Therese is travelling on work 
during that period and the accommodation expenses she incurs for the first five nights of 
her stay are deductible. The cost of the accommodation for the two nights after the 
workshop is a private expense and will not be deductible. 
93. 
The full cost of the room for five nights will be deductible because Therese’s choice 
of room and the cost of the room was not affected by her husband accompanying her. 
Therefore, Therese can claim a deduction of $1,200 (5/7 nights × $1,680) for the 
accommodation.55 
94. 
Therese will not be entitled to a deduction in relation to the food and drink that are 
provided as part of the workshop (lunch each day and dinner on one evening) since she 
has not incurred the expenditure. However, she will be entitled to claim the cost of any 
other food and drink she incurs during the period of the workshop. If she eats out with her 
husband, only the cost of her meal will be deductible. Any food and drink Therese 
purchases on the last two days of her trip is not deductible because the expenses are 
private in nature. 
 
 
Accommodation expenses – additional property expenses 
95. 
When an employee is travelling on work, they usually stay in short-term 
accommodation close to the location that they will be performing their income-producing 
activities, either alone or shared with others. This may include a hotel, motel, serviced 
apartment, caravan or other commercial accommodation. 
96. 
Employees who travel frequently to the same location may choose to rent or buy a 
property rather than stay in a hotel or other commercial accommodation when travelling on 
work. 
 
55 If Therese receives an allowance from her employer, she must declare it as assessable income. Therese 
must also obtain and keep substantiation records that meet the requirements in Division 900 unless she 
meets the exception from keeping substantiation records in section 900-50 – see TR 2004/6. However, she 
may still be required to show how she calculated her deduction, including her basis for apportionment and 
that she incurred the expenses she has claimed. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 19 of 28 
97. 
Whether an employee can claim a deduction for expenses associated with such a 
property, and to what extent, depends on the ordinary principles of deductibility under 
section 8-1 (see paragraphs 5 to 13 of this Ruling). 
98. 
A deduction is allowable for expenses incurred in financing, holding and 
maintaining an additional property which an employee purchases or rents if it is occupied 
by them as accommodation in the course of travelling on work, except to the extent the 
expenses are capital, private or domestic in nature.56 
99. 
Additional property expenses that may be claimed include lease payments, rent, 
interest on borrowings to acquire the property, rates, land tax, property insurance and 
general maintenance of the building and grounds. A deduction is also allowable for the 
decline in value (depreciation) of depreciating assets (such as furniture and household 
equipment) used in connection with the property.57 
100. 
However, if an employee’s expenses in relation to the property are disproportionate 
to what the employee would have paid for suitable commercial accommodation for the 
period of travel, a deduction is not allowable to the extent that the expenses are incurred in 
the pursuit of another object unrelated to the earning of an employee’s assessable 
income.58 
101. 
Additional property expenses must also be apportioned where the property is used 
for private purposes, for example if the employee and their family use it for holidays, as 
well as for the employee’s use while travelling on work. 
102. 
No deduction will be allowed for additional property expenses if the travel 
undertaken by the employee is a consequence of the employee’s personal circumstances, 
including their choice about where to live59 (see paragraphs 25 to 37 of this Ruling). 
 
Example 12 – travelling on work – additional property expenses deductible 
103. 
Anwar is employed as an engineer. He lives with his spouse in their apartment in 
Adelaide near his regular place of work. As part of his role, Anwar has been assigned to 
work on a project in Mount Gambier (497 kilometres from Adelaide) which is expected to 
last for nine months. During the same nine-month period, all of Anwar’s other projects are 
located in Adelaide. Based on other large projects he has worked on, Anwar determines 
that he will generally have to travel to Mount Gambier twice a month for around three 
nights at a time. Anwar will receive a travel allowance from his employer to cover his 
accommodation and food and drink expenses when he travels to Mount Gambier. Due to 
the frequency of his travel and his preference not to stay in a hotel, Anwar decides to rent 
a fully-furnished unit in Mount Gambier to stay in when he travels there. 
104. 
During the nine-month period, Anwar stayed in the rented Mount Gambier property 
for 65 nights. When he was not there, the unit was left vacant. The rent on the unit was 
$210 per week so Anwar’s additional property expenses for the nine-month period amount 
to $7,560 ($210 × 36 weeks). 
105. 
Anwar determines that the weekly rent on the fully-furnished unit over the 
nine-month period of the project is less than the amount he would have spent if he had 
 
56 See paragraphs 16 to 23 of this Ruling, paragraphs 37 to 40 of TR 2020/1, and paragraph 329 of Taxation 
Ruling TR 1999/10 Income tax and fringe benefits tax: Members of Parliament – allowances, 
reimbursements, donations and gifts, benefits, deductions and recoupments for more information on 
apportionment. 
57 See Division 40 and the ATO's Guide to depreciating assets 2021. 
58 Fletcher v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) [1991] HCA 42. 
59 Charlton; Toms. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 20 of 28 
stayed in a hotel in Mount Gambier near the project site for 65 nights during that same 
period. 
106. 
During the period of the project, Anwar’s regular place of work remained in 
Adelaide and he continued living at his usual residence with his spouse. Although the 
project was for a period of nine months, Anwar was only away overnight from his usual 
residence for short periods of time, that is three nights at most each fortnight (total of 65 
nights). Based on these factors, Anwar was travelling on work when he travelled to Mount 
Gambier. The expenditure Anwar incurred on accommodation and food and drink while he 
was working in Mount Gambier was incurred in the course of gaining or producing his 
assessable income as the occasion of the outgoings is his income-producing activities. 
107. 
The cost of renting the unit is not disproportionate to the cost Anwar would have 
incurred if he had stayed in commercial accommodation. Therefore, Anwar will be entitled 
to claim a deduction of $7,560 (the amount he incurred) for accommodation expenses and 
the amount he spent on food and drink for the periods he was in Mount Gambier. 
108. 
Anwar must declare the allowance he receives from his employer for 
accommodation and food and drink as assessable income in his tax return.60 
 
 
Substantiation for deductions claimed for accommodation and food and drink 
expenses under section 8-1 
109. 
Accommodation and food and drink expenses incurred by an employee who is 
travelling on work are work expenses.61 Accordingly, these expenses62, which are 
deductible under section 8-1, can only be deducted if the employee can substantiate them 
by: 
• 
getting written evidence63 
• 
keeping travel records where that travel involves an employee being away 
from their ordinary residence64 for six or more nights in a row65, and 
• 
retaining the written evidence and travel records for five years.66 
 
Exceptions from substantiation – reasonable amounts 
110. 
There are some exceptions from the requirement to substantiate accommodation 
and food and drink expenses and the requirement to provide travel records for employees 
travelling on work.67 These exceptions only apply when the employee receives a travel 
allowance.68 A travel allowance is paid, or is to be paid by the employer, to cover losses or 
 
60 Anwar must also obtain and keep substantiation records that meet the requirements of Division 900 unless 
he meets the exception from keeping substantiation records in section 900-50. Even if Anwar does meet the 
exception from substantiation, he will still need to be able to demonstrate that he incurred deductible 
expenses – see TR 2004/6 for further information. 
61 Defined in subsection 900-30(1). 
62 This includes incidental expenses – see paragraph 87 of this Ruling. 
63 See subsection 900-15(1). 
64 See footnote 19 of this Ruling – ‘ordinary residence’ is used for income tax purposes. 
65 Section 900-20. 
66 Section 900-25. 
67 See sections 900-50, 900-55 and 900-65 and TR 2004/6 for more information on the exceptions from 
substantiation. 
68 As defined in subsection 900-30(3). 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 21 of 28 
outgoings that the employee incurs when travelling away from their ordinary residence 
when undertaken in the course of their duties as an employee: 
• 
for accommodation, or 
• 
for food or drink, or 
• 
that are incidental to the travel (incidental expenses). 
111. 
If the employee meets the criteria for relying on the exception from substantiation, 
the exception will only apply to the expenses the travel allowance is paid to cover. For 
example, an employer may pay for an employee’s accommodation directly and then pay 
their employee a travel allowance to cover food and drink expenses the employee will 
incur while travelling on work. In these circumstances, the exception from substantiation 
may only apply to the food and drink expenses incurred by the employee, noting that the 
exception does not apply to overseas accommodation.69 
112. 
The exception from substantiation for travel allowance expenses70 allows an 
employee to claim a deduction for expenses they have incurred up to the amount the 
Commissioner considers reasonable (reasonable amount)71 without having to provide 
written evidence72 and, in some circumstances, travel records.73 If an exception from 
substantiation applies, it does not mean that an employee can automatically deduct the 
reasonable amount for accommodation and food and drink expenses. In order to be able 
to claim a deduction under section 8-1, the employee must: 
• 
have incurred the expense (such that it was not incurred by somebody 
else), and 
• 
demonstrate they incurred the expense when they were travelling on work. 
 
Reimbursements, direct payments and allowances by employer 
113. 
There may be a fringe benefit and therefore FBT implications for an employer 
where the employer: 
• 
reimburses an employee’s accommodation or food and drink expenses, or 
• 
incurs expenditure on accommodation or food and drink in respect of an 
employee. 
114. 
Depending on the benefits provided to the employee, it may be an expense 
payment fringe benefit, property fringe benefit, a board fringe benefit, a residual fringe 
benefit or a LAFHA fringe benefit. 
115. 
Further, an allowance paid by an employer to cover the costs of an employee’s 
accommodation and food and drink may be a travel allowance or a LAFHA (see 
paragraphs 120 to 144 of this Ruling). 
 
 
69 Subsection 900-55(1). For further information on the substantiation exception, refer to TR 2004/6 and the 
Commissioner’s annual Taxation Determination setting out the reasonable travel allowance expense 
amounts for each income year (for example, Taxation Determination TD 2021/6 Income tax: what are the 
reasonable travel and overtime meal allowance expense amounts for the 2021–22 income year?). 
70 Travel allowance expenses is defined in subsection 900-30(2). 
71 Subsection 900-50(2) and subsection 90-55(1). 
72 Subsection 900-115(2) sets out what a document must set out to be written evidence. 
73 Section 900-150 sets out how to keep travel records. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 22 of 28 
Reimbursements and direct payments 
116. 
The FBT consequences for the employer depend on the taxable value of the fringe 
benefit. The taxable value of a fringe benefit under the FBTAA can be reduced, potentially 
to nil, if the ‘otherwise deductible’ rule applies. Pagone J. in John Holland74 states that this 
rule requires: 
... a conclusion to be reached about whether the hypothetical expenditure of money would 
have been allowable as a deduction to the employee if the employee had incurred that 
expenditure. … [It] requires the making of the assumption that the expenditure actually 
incurred by the employer had been incurred by the employee. 
117. 
If the employee would not be able to claim a deduction (under section 8-1) for the 
hypothetical expenditure, the employer will not be able to use the otherwise deductible rule 
to reduce the value of the fringe benefit. 
118. 
Accommodation and food and drink expenses incurred by an employee that are 
subsequently reimbursed by their employer cannot be claimed as a deduction by the 
employee under section 8-1.75 
119. 
Where the reimbursement or direct payment of an employee’s accommodation and 
food and drink by their employer gives rise to a fringe benefit, the amount paid is 
non-assessable non-exempt income in the hands of the employee.76 
 
Travel allowances and LAFHAs 
120. 
When an allowance is paid by an employer to cover accommodation and food and 
drink expenses, it is necessary to determine whether that allowance is a travel allowance77 
or a LAFHA78 as they are subject to different taxation treatment. 
121. 
Specifically, a: 
• 
travel allowance is included in an employee’s assessable income under the 
ITAA 199779, whereas 
• 
LAFHA is a fringe benefit which is non-assessable non-exempt income in 
the hands of the employee80 and may give rise to FBT which is paid by the 
employer. 
122. 
The name of an allowance does not determine the nature of that allowance. In 
order to determine whether an allowance is a travel allowance or a LAFHA, it is necessary 
to consider the purpose for which the allowance is paid.81 
 
 
74 John Holland Group Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation [2015] FCAFC 82 at [55]. 
75 Section 51AH of the ITAA 1936. 
76 Section 23L of the ITAA 1936. 
77 As defined in subsection 900-30(3). 
78 As defined in subsection 30(1) of the FBTAA. 
79 Refer to paragraph 12 of TR 2004/6 for guidance on when a travel allowance does not need to be declared 
as assessable income. 
80 That is, the LAFHA is not included in the employee’s assessable income. See subsections 6-15(3), 
and 23L(1) of the ITAA 1936. 
81 In most cases, it will be necessary to consider the industrial instrument under which the allowance is paid. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 23 of 28 
Travel allowances 
123. 
A travel allowance is an allowance an employer pays (or is to pay) to an employee 
to cover losses or outgoings that: 
• 
an employee incurred for travel away from their ordinary residence82, either 
within or outside Australia, that they undertake in the course of their duties 
as an employee, and 
• 
are incurred for accommodation or for food or drink expenses, or expenses 
that are incidental to the travel.83 
124. 
A travel allowance is assessable income.84 However, there are some 
circumstances where the amount of the travel allowance does not have to be reported in 
an employee’s tax return as assessable income.85 
125. 
The receipt of a travel allowance, which is included in an employee’s assessable 
income, does not give rise to an entitlement to claim a deduction for accommodation and 
food and drink expenses.86 The nature of the expense and its connection to the 
employee’s income-producing activities determines whether it is deductible (see 
paragraphs 5 to 13 and 16 to 23 of this Ruling). 
 
LAFHA 
126. 
An allowance will be a LAFHA benefit87 where it would be concluded that some or 
all of the allowance is, in the nature of compensation to the employee, for: 
• 
additional expenses (not being deductible expenses) incurred by the 
employee, or 
• 
additional expenses (not being deductible expenses) incurred by the 
employee and other additional disadvantages to which the employee is 
subject, 
because the employee is required to live away from their normal residence88 in order to 
perform duties of employment. As a LAHFA is a fringe benefit, it is non-assessable 
non-exempt income in the hands of an employee.89 
127. 
For the purposes of section 30 of the FBTAA, an employee’s normal residence is90: 
• 
their usual residence if the employee’s usual place of residence is in 
Australia, or 
• 
either 
- 
the employee’s usual overseas place of residence if they do not 
have a place in Australia where they usually reside, or 
 
82 See footnote 19 of this Ruling – ‘ordinary residence’ is used for income tax purposes. 
83 Subsection 900-30(3). See also sections 900-50 and 900-55. 
84 Section 15-2. 
85 See paragraph 12 of TR 2004/6 for information on when a travel allowance does not have to be included as 
assessable income and pay as you go withholding variation (registration ID F2015L01047). 
86 Case R22 84 ATC 212. 
87 Subsection 30(1) of the FBTAA. 
88 See footnote 19 of this Ruling – ‘normal residence’ is used in subsection 30(1) of the FBTAA. 
89 See footnote 80 of this Ruling. 
90 ‘Normal residence’ is defined in subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 24 of 28 
- 
the place in Australia where they usually reside when they are in 
Australia (see Example 7 of this Ruling).91 
128. 
If an allowance is only paid for the disadvantages to which the employee is subject, 
it will not be a LAFHA.92 This means it will be assessable income in the hands of the 
employee who receives it. 
129. 
The expenses of living away from home are living expenses which are not 
deductible (see paragraphs 9, 14 and 15 of this Ruling).93 
 
Difference between a travel allowance and a LAFHA 
130. 
The main difference between a travel allowance and a LAFHA is that a: 
• 
travel allowance can only be paid to cover deductible accommodation and 
food and drink expenses and incidental expenses incurred by an employee 
when they are travelling on work 
• 
LAFHA is paid to provide compensation to an employee for the additional 
living expenses incurred by an employee because their duties of 
employment require them live at location away from their usual residence. 
131. 
Not every allowance that is paid by an employer to cover an employee’s living 
expenses will be a LAFHA. In order to be a LAFHA, the allowance must meet the criteria in 
paragraphs 126 to 129 of this Ruling. Depending on the circumstances, the amount paid 
by the employer may also be another type of fringe benefit. 
132. 
A LAFHA may also be paid partly as compensation for additional living expenses 
incurred by the employee and partly for other additional disadvantages to which the 
employee is subject, for example, disadvantages associated with isolation or the lack of 
normal amenities of a town or city dwelling94 because the employee’s duties require them 
to live away from where they usually reside. 
133. 
Accordingly, to determine whether an allowance is a travel allowance or a LAFHA, 
it is first necessary to determine what expenditure the allowance is designed to cover or 
compensate the employee for and whether those expenses are deductible under 
section 8-1. 
 
Example 13 – travel allowance paid to employee 
134. 
Roy is employed by a construction company that works on large projects all around 
Australia. He lives in a house in Sydney with his family and his position is located there. 
Roy generally works on projects in Sydney but on occasion, his employer assigns him to 
work on projects interstate or in regional parts of New South Wales. 
135. 
During the 2019–20 income year, Roy worked on six different projects of varying 
lengths of time. All the projects except for one were located in or around Sydney. The 
other project his employer sent him to work on was in Berry, New South Wales 
(157 kilometres from Roy’s usual residence in Sydney). Roy worked on that project from 
20 January 2020 to 7 February 2020. 
 
91 Subsection 136(1) of the FBTAA and Chapter 11 of Fringe benefits tax – a guide for employers. 
92 Atwood Oceanics Australia Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation [1989] FCA 481 (Atwood Oceanics). 
93 If the employer provides accommodation rather than paying an allowance, it may be an exempt residual 
benefit under subsection 47(5) of the FBTAA. 
94 Atwood Oceanics. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 25 of 28 
136. 
Under the Enterprise Bargaining Agreement under which Roy is employed, his 
employer is obliged to pay him an allowance to cover the cost of accommodation and food 
and drink when he travels and works on a project that is located more than 150 kilometres 
from Roy’s usual residence as it is not considered possible for an employee to return home 
each night in those circumstances. 
137. 
The night before he is due to start work on the project, Roy travels to Berry. Each 
Friday night, Roy returns home for the weekend and each Sunday night, travels back to 
Berry. During the week, Roy stays in a motel near the worksite and purchases all his 
meals. 
138. 
Roy is not living at Berry away from his usual residence in Sydney while working on 
the project. This is due to the: 
• 
length of the project and the fact that the overall period of time Roy is away 
from his usual residence is reasonably short 
• 
location of Roy’s regular place of work in Sydney does not change 
• 
short-term nature of the accommodation in which he stays while working in 
Berry. 
139. 
The expenditure Roy incurs on accommodation and food and drink is not 
occasioned by Roy’s personal circumstances because he lives in Sydney. Roy’s travel to 
Berry is required to carry out his duties of employment. As such, Roy is travelling on work. 
The expenditure Roy incurs on his motel accommodation and food and drink while he is 
working in Berry is deductible. As the allowance Roy receives is to cover deductible 
accommodation and food and drink expenses incurred by him while he is travelling on 
work, the allowance Roy’s employer pays him for this period is a travel allowance. 
 
 
140. 
Instead of working out whether the allowance paid to Roy is for travelling or living 
away from home, and whether his expenses would be deductible, Roy’s employer may 
choose to apply the compliance approach in PCG 2021/3 to determine whether the 
allowance they pay to Roy is a travel allowance or a LAFHA based on the number of 
nights he is away. 
 
Example 14 – LAFHA paid to employee 
141. 
Rowan lives in Adelaide with his family and is employed at the Olympic Dam mine 
as an electrician on a fly-in fly-out basis. The Olympic Dam mine is located 570 kilometres 
from Rowan’s home in Adelaide. He is employed to work at the Olympic Dam mine on an 
18-month contract. He works four weeks on and two weeks off. Under the terms of his 
employment agreement, Rowan has the option of being provided with board and lodging or 
being paid an allowance of $350 per week to cover those costs. 
142. 
Rowan chooses to be paid an allowance as he prefers to stay in rented 
accommodation with a co-worker. The two-bedroom unit which he shares with his 
co-worker is in Roxby Downs, located around 10 kilometres from their worksite. The rent 
on the unit is $200 per week so Rowan and his co-worker each pay $100 per week. Even 
though Rowan has to pay rent for the two weeks he is not occupying the unit, his 
allowance covers this additional rent expense and the expenditure he generally incurs on 
food and drink and rent during the four-week period he is working. 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 26 of 28 
143. 
The expenses that Rowan has incurred on accommodation and food and drink 
while he is in Roxby Downs are living expenses and are not deductible. 
144. 
The occasion of the expenditure is Rowan’s personal circumstances such that he 
lives in Adelaide and works at the Olympic Dam mine. The allowance the employer pays 
him is to cover his non-deductible additional expenses because he is required to live away 
from his normal residence in order to perform duties of employment. The allowance is a 
LAFHA and not a travel allowance. 
 
 
Date of effect 
145. 
This Ruling applies both before and after its date of issue. However, the Ruling 
does not apply to taxpayers to the extent that it conflicts with the terms of settlement of a 
dispute agreed to before the date of issue of the Ruling (see paragraphs 75 to 76 of 
Taxation Ruling TR 2006/10 Public Rulings). 
146. 
To the extent that there is any conflict between this Ruling and draft Rulings 
TR 2017/D6 and TR 2021/D1, the Commissioner will have regard to the earlier draft 
Rulings in deciding whether to apply compliance resources in relation to the income years 
to which the earlier draft Rulings apply. 
 
 
Commissioner of Taxation 
11 August 2021 
 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: not legal binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 27 of 28 
References 
Previous draft: 
TR 2021/D1 
 
Related Rulings/Determinations: 
PCG 2021/3; TD 2021/6; TR 98/9; 
TR 1999/10; TR 2004/6; TR 2005/16; 
TR 2006/10; TR 2020/1; TR 2021/1 
 
Previous Rulings/Determinations: 
TR 2017/D6 
 
Legislative references: 
- ITAA 1936 23L 
- ITAA 1936 23L(1) 
- ITAA 1936 51AH 
- ITAA 1997 6-15(3) 
- ITAA 1997 8-1 
- ITAA 1997 8-1(2)(b) 
- ITAA 1997 15-2 
- ITAA 1997 Div 40 
- ITAA 1997 Div 900 
- ITAA 1997 900-15 
- ITAA 1997 900-15(1) 
- ITAA 1997 900-20 
- ITAA 1997 900-25 
- ITAA 1997 900-30(1) 
- ITAA 1997 900-30(2) 
- ITAA 1997 900-30(3) 
- ITAA 1997 900-50 
- ITAA 1997 900-50(2) 
- ITAA 1997 900-55 
- ITAA 1997 900-55(1) 
- ITAA 1997 900-65 
- ITAA 1997 900-115(2) 
- ITAA 1997 900-150 
- FBTAA 1986 30 
- FBTAA 1986 30(1) 
- FBTAA 1986 47(5) 
- FBTAA 1986 58AA 
- FBTAA 1986 58B 
- FBTAA 1986 58C 
- FBTAA 1986 58D 
- FBTAA 1986 136(1) 
 
Cases relied on: 
- Atwood Oceanics Australia Pty Ltd v 
Commissioner of Taxation [1989] FCA 
481; 89 ATC 4808; 20 ATR 742; 30 IR 58 
- Case R22 84 ATC 212 
- Commissioner of Taxation v. Cooper, R.J. 
[1991] FCA 190; 99 ALR 703; 91 ATC 
4396; 21 ATR 1616; 29 FCR 177 
- Commissioner of Taxation v Day [2008] 
HCA 53; 236 CLR 163; 83 ALJR 68; 250 
ALR 388 
- Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) v Forsyth 
[1981] HCA 15; (1981) 148 CLR 203; 55 
ALJR 340; 34 ALR 263; 11 ATR 657; 81 
ATC 4157 
- Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) v Green 
[1950] HCA 20; (1950) 81 CLR 313; 
[1950] ALR 531; 9 ATD 142; 24 ALJ 303 
- Commissioner of Taxation v Payne [2001] 
HCA 3; 202 CLR 93; 75 ALJR 442; 177 
ALR 270 
- Commissioner of Taxation v Toms, A.J. 
[1989] FCA 153; 89 ATC 4373; 20 ATR 
466 
- Fardell and Commissioner of Taxation 
[2011] AATA 725 
- Federal Commissioner of Taxation v 
Charlton 84 ATC 4415; (1984) 15 ATR 
711; 71 FLR 107 
- Fletcher v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) 
[1991] HCA 42; (1991) 173 CLR 1; 66 
ALJR 11; 103 ALR 97; 22 ATR 613; 91 
ATC 4950 
- Hancox v Commissioner of Taxation 
[2013] FCA 735; 214 FCR 25 
- Handley v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) 
[1981] HCA 16; (1981) 148 CLR 182; 55 
ALJR 345; 34 ALR 275; 11 ATR 644; 81 
ATC 4165 
- John Holland Group Pty Ltd v 
Commissioner of Taxation [2015] FCAFC 
82; 321 ALR 530; 232 FCR 59 
- Ricketts v Colquhoun [1926] AC1 
- Ronpibon Tin NL v Commissioner of 
Taxation [1949] HCA 15; (1949) 78 CLR 
47 
- The Roads and Traffic Authority of New 
South Wales v. Commissioner of Taxation 
[1993] FCA 445; 116 ALR 482; 93 ATC 
4508; 26 ATR 76; 43 FCR 223 
 
Other references: 
- Fringe benefits tax – a guide for 
employers 
- Guide to depreciating assets 2021 
- Taxation Administration Act 1953 – Pay 
As You Go Withholding Variation: 
Allowances 
 
 
Taxation Ruling 
TR 2021/4 
Status: not legally binding 
Taxation Ruling TR 2021/4 
Page 28 of 28 
 
ATO references 
NO: 
1-KRKMVZH 
ISSN: 
2205-6122 
BSL: 
IAI and SMB 
ATOlaw topic: 
Income tax ~~ Assessable income ~~ Employment related ~~ Allowances and 
benefits 
Income tax ~~ Deductions ~~ General deductions - section 8-1 ~~ Other 
Income tax ~~ Deductions ~~ Employment expenses ~~ Expenses incurred by 
employer for employees 
Income tax ~~ Deductions ~~ Work related expenses ~~ Home to work travel 
Fringe benefits tax ~~ Expense payment benefits ~~ Taxable value ~~ 
Otherwise deductible rule 
Fringe benefits tax ~~ Living away from home allowance benefits ~~ Provision of 
benefit ~~ Living away from home or travel 
 
 
© AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE FOR THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 
 
You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as you wish (but not in any 
way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth endorses you or any of your services or 
products).