Note: From 27 July      REGULATORY GUIDE 44
2020, an application
for an extension of
time for companies
to hold an annual
                        Annual general meeting—
general meeting
(AGM) should be
                        extension of time
submitted through       Chapter 2G — Meetings
the ASIC Regulatory
                        Reissued 4/11/1998
Portal. For more
                        Amended 2/6/1999, 7/7/1999
information, see how
                        Previous version: Superseded Policy Statement 44 [SPS 44] in the
you apply for relief.
                        ASIC Digest on CD-ROM

                        From 5 July 2007, this document may be referred to as Regulatory
                        Guide 44 (RG 44) or Policy Statement 44 (PS 44). Paragraphs in this
                        document may be referred to by their regulatory guide number
                        (e.g. RG 44.1) or their policy statement number (e.g. PS 44.1).

                        Editor’s note: This guide replaces Superseded Policy Statement 13
                        [SPS 13] issued on 9 December 1991.

                        Headnotes
                        Annual general meetings; public companies; s250N statutory
                        requirements; application for extension of time under s250P; lodgment of
                        applications; administrative policy; s323D; changes in financial year;
                        companies in receivership; applications; review of ASIC’s decision.


                                      Contents
                                      Purpose...................................................................................2
                                      Statutory requirements .........................................................2
                                      Application for extension of time .........................................2
                                      Lodgment of applications .....................................................3
                                      Administrative policy ............................................................4
                                      Applications ...........................................................................7
                                      Review of ASIC’s decision ....................................................7


                                           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 1999
                                                                                                Page 1
              REGULATORY GUIDE 44: Annual general meeting—extension of time




Purpose
RG 44.1 This guide sets out the procedural requirements to be
followed by a public company applying for an extension of time to
hold its annual general meeting (AGM) and the criteria ASIC uses to
determine the application. It replaces Superseded Policy Statement 13
[SPS 13].

RG 44.2 This statement does not comprehensively cover a public
company’s statutory obligations in relation to AGMs. These are
contained in Div 8 of Pt 2G.2 of the Corporations Law (Law).


Statutory requirements
RG 44.3 Every public company that has more than one member
must hold an AGM:

(a) at least once in each calendar year; and
(b) within five months after the end of its financial year (s250N(2)
    and s250N(4)).
RG 44.4 The penalty for failing to hold an AGM on time is $1000
or imprisonment for three months or both.

RG 44.5 Section 250N(1) sets out the certain AGM requirements for
newly-registered companies but these requirements are redundant
because such companies are also subject to the requirements of s250N(2)
(see Superseded Policy Statement 68 New financial reporting and
procedural requirements at [SPS 68.128]–[SPS 68.130]. The application
of s250N(2) in certain circumstances where a public company changes its
balance date is discussed at [SPS 68.123]–[SPS 68.127].
[Historical note: RG 44.5 was amended 2/6/1999 by replacing the word “the” before
the word “AGM” with the word “certain” and inserting all the words after the phrase
“newly registered companies”.]


Application for extension of time
RG 44.6 A public company may apply to ASIC to extend the date
by which its AGM must be held. ASIC Form 2501 covers applications
for an extension to hold an AGM at a later date and is available from
law stationers or ASIC Business Centres. Applicants should follow the
directions specified in that form. In particular, the form should:

(a) be signed by a director or a secretary; and

                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 1999
                                                                          Page 2
            REGULATORY GUIDE 44: Annual general meeting—extension of time




(b) provide full details of the reasons for seeking an extension of
    time.
RG 44.7 An application made under s250P to extend the date of the
AGM must be made before the end of the period within which the
meeting would otherwise be required to be held.


Lodgment of applications
RG 44.8 Under s250P(2), if a company applies before the end of
the period within which the company would otherwise be required to
hold an AGM, ASIC may extend the period. Companies are advised to
lodge applications well in advance of the due date for holding the
AGM. Sufficient time should be allowed to enable ASIC to consider
the application and to enable the public company to hold the AGM by
the ordinary due date if the application is refused. Applicants should
not assume that the submission of an application will automatically
lead to the granting of an extension.

RG 44.9 The question has arisen as to whether a company which
has been granted an extension of time and which seeks a further
extension needs to lodge a subsequent application before the
expiration of the original due date or before the extended date.
Subsequent applications need not be made by the unextended date but
must be made prior to the expiration of any extended date.

RG 44.10 Applications for extension of time may be lodged at any
ASIC office. However, applications relating to listed public
companies will be dealt with more quickly if they are lodged at the
Regional Office in the state in which the company has its principal
place of business (or the Regional Office the company usually deals
with). Applications relating to unlisted public companies should be
sent to ASIC’s Information Processing Centre, Customer Service
Branch, Gippsland Mail Centre, Morwell, Victoria 3841. If a number
of companies in a group all require extensions of time and the group
contains a mix of listed and unlisted public companies, all applications
should be lodged at one Regional Office.

RG 44.11 An application (Form 2501) should be accompanied by the
prescribed fee (see Item 27 in the Schedule to the Corporations (Fees)
Regulations for the appropriate fee). ASIC may refuse to deal with the
application until the fee is paid.

RG 44.12 Applications which have not been:

(a) made by the company;


                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 1999
                                                                       Page 3
            REGULATORY GUIDE 44: Annual general meeting—extension of time




(b) signed by a director or secretary; and
(c) lodged in time,
will be rejected.

Applications must be received by ASIC before the date on which the
AGM is due to be held: see RG 44.8 and RG 44.9.


Administrative policy

General
RG 44.13 ASIC can deal with an application as it sees fit and will
consider each on its merits within the guidelines specified in
RG 44.17–RG 44.25.

RG 44.14 ASIC is guided by the judgment of Bowen CJ in Re Gem
Explorations and Minerals Ltd [1975] 2 NSWLR 584. In refusing to
grant an extension of time, his Honour held that the obligation to hold
an AGM formed “an important safeguard for shareholders, investors
and creditors of companies” which “should be relaxed only for good
cause shown”.

RG 44.15 This decision was reached after his Honour considered and
   rejected the following arguments in support of the application:
(a) the company’s records were up to date;
(b) the company had engaged a reputable firm of chartered
    accountants to act as its auditors;
(c) the relationship between the company and other companies in the
    group was complex because of cross-shareholdings and
    intercompany debts;
(d) the company (an exploration company) faced valuation problems
    each year; and
(e) the company’s shareholders would not be prejudiced by a two-
    months delay in the holding of the AGM.
RG 44.16 In Re Oilmin NL (1982) 1 ACLC 279, Kelly J agreed to a
short extension of time because his Honour believed it would be in the
interests of shareholders to do so. The incumbent directors had been
accused of inefficient management by a substantial shareholder.
Kelly J agreed that on the one hand the directors needed time to
answer this allegation and on the other, shareholders needed time to



                    © Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 1999
                                                                         Page 4
              REGULATORY GUIDE 44: Annual general meeting—extension of time




consider whether they should vote for a person nominated as a
director by the dissident shareholder.

RG 44.17 An AGM is the forum at which a company’s members
meet with those entrusted with the company’s management to review
the company’s operations for the past year. Typically, they consider
the company’s prospects, elect directors, declare dividends (if any),
appoint auditors if necessary and consider any other business. An
AGM is therefore an important meeting for the members. ASIC will
usually be inclined to grant an extension of time only if:

(a) the inability of a company to hold its AGM on time is due to
    factors beyond its control, eg temporary or permanent loss of key
    personnel including the external auditor (although even in such a
    case the likelihood of an extension being granted will decrease as
    the extent of external interest in the company increases); or
(b) ASIC is persuaded that it is in the interests of the shareholders to
    do so (as per the Oilmin judgment referred to above).

Change in a financial year
RG 44.18 A public company’s first financial year starts on the day
when it is registered or incorporated, and may last for any period of up
to 18 months as determined by its directors (s323D(1)). Each of its
subsequent financial years must:

(a) start at the end of a previous financial year; and
(b) be 12 months long (s323D(2)).
[Historical note: RG 44.18 amended 7/7/1999 by replacing in the first sentence, the
words “a period of between 12 and 18 months” with the words “any period of up to
18 months”.]

RG 44.19 There are a few exceptions to the general rule that a public
company’s financial year must be 12 months long. One exception is
that the directors of the company may determine that the financial
year is to be shorter or longer than 12 months by a period of no more
than seven days (s323D(2)).

RG 44.20 A public company might also seek to apply to ASIC for
relief under s340 from the requirements of s323D(2). In accordance
with s342, the applicant would generally have to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of ASIC that complying with the requirement for the
company’s financial year to be a period of 12 months would impose
unreasonable burdens. Applications should comply with the
requirements of the Law and applicants should also refer to



                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 1999
                                                                          Page 5
            REGULATORY GUIDE 44: Annual general meeting—extension of time




Superseded Policy Statement 43 Financial reports and audit relief
[SPS 43] and to Regulatory Guide 51 Applications for relief (RG 51).

RG 44.21 A third exception is provided by s323D(3) which may
have the effect of compelling a change in the financial year of a public
company. Section 323D(3) requires a company, registered scheme or
disclosing entity that has to prepare consolidated financial statements
to do whatever is necessary to ensure that the financial years of its
consolidated entities are synchronised with its own financial years. To
facilitate the synchronisation, the financial year of a controlled entity
may be extended or shortened. An extended financial year cannot be
longer than 18 months (s323D(4)).

RG 44.22 A fourth exception results from ASIC Class Order
[CO 98/96] which may allow a foreign controlled public company to
have a financial year of up to 18 months in order to synchronise its
financial year with that of its foreign parent (see Regulatory Guide 58
Reporting requirements — registered foreign companies and
Australian companies with foreign company shareholders (RG 58).

RG 44.23 It may be that the effect of:

(a) a determination of the directors, as referred to in RG 44.19;
(b) a successful application for ASIC relief, as referred to in
    RG 44.20;
(c) a synchronisation which is required by s323D(3), as referred to in
    RG 44.21; or
(d) application of Class Order [CO 98/96], as referred to in RG 44.22,
will be such that a public company is not able to hold an AGM in a
particular calendar year. Where that occurs ASIC will generally grant
an application under s250P to allow the AGM to be held in the
following calendar year.

Companies in receivership
RG 44.24 If a company is in receivership and the receiver has control
over the management of all the day-to-day operations of the company,
ASIC will be inclined to grant an extension of up to six months to hold
the AGM. This relief will be conditional on the directors ensuring that a
copy of the Report as to affairs (Form 507) and Accounts by a scheme
administrator/controller/administrator of Deed of Company
Arrangement (Form 508) are sent to every member in lieu of financial
statements (made out in accordance with Chapter 2M of the Law) at
about the same time as these documents are lodged with ASIC. Further



                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 1999
                                                                       Page 6
            REGULATORY GUIDE 44: Annual general meeting—extension of time




extensions may be granted, subject to a full reassessment of the
circumstances.

RG 44.25 In cases where the directors retain some control over the
management of the company, an extension of up to two months may
be given if the applicants demonstrate that the receivership has
resulted in the delay in holding the AGM. ASIC believes that an
extension beyond this would generally deny the members of the
company access to information at a critical time and be contrary to
their interests.


Applications
RG 44.26 Applications must address all factors in support of the
grant of relief as outlined in this guide. (Applicants should also refer
to RG 51.) Applications which do not sufficiently address these
matters will not be considered by ASIC until all relevant information
is provided. See RG 44.10 for where to send applications.


Review of ASIC’s decision
RG 44.27 A company may apply to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal under s1317B(1) of the Law for a review of an ASIC
decision not to allow an extension of time. If ASIC grants an
extension, other persons affected by the decision may apply for a
review of the decision.




                   © Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 1999
                                                                        Page 7
