REGULATORY GUIDE 90

Example Statement of
Advice: Scaled advice for a
new client

December 2017




About this guide
This guide is for Australian financial services (AFS) licensees, authorised
representatives and advisers who give personal advice to retail clients.

It explains how and why we have developed an example Statement of
Advice (SOA) for scaled advice (i.e. personal advice that is limited in scope)
on personal insurance for a new retail client.

The example SOA was developed in consultation with stakeholders, and we
acknowledge their valuable contribution throughout the process.
                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how regulated
                                      entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in December 2017 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 90, issued August 2013
                                    Superseded guide Example Statement of Advice (SOA) for a limited
                                     financial advice scenario for a new client, issued August 2005,
                                     rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                               Page 2
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Scope of this guide ..................................................................................4
                                    Aims of the example SOA........................................................................6
                                    Design and structure of the example SOA ..............................................7
                                    Financial advice scenario ........................................................................8
                             B      Aims of the example SOA .....................................................................9
                                    Legislative requirements ..........................................................................9
                                    Purpose of an SOA ................................................................................10
                                    Other communications with a client .......................................................12
                             C      Design and structure of the example SOA........................................14
                                    Design and layout ..................................................................................14
                                    Key sections of the example SOA .........................................................16
                                    What is not included in the example SOA .............................................21
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................23
                             Related information .....................................................................................27
                             Appendix 1: Financial advice scenario for example SOA .......................28
                             Appendix 2: Example SOA .........................................................................30




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                                      Page 3
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              The focus of this guide is the example Statement of Advice (SOA) in
                              Appendix 2.

                              The example SOA is based on a hypothetical limited financial advice
                              scenario for personal insurance. It illustrates how an adviser can produce a
                              compliant SOA that is concise, is structured in a way that is easy to follow
                              and is written in simple, plain language.

                              The example SOA has been developed in line with our increasing use of
                              behavioural research to understand regulatory problems. Our aim is to
                              provide guidance to help make SOAs more effective and easier for retail
                              clients to read and understand, as well as to assist advisers to make better
                              use of SOAs.

                              It is not designed to illustrate what we would consider to be the best advice
                              in this scenario.


Scope of this guide
              RG 90.1        The focus of this guide is the example SOA in Appendix 2. This example
                             SOA is based on a hypothetical financial advice scenario described in
                             Appendix 1. The example SOA provides an example of scaled advice
                             (i.e. personal advice that is limited in scope) about personal insurance—
                             including life and total and permanent disability (TPD) cover, income
                             protection insurance and trauma insurance—for a new client.

                                  Note: In this guide, we have used the term ‘client’ to refer to a ‘retail client’.

              RG 90.2        This guide briefly sets out the aims of the example SOA, highlights the
                             various sections of the example SOA, and explains what these sections
                             contain and why.

              RG 90.3        The example SOA illustrates how an adviser can produce a compliant SOA
                             that is clear, concise and effective. It is structured in a way that is easy to
                             follow and written in simple, plain language.

              RG 90.4        The example SOA has been developed in line with our increasing use of
                             behavioural research to understand regulatory problems and, in some cases,
                             design and refine solutions for them.

              RG 90.5        We designed the example SOA based on what we think is good disclosure
                             practice (not best disclosure practice) for an SOA dealing with such a
                             financial advice scenario.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                       Page 4
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




              RG 90.6        While the example SOA has been prepared for a personal insurance advice
                             scenario, we have tried to create an example that can be adapted to other
                             financial advice scenarios. We therefore encourage advisers to use the
                             example SOA as a model for other SOAs.

              RG 90.7        We suggest that advisers consider the style, content and layout of the
                             example SOA in light of the particular SOA they are producing. We
                             recognise that the style, content, layout and length of an SOA will vary
                             depending on various matters, including the scope and complexity of the
                             advice. The example SOA is not intended to be used as a template, so it is
                             unlikely that an adviser could use it without modification.

              RG 90.8        You may reproduce all or any part of the example SOA, in hard copy and/or
                             in electronic format, without asking for permission from ASIC.

              RG 90.9        For further example SOAs, see the appendix to Regulatory Guide 244
                             Giving information, general advice and scaled advice (RG 244). The
                             examples in RG 244 are designed to illustrate the differences between giving
                             factual information, general advice and scaled advice.

              RG 90.10       Our general approach to compliance with the SOA requirements is set out in
                             Section D of Regulatory Guide 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—
                             Conduct and disclosure (RG 175).

              RG 90.11       Regulatory Guide 221 Facilitating digital financial services disclosures
                             (RG 221) explains our approach to facilitating digital disclosure. We
                             encourage advisers to explore more innovative forms of disclosure and,
                             where advisers are concerned that there are remaining regulatory barriers, we
                             are open to granting individual relief to facilitate the use of these kinds of
                             disclosure where they are consistent with our Good Disclosure Principles set
                             out in Section C of Regulatory Guide 168 Disclosure: Product Disclosure
                             Statements (and other disclosure obligations) (RG 168).

              RG 90.12       We have also provided—in the appendix to Report 413 Review of retail life
                             insurance advice (REP 413)—a checklist of matters that advisers should
                             consider when giving life insurance advice. This checklist includes guidance
                             about how to communicate the advice in an SOA.

              RG 90.13       We will continue to assess SOAs against the existing law and our current
                             guidance. The example SOA is an illustrative aid. As stated above, we
                             encourage advisers to consider it as a model when preparing their own
                             SOAs. However, we do not intend to assess any SOAs against the example
                             SOA in a compliance review.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                             Page 5
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




Aims of the example SOA
              RG 90.14       The purpose of an SOA is to communicate to the client important and
                             relevant information about the advice being provided to enable the client to
                             make an informed decision about whether to act on the advice.

              RG 90.15       Section B of this guide sets out the legislative requirements that apply to
                             SOAs, and what we think should be included in an SOA to enable a client to
                             make an informed decision about whether to act on the advice.

              RG 90.16       The example SOA and this guide are underpinned by our current guidance
                             on SOA requirements, including the requirement for clear, concise and
                             effective disclosure. The design of the example SOA has also been based on
                             insights from behavioural research into how people find and understand the
                             information in SOAs. The language, structure, content and length of the
                             example SOA are designed to make it a relatively simple and effective
                             communication tool.

              RG 90.17       We have developed the example SOA as a communication tool that sets out
                             and explains the advice. It has not been designed for use as:
                             (a)   a compliance tool;
                             (b)   a mechanism to protect the providing entity against liability;
                                   Note: A ‘providing entity’ is the person to whom the obligations in Pt 7.7 of the
                                   Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) apply. This is the Australian financial
                                   services (AFS) licensee or authorised representative that provides the financial product
                                   advice.

                             (c)   a complete record of all information that you would expect to find in the
                                   client file (i.e. the information kept about the advice provided to the
                                   client); or
                             (d)   a place to include additional information not required by law
                                   (e.g. educational material, which may be attached or provided
                                   separately).

              RG 90.18       The example SOA also provides an example of scaled advice. It demonstrates
                             how an adviser can clearly communicate the scope of such advice. For more
                             guidance about giving scaled advice, see RG 244.

              RG 90.19       We developed the example SOA on the basis that the adviser in our financial
                             advice scenario is maintaining information on a client file, and that this file
                             shows that the adviser has met the best interests duty and related obligations
                             in Div 2 of Pt 7.7A of the Corporations Act.

                                   Note: See RG 90.37–RG 90.39 for a description of the record-keeping obligations that
                                   apply when giving personal advice to clients.

              RG 90.20       Clients and their advisers will discuss a broad range of matters over the
                             course of their relationship. While these matters may provide context and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                     Page 6
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                             background for the advice, not all this information should be in the SOA.
                             Information can be communicated to the client in other ways: see RG 90.43.


Design and structure of the example SOA
               RG 90.21      Section C of this guide explains in detail the design and structure of the
                             example SOA. We describe what each section of the example SOA contains
                             and explain why this information has been included. Table 1 summarises the
                             sections included in the example SOA.

Table 1:     Key sections of the example SOA

 Section                      Purpose

 Front cover                  The front cover sets out basic information—such as the name of the adviser and
                              their contact details—that the clients need to know before they read the contents
                              of the SOA. It explains what the SOA is about, and why clients should read it.

 Table of contents            The table of contents helps clients navigate the document. We consider a table of
                              contents to be particularly useful if an SOA is more than 10 pages long.

 Summary of my                This section provides an overview of the adviser’s recommended insurance
 insurance                    products and commissions. It refers clients to key sections of the SOA for more
 recommendations and          information about these topics.
 commissions                        Note: The SOA should also disclose any fees or costs associated with the advice and,
                                    if these apply, this should be reflected in the heading to this section.

 What you want                This section outlines the adviser’s understanding of the clients’ insurance
                              preferences and needs.

 What you should know         This section sets out the limits on the advice (i.e. the scope) and other key
 about my advice              information the clients need to know about the advice.

 About you: Brad and          This section summarises details from the clients’ personal and financial profile,
 Zara                         which the adviser has gathered to understand their needs and what is required to
                              meet those needs.

 My advice                    This section sets out the adviser’s recommendations for meeting the clients’
                              needs, as identified in the ‘What you want’ section.

 Reasons for my               This section explains why the advice is in the clients’ best interests and is
 recommendations              appropriate in light of their financial circumstances and objectives.

 Consequences of my           This section sets out the financial consequences and risks of the advice.
 advice

 How to follow my             This section outlines the steps the clients need to take if they wish to follow the
 advice                       advice.

 My commissions               This section sets out any commissions the adviser and their AFS licensee would
                              receive if the clients decide to act on the advice.
                                    Note: If there are any fees or costs associated with the advice, this should be made
                                    clear in the heading to this section.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                      Page 7
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




 Section                      Purpose

 Authority to proceed         It is generally industry practice to include some kind of document giving the
                              adviser an ‘authority’ to proceed with the advice. We have included this authority,
                              together with a checklist of important things the clients should make sure they
                              have done before acting on the advice.



              RG 90.22       The last part of Section C of this guide sets out what is not included in the
                             example SOA and why. The types of information we have not included are:
                             (a)   disclaimers and warnings;
                             (b)   financial product information;
                             (c)   financial services provided; and
                             (d)   additional information not material to the advice or the basis of the
                                   advice.



Financial advice scenario
              RG 90.23       We have designed the example SOA based on a hypothetical and limited
                             financial advice scenario for personal insurance (i.e. one that does not
                             require a full financial plan).

              RG 90.24       The advice scenario deals with Brad and Zara—a married couple with two
                             young children—who have asked a financial planner, Sally Chong, to advise
                             them on personal insurance cover in the event of death or disability, taking
                             into account their current income and assets. This scenario is set out in more
                             detail in Appendix 1.

              RG 90.25       The advice we developed is one of a number of possible outcomes. While
                             we have tried to ensure that the financial advice scenario is as realistic as
                             possible, we recognise that there might be disagreement with some aspects
                             of the scenario. The example SOA in Appendix 2 is not designed to illustrate
                             what we would consider to be the best advice in this scenario.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                             Page 8
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




B          Aims of the example SOA

                              Key points

                              The example SOA, together with this guidance, is intended to help advisers
                              produce a relatively simple and effective SOA that complies with the SOA
                              requirements in Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act.

                              This section sets out the relevant legislative requirements, and provides a
                              brief overview of how the best interests duty affects the content of SOAs: see
                              RG 90.29–RG 90.31.

                              In preparing an SOA, we consider that the presentation requirements
                              (i.e. structure, layout and language) are as important as the content
                              requirements. This is why we have used insights from behavioural research to
                              improve the way our example SOA communicates information to clients.

                              It is particularly important to ensure that SOAs are not too long or complicated
                              because this detracts from client understanding. Although an adviser is likely
                              to consider and discuss a broad range of matters with the client, not all this
                              information needs to be in the SOA: see RG 90.40–RG 90.43.




Legislative requirements
              RG 90.26       We consider that the example SOA will help advisers comply with the SOA
                             requirements in Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act.

              RG 90.27       Under s947B, 947C and 947D, an SOA must contain:
                             (a)   a statement setting out the advice (see s947B(2)(a) and 947C(2)(a));
                             (b)   information about the basis on which the advice is or was given (see
                                   s947B(2)(b) and 947C(2)(b));
                             (c)   a statement setting out the name and contact details of the providing
                                   entity and, where relevant, the authorising AFS licensee (see
                                   s947B(2)(c) and 947C(2)(c)–(d));
                             (d)   information about remuneration, commissions and other benefits
                                   capable of influencing the providing entity in providing the advice (see
                                   s947B(2)(d) and 947C(2)(e));
                             (e)   information about any other interests, associations or relationships that
                                   might be expected to be or have been capable of influencing the
                                   providing entity in providing the advice (see s947B(2)(e) and
                                   947C(2)(f));
                             (f)   where the personal advice is based on incomplete or inaccurate
                                   information, a statement setting out the warning required by s961H (see
                                   s947B(2)(f)) and 947C(2)(g)); and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                             Page 9
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                             (g)   where the personal advice recommends the replacement of one financial
                                   product with another financial product (also known as ‘switching
                                   advice’), the additional information required by s947D.
                                   Note: Under s947B(2)(g) and 947C(2)(h), an SOA must also contain any other
                                   statements or information required by the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations
                                   Regulations). Currently, there are no requirements other than those specified above.

              RG 90.28       These requirements are subject to two general limitations, as set out in Table 2.

                             Table 2:      General limitations on the SOA requirements

                              Limitation               Description

                              Level of detail          The level of detail for each matter is generally what a
                                                       person as a retail client would reasonably require to make
                                                       a decision about whether to act on the advice: see
                                                       s947B(3) and 947C(3).

                              Clear, concise and       The statements and information in an SOA must be worded
                              effective                and presented in a clear, concise and effective manner:
                                                       see s947B(6) and 947C(6).
                                                             Note: For guidance on clear, concise and effective
                                                             disclosure, see RG 175.203–RG 175.207 in RG 175.



              RG 90.29       Part 7.7A of the Corporations Act contains a series of obligations that
                             financial advisers must meet in providing advice. These are designed to
                             reduce conflicts of interest and ensure the adviser gives priority to their
                             clients’ interests and provides advice of sufficient quality.

              RG 90.30       Under Div 2 of Pt 7.7A, financial advisers must comply with a best interests
                             duty when providing personal advice to clients. This duty requires advisers
                             to act in the best interests of their clients and to place the interests of their
                             clients ahead of their own: see s961B(1) and 961J(1).

              RG 90.31       An adviser is deemed to have satisfied the best interests duty in s961B(1) if
                             they can prove they have taken the steps set out in s961B(2)—referred to in
                             RG 175 as the ‘safe harbour’. One way for an adviser to demonstrate they
                             have satisfied the best interests duty is to ensure that the client file reflects
                             that the adviser has taken these ‘safe harbour’ steps. However, this is not the
                             only way an adviser may demonstrate they have acted in the best interests of
                             a client.
                                   Note: See Section E of RG 175 for more guidance on our expectations for complying
                                   with the best interests duty and related obligations.



Purpose of an SOA
              RG 90.32       The purpose of an SOA is to communicate to the client important and
                             relevant information about the advice so they can make an informed decision
                             about whether to act on the advice. The example SOA and this guide are



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                  Page 10
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                             underpinned by our current guidance on the SOA requirements, including
                             the requirement for clear, concise and effective disclosure. The design of the
                             example SOA has also been influenced by behavioural insights and primary
                             research on how people find and use information in SOAs.
                                   Note: See Section D of RG 175 and the Good Disclosure Principles in Section C of
                                   RG 168.

              RG 90.33       As outlined in RG 175, we consider that an SOA should clearly, concisely
                             and effectively summarise, for the benefit of the client:
                             (a)   the advice;
                             (b)   the reasoning that led to the advice, including:
                                   (i)     the subject matter of the advice sought by the client;
                                   (ii)    the scope of the advice;
                                   (iii)   a concise summary of the client’s relevant circumstances, as
                                           ascertained after making the inquiries required by s961B;
                                   (iv)    a generic description of the range of financial products, classes of
                                           financial product or strategies considered and investigated for the
                                           purposes of s961B;
                                   (v)     an explanation of why the advice and recommendations were
                                           considered appropriate, including in light of the alternative options
                                           considered, and the advantages and disadvantages (including risks)
                                           for the client if they follow the advice; and
                                   (vi)    an explanation of how the adviser has acted in the client’s best
                                           interests. We consider that it is good practice to set out the basis on
                                           which a reasonable adviser would believe that the advice is likely
                                           to leave the client in a better position if the client follows the
                                           advice.
                                   Note: For further guidance on preparing and providing an SOA, see Section D of RG 175.

              RG 90.34       Consistent with this purpose, we have developed the example SOA as a
                             communication tool that sets out and explains the advice. It has not been
                             designed for use as:
                             (a)   a compliance tool;
                             (b)   a mechanism to protect the providing entity against liability;
                             (c)   a complete record of all the information that you would expect to find in
                                   the client file (i.e. the information kept about the advice provided to the
                                   client); or
                             (d)   a place to include additional information not required by law
                                   (e.g. educational material, which may be attached or provided separately).
                                   Note 1: For more detail about the design of the SOA, see Section C of this guide. For
                                   guidance on preparing and providing suitable personal advice, see Section B of RG 175
                                   and Sections D–F of RG 244. For guidance on including additional information in an
                                   SOA, and the clear, concise and effective disclosure requirement, see RG 175.203–
                                   RG 175.207 of RG 175.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                Page 11
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




              RG 90.35       We have developed the example SOA on the basis that the adviser in our
                             financial advice scenario is maintaining information on a client file. This
                             client file should show the steps that the adviser has taken to satisfy the best
                             interests duty and related obligations in Div 2 of Pt 7.7A.

              RG 90.36       We have not included in the example SOA all of the information that we
                             would usually expect to find in the client file. For instance, the example
                             SOA does not include information about the alternative financial products or
                             strategies that were considered but rejected by the adviser in providing the
                             advice. However, we would expect this information to be clearly set out in
                             the client file.


                             Record-keeping obligations

              RG 90.37       An AFS licensee must ensure that records of advice are kept for a period of
                             at least seven years after the day the personal advice is provided to the client.
                             Class Order [CO 14/923] Record-keeping obligations for Australian
                             financial services licensees when giving personal advice modifies Div 3 of
                             Pt 7.6 of the Corporations Act, as it applies to all AFS licensees, to insert a
                             new section—s912G—which sets out the record-keeping requirements for
                             licensees when the licensee or its representatives (including advisers) give
                             personal advice to clients.

              RG 90.38       Section 912G(2)(c) requires that, when an AFS licensee or its representative
                             provides personal advice to clients, the licensee must ensure that records are
                             kept of the advice given. This includes an obligation to keep copies of SOAs.

                                  Note: We have provided guidance on the record-keeping obligations in Section D
                                  of RG 175.

              RG 90.39       The information we require to be kept, under the record-keeping obligations,
                             will help to demonstrate that the adviser has satisfied the best interests duty
                             and related obligations.



Other communications with a client
              RG 90.40       It is important to remember that an SOA forms only one part of the advice
                             process. In developing the example SOA, we considered what information
                             could be excluded, based on both the disclosure requirements and the
                             purpose of the SOA in the context of the whole adviser–client relationship.

              RG 90.41       The SOA is intended to communicate to the client specific information at a
                             particular point in time. Over the course of their relationship, an adviser and
                             client will generally consider and discuss a broad range of matters that help
                             provide the background to (and eventual basis for) the advice that
                             is provided.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                              Page 12
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




              RG 90.42       Some of these matters include:
                             (a)   the client’s personal circumstances (including their risk tolerance),
                                   financial situation, and goals and objectives;
                             (b)   financial concepts, including the concept of risk and return and what
                                   this means for asset allocation when investing;
                             (c)   the financial services that the providing entity is authorised to provide
                                   (including the cost of those services and any limitations that apply to
                                   those services);
                             (d)   information about financial strategies and financial products; and
                             (e)   the advice itself (including its cost, the advantages and disadvantages,
                                   and the alternative financial products and strategies that were
                                   considered by the adviser).

              RG 90.43       While these matters may provide context and background for the advice, not
                             all this information needs to be in the SOA. Information about these matters
                             could be provided to the client in:
                             (a)   other documents, including the Financial Services Guide (FSG),
                                   Product Disclosure Statements (PDSs), promotional literature and
                                   educational material;
                             (b)   verbal communications, such as face-to-face meetings and telephone
                                   conversations; and
                             (c)   other written communications, such as emails and letters.

                                   Note: For more information about what has not been included in the example SOA, see
                                   RG 90.83–RG 90.93.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                               Page 13
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




C          Design and structure of the example SOA

                              Key points

                              This section explains in detail the design and structure of the example
                              SOA, and describes what each section contains and why.

                              The example SOA has been designed to make it as easy as possible for
                              clients to understand and navigate.

                              The design also takes into account any technical constraints that an
                              adviser may face in adapting the example SOA to different personal advice
                              scenarios. It has been created in a basic word-processing package, using
                              simple design and layout techniques that should be available to all
                              advisers.

                              In keeping with the requirement for clear, concise and effective disclosure,
                              the example SOA does not contain any information that does not need to
                              be in an SOA. For example, the body of the example SOA does not contain
                              standard disclaimers or warnings, financial product information, advertising
                              material or educational information.




Design and layout
              RG 90.44       We have used simple design and layout techniques in the example SOA
                             (e.g. headings, tables and bullet points) to help highlight key information and
                             make the document easier to read and navigate.

              RG 90.45       We have deliberately used language that is simple and easy to understand.
                             Our aim was to develop a communication tool that can be understood by
                             anyone seeking personal insurance advice, regardless of their previous level
                             of understanding about insurance products.

              RG 90.46       We have used the following strategies to make the SOA easier to read and
                             understand:
                             (a)   where possible, technical words and phrases have been replaced with
                                   more commonly understood terms;
                             (b)   where legal or technical terms have been used, their meaning and
                                   implications are explained in simple, plain language;
                             (c)   acronyms and abbreviations have only been used where necessary and
                                   are defined at the first point of usage;
                             (d)   short, simple sentences have been used, with no complex sentence
                                   structures;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                            Page 14
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                             (e)   where possible, tables and bullet points have been used to break up the
                                   text and present information in a clear, accessible way, and to make it
                                   easier for clients to find and compare information; and
                             (f)   different types of information have been identified and separated into
                                   two ‘voices’, using a different style to represent each voice:
                                   (i)    the first ‘voice’ (in normal text) is the voice of the adviser and sets
                                          out key information, facts and recommendations; and
                                   (ii)   the second ‘voice’ (in italics with an arrow bullet) provides further
                                          explanation or expands on the implications of what the first voice
                                          has said.

              RG 90.47       In addition, some repetition has been employed throughout the example
                             SOA, based on the knowledge that many people do not read these types of
                             documents from cover to cover. Some people may only skim the document
                             and/or engage with specific sections. For these people, the table of contents
                             allows them to find the information they want and only read that
                             information. Some repetition has been necessary to make each section make
                             sense by itself.

              RG 90.48       The example SOA has been designed in accordance with the principles of
                             the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0, which apply to all
                             material published on Australian Government websites. This ensures that the
                             document can be accessed and understood by people with disabilities,
                             including those using assistive technologies such as screen readers.

              RG 90.49       We note that SOAs are challenging documents for clients. We would expect
                             the adviser to talk through the SOA with the client as part of the advice
                             process.

              RG 90.50       In our view, the structure of the example SOA reflects the process of giving
                             advice, including a discussion of:
                             (a)   the clients’ goals and objectives;
                             (b)   what the advice does and does not cover (i.e. its scope);
                             (c)   the clients’ personal circumstances and financial situation;
                             (d)   the advice;
                                   Note: The example SOA does not include detailed information about the alternative
                                   financial products or strategies that were considered but do not form part of the final
                                   recommendations given by the adviser. However, we would expect this information to
                                   be recorded on the client file in accordance with the record-keeping obligations: see
                                   RG 90.37–RG 90.39.

                             (e)   why the advice is in the clients’ best interests and appropriate;
                             (f)   the financial consequences and risks of the advice, including the
                                   consequences of replacing one financial product with another;
                             (g)   what the clients should do to follow the advice; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                   Page 15
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                             (h)   the commissions associated with the advice—these have also been
                                   summarised in the ‘Summary of my insurance recommendations and
                                   commissions’ section in order to strengthen the remuneration
                                   disclosure.

              RG 90.51       The design of the example SOA also takes into account any technical
                             constraints that an adviser may face in adapting the SOA to different
                             personal advice scenarios. The example SOA has been formatted in a
                             common word-processing package that should be available to all advisers.


Key sections of the example SOA

                             Front cover
              RG 90.52       The front cover sets out the basic information that the clients need to know
                             before they read the contents of their SOA. This includes:
                             (a)   the fact that the document is called a Statement of Advice;
                             (b)   the name of the adviser and their contact details;
                             (c)   the name of the authorising AFS licensee and its contact details; and
                             (d)   a description of what the document is about.

              RG 90.53       We have also provided a list of attached PDSs for the financial products that
                             have been recommended.


                             Table of contents

              RG 90.54       The table of contents helps clients to navigate the document.


                             Summary of my insurance recommendations and
                             commissions

              RG 90.55       This section provides a short summary of the adviser’s individual insurance
                             recommendations for Brad and Zara and the associated commissions. It
                             refers the clients to key parts of the SOA for more details about these topics.

              RG 90.56       The summary of the commissions has been included in this section to
                             illustrate how an adviser can provide prominent, upfront disclosure of
                             commissions: see also RG 90.76–RG 90.80.

                                   Note: The SOA should also disclose any fees or costs associated with the advice and, if
                                   these apply, this should be reflected in the heading to this section.

              RG 000.57      In addition, we have included a heading for ‘Conflicts of interest’, under
                             which any other interests, associations or relationships that might be
                             expected to be or have been capable of influencing the advice should be
                             disclosed.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                  Page 16
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                             What you want

              RG 90.58       This section summarises the adviser’s understanding of the clients’ needs
                             and preferences. It broadly outlines the clients’ combined goals and
                             objectives, as described by Brad and Zara, including their priorities and
                             attitudes to risk.


                             What you should know about my advice

              RG 90.59       This section outlines the scope of the advice and other key information the
                             clients need to know about the advice.

              RG 90.60       It highlights limits on the advice and reminds the clients that the adviser can
                             provide them with further advice, if they want it, at an additional cost. This
                             gives the clients enough information to make them aware of other matters
                             they might need to consider in the future. We have deliberately drafted this
                             information so it is not a disclaimer or warning.

              RG 90.61       We have also included an expiry date for the advice, which is 30 days after
                             the SOA is issued, to highlight that the advice has a time limit and that the
                             clients should not act on the advice after a certain date. It is important for the
                             clients to know that the advice is only appropriate for them at this point in
                             time, based on their current personal circumstances and financial situation,
                             and other factors such as the financial products currently on the AFS
                             licensee’s approved product list.


                             About you: Brad and Zara

              RG 90.62       This section summarises details from the clients’ personal and financial
                             profile that are relevant to the advice being provided and the basis for the
                             advice.

              RG 90.63       While the client file would contain more detailed information about the
                             clients’ personal circumstances and financial situation, we did not consider it
                             necessary to include all of this information in the example SOA. We
                             recognise that the level of relevant personal and financial information
                             included in an SOA may vary depending on the scope and complexity of the
                             advice being sought and the circumstances of the particular client.

              RG 90.64       The information in the ‘About you’ section of the example SOA has been
                             organised under separate headings, as set out in Table 3.

Table 3:    Headings used in the ‘About you’ section of the example SOA

Heading                              Explanation

Personal details                     This section summarises the clients’ relevant circumstances.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                            Page 17
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




Heading                              Explanation

What you own and what you owe        This section sets out the clients’ existing assets and liabilities.

What you earn each year              This section outlines the clients’ individual and combined earnings after tax and
                                     benefits.

What you spend each year             This section calculates the clients’ combined total annual expenses.

Your current personal insurance      This section summarises the clients’ existing personal insurance products.



                             My advice
              RG 90.65       This section sets out the adviser’s recommendations for meeting the clients’
                             needs, as set out in the ‘What you want’ section. The information has been
                             organised under the separate headings listed in Table 4.

Table 4:    Headings used in the ‘My advice’ section of the example SOA

Heading                       Explanation

Insurance needs: Brad         This section calculates the total cover required to meet Brad’s objectives and
                              explains how it will meet those objectives.

Insurance needs: Zara         This section calculates the total cover required to meet Zara’s objectives and
                              explains how it will meet those objectives.



                             Reasons for my recommendations

              RG 90.66       This section summarises why the recommendations are considered
                             appropriate for the clients, and the basis on which it would be reasonable to
                             conclude that they will be better off if they follow the advice.

              RG 90.67       We have limited the information to key points that we think the clients need
                             to know about the recommendations to understand why the advice is in their
                             best interests and appropriate in light of their relevant circumstances.

              RG 90.68       We have not included a detailed analysis of each of the recommended
                             insurance products because this would be in the relevant PDSs. We consider
                             that the example SOA provides sufficient information for the clients to
                             understand why the type and amount of insurance cover has been
                             recommended.

              RG 90.69       In providing personal advice, advisers must comply with the best interests
                             duty and related obligations. This means that, among other things, advisers
                             must conduct a reasonable investigation into the financial products that
                             might achieve the objectives and meet the needs of the client that would
                             reasonably be considered relevant to the advice on that subject matter.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                            Page 18
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




              RG 90.70       However, the SOA does not need to set out all the details of this
                             investigation. We have assumed that the adviser has recorded sufficient
                             information on the client files to demonstrate that the advice is in the clients’
                             best interests and is appropriate.

              RG 90.71       We have provided detailed guidance on the best interests duty and related
                             obligations in Section E of RG 175.

              RG 90.72       However, we recognise that the level of information provided in an SOA
                             may vary depending on the advice being sought and the circumstances of the
                             particular client.


                             Consequences of my advice

              RG 90.73       We have limited the information in this section to the relevant information
                             that the clients need to know in order to:
                             (a)   understand the financial consequences and risks of the advice; and
                             (b)   decide whether to follow the advice.

              RG 90.74       This section of the example SOA has been organised under the broad
                             headings listed in Table 5.

Table 5:    Key headings used in the ‘Consequences of my advice’ section of the example SOA

Heading                    Explanation

Consequences of            This section addresses the disclosure obligation in s947D of the Corporations Act.
replacing products         Section 947D applies where personal advice is, or includes, a recommendation to
                           replace one financial product with another.
                           We have included a table under the heading ‘Comparison of replacement and existing
                           insurance products: Brad’, which sets out the immediate consequences of following the
                           advice, including a comparison between the sums insured and the total annual
                           premiums for each policy. If there are costs associated with cancelling an existing
                           insurance policy and obtaining a new policy, these should be included here.

Additional                 This section explains the financial consequences and risks of following the advice in
consequences and           detail, including the estimated impact of the recommendations on the clients’ cash flow
risks you should           and retirement savings. The purpose of this information is to ensure that clients have all
understand                 the information they need to make a decision. We have tailored the information to the
                           particular clients and the recommendations made.
                           We have deliberately not included generic information about risk (e.g. generic
                           references to inflation risk).



                             How to follow my advice

              RG 90.75       This section outlines the steps that the clients need to take if they wish to
                             follow the advice.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                             Page 19
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                             My commissions

              RG 90.76       While the provisions on conflicted and other banned remuneration in Divs 4
                             and 5 of Pt 7.7A of the Corporations Act prohibit many benefits that an
                             adviser can receive, some commissions are excluded from the conflicted and
                             other banned remuneration provisions and are still permitted. For advice on
                             life insurance, commissions are permitted if requirements imposed by ASIC
                             setting out maximum levels of upfront and ongoing commissions are met:
                             see the Corporations Amendment (Life Insurance Remuneration
                             Arrangements) Act 2017.

              RG 90.77       If an adviser and their AFS licensee do receive allowable commissions, they
                             will need to provide details of this in the SOA: see s947B(2)(d) and
                             947C(2)(e).

                                   Note: For further guidance on complying with the conflicted and other banned
                                   remuneration provisions, see Regulatory Guide 246 Conflicted and other banned
                                   remuneration (RG 246).

              RG 90.78       In the example SOA, we have sought to strengthen remuneration disclosure
                             by including a summary of the commissions associated with the advice in
                             the ‘Summary of my insurance recommendations and commissions’ section.
                             This disclosure is in addition to a full breakdown of commissions, within the
                             body of the SOA, which appears before the authority to proceed. This is
                             intended to draw the clients’ attention to the information and give them an
                             opportunity to review the commissions before signing the document.

              RG 90.79       In addition to information about commissions, the SOA should clearly
                             disclose:
                             (a)   any fees payable for the advice and for preparing the SOA; and
                             (b)   any product costs the clients will pay if they purchase the recommended
                                   financial products.

              RG 90.80       If the above apply, this should be made clear in the heading.


                             Authority to proceed

              RG 90.81       It is generally industry practice to include some kind of document giving the
                             adviser an ‘authority’ to proceed according to the advice. We have included
                             an ‘Authority to proceed’, together with a checklist of important things the
                             clients should make sure they have done before they act on the advice.

              RG 90.82       This section also includes information about the AFS licensee’s continuing
                             review service and the cooling-off period that applies if the clients apply for
                             the recommended products and then change their minds.
                                   Note: It is important that clients know about their cooling-off rights. Because the
                                   example SOA refers the clients to the PDS for each financial product, rather than
                                   providing detailed information in the SOA, we have assumed that the adviser has




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                     Page 20
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                                  explained to the clients the importance of their cooling-off rights and has shown them
                                  where that information can be found in the PDS.




What is not included in the example SOA

                             Disclaimers and warnings

              RG 90.83       Consistent with its purpose as a communication tool (and not a mechanism
                             to protect against liability), we have not included in the example SOA any
                             disclaimers designed to protect advisers from liability for the advice.

                                  Note: Standard disclaimers and warnings should be distinguished from information that
                                  clients need to know in order to evaluate the consequences and risks of the advice.

              RG 90.84       We have excluded this information because it is not designed to help the
                             clients understand (and decide whether to rely on) personal advice. We think
                             it would be more appropriate to include this type of information in other
                             documents (e.g. documents that establish the legal relationship between the
                             adviser and the clients, such as the FSG or the letter of engagement).

              RG 90.85       However, where personal advice is, or may be, based on incomplete or
                             inaccurate information, a warning must be given to the client. If the SOA is
                             the means by which the advice is provided, or the SOA is given to the client
                             at the same time as the advice is provided, the warning may be given by
                             including it in the SOA: see s961H.


                             Financial product information

              RG 90.86       We have not included detailed information about the recommended financial
                             products in the example SOA because this information would be in the PDS
                             for each product. We have assumed, however, that the adviser has drawn the
                             clients’ attention to the relevant information in each PDS.

              RG 90.87       The PDS is the point-of-sale document that sets out the significant features
                             of a financial product, including its risks, benefits and cost. Its broad
                             objectives are to help clients compare and make informed choices about
                             financial products.

                                  Note: For further guidance about complying with the PDS requirements, see RG 168.


                             Financial services provided

              RG 90.88       We have not included information about any of the other financial services
                             provided by the adviser because this information would be available in the
                             FSG. We have assumed, however, that the adviser has drawn the clients’
                             attention to the relevant information in the FSG.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                  Page 21
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




              RG 90.89       Under the Corporations Act, the FSG must include (among other things)
                             information about the kinds of financial services that the adviser is
                             authorised to provide: see s942B(2)(c) and 942C(2)(d).

                                  Note: For further information and guidance about what must be included in an FSG, see
                                  Section C of RG 175—in particular, RG 175.108–RG 175.124.


                             Additional information

              RG 90.90       We consider that an SOA should be confined to explaining the advice and
                             the basis for the advice. This means that we have not included any
                             information in the example SOA that does not satisfy this purpose.

              RG 90.91       In this context, we consider that it might be more appropriate for additional
                             information that is not material to the advice, or to the basis for the advice,
                             to be given to, and discussed with, clients through some other means (e.g. in
                             other documents such as promotional material, or in face-to-face meetings).
                             In developing the example SOA, we have assumed that the adviser has told
                             the clients that additional information can be provided on request.

              RG 90.92       While we recognise that the SOA may have some educational value, its
                             primary purpose is to disclose to the client key information about the advice.
                             We do not consider that it is necessary to provide information in an SOA to
                             educate a client about financial products.

              RG 90.93       We have therefore not included additional educational information in the
                             body of the example SOA. Instead, we have included a reference to some
                             (hypothetical) attached educational material and provided a link to ASIC’s
                             MoneySmart website (www.moneysmart.gov.au). Educational material may
                             also be provided separately.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                               Page 22
                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




Key terms

                              Term                        Meaning in this document

                              advice                      Personal advice given to clients

                              adviser                     A natural person providing personal advice to clients on
                                                          behalf of an AFS licensee who is either:
                                                           an authorised representative of a licensee; or
                                                           an employee representative of a licensee
                                                                Note: This is the person to whom the obligations in Div 2 of
                                                                Pt 7.7A of the Corporations Act apply: see the definition of
                                                                ‘advice provider’ in the ‘key terms’ in RG 175.

                              AFS licence                 An Australian financial services licence under s913B of the
                                                          Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries on
                                                          a financial services business to provide financial services
                                                                Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                              AFS licensee                A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                              approved product list       A list of financial products, determined by the AFS
                                                          licensee, and considered suitable for the licensee’s
                                                          representatives to recommend to clients

                              ASIC                        Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                              authorised                  A person authorised by an AFS licensee, in accordance
                              representative              with s916A or 916B of the Corporations Act, to provide a
                                                          financial service or services on behalf of the licensee
                                                                Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                              best interests duty         The duty to act in the best interests of the client when
                                                          giving personal advice to a client as set out in s961B(1) of
                                                          the Corporations Act

                              best interests duty         The obligations in Div 2 of Pt 7.7A of the Corporations Act
                              and related
                              obligations

                              client                      Retail client

                              client’s relevant           The objectives, financial situation and needs of a client
                              circumstances               that would reasonably be considered relevant to the
                                                          subject matter of advice sought by the client




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                     Page 23
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              conflicted                A benefit given to an AFS licensee, or a representative of
                              remuneration              a licensee, who provides financial product advice to
                                                        clients that, because of the nature of the benefit or the
                                                        circumstances in which it is given, could reasonably be
                                                        expected to influence:
                                                         the choice of financial product recommended to clients
                                                          by the licensee or its representative; or
                                                         the financial product advice given to clients by the
                                                          licensee or its representative.
                                                        In addition, the benefit must not be excluded from being
                                                        conflicted remuneration by the Corporations Act or
                                                        Corporations Regulations

                              conflicted and other      The provisions on conflicted remuneration and other
                              banned remuneration       banned remuneration in Divs 4 and 5 of Pt 7.7A of the
                              provisions                Corporations Act and in Div 4 of Pt 7.7A of the
                                                        Corporations Regulations

                              Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                        purposes of that Act

                              Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                              Regulations

                              example SOA               The example SOA set out in Appendix 2 to this guide

                              factual information       Objectively ascertainable information whose truth or
                                                        accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned

                              financial adviser         See ‘adviser’

                              financial product         A facility through which, or through the acquisition of
                                                        which, a person does one or more of the following:
                                                         makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                         manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                         makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s763A of the
                                                             Corporations Act: see also s763B–765A.

                              financial product         A recommendation or a statement of opinion, or a report
                              advice                    of either of these things, that:
                                                         is intended to influence a person or persons in making
                                                          a decision about a particular financial product or class
                                                          of financial product, or an interest in a particular
                                                          financial product or class of financial product; or
                                                         could reasonably be regarded as being intended to
                                                          have such an influence.

                                                        This does not include anything in an exempt document or
                                                        statement
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s766B of the
                                                             Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                    Page 24
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              financial service         Has the meaning given in Div 4 of Pt 7.1 of the
                                                        Corporations Act

                              FSG                       A Financial Services Guide—a document required by
                                                        s941A or 941B to be given in accordance with Div 2 of
                                                        Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                              general advice            Financial product advice that is not personal advice
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s766B(4) of the
                                                             Corporations Act.

                              PDS                       A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that must
                                                        be given to a client for the offer or issue of a financial
                                                        product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                        Corporations Act
                                                             Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                              personal advice           Financial product advice given or directed to a person
                                                        (including by electronic means) in circumstances where:
                                                         the person giving the advice has considered one or
                                                          more of the client’s objectives, financial situation and
                                                          needs; or
                                                         a reasonable person might expect the person giving the
                                                          advice to have considered one or more of these matters
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s766B(3) of the
                                                             Corporations Act.

                              providing entity          A person to whom the obligations in Pt 7.7 of the
                                                        Corporations Act apply. This is the AFS licensee or an
                                                        authorised representative that provides the financial
                                                        product advice

                              Pt 7.7A (for example)     A part of the Corporations Act (in this example number
                                                        7.7A)

                              representative of an      Means:
                              AFS licensee               an authorised representative of the licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of the licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of a related body corporate of
                                                          the licensee; or
                                                         any other person acting on behalf of the licensee
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s910A of the
                                                             Corporations Act.

                              retail client             A client as defined in s761G of the Corporations Act and
                                                        Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Regulations

                              RG 175 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered
                                                        175)

                              s961 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                        numbered 961), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                    Page 25
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              scaled advice             Personal advice that is limited in scope

                              SOA                       A Statement of Advice—a document that must be given
                                                        to a client for the provision of personal advice under
                                                        Subdivs C and D of Div 3 of Pt 7.7 of the Corporations
                                                        Act
                                                             Note: See s761A for the exact definition.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                            Page 26
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




Related information
                             Headnotes
                             advice provider, adviser, best interests duty, best interests duty and related
                             obligations, communications with a client, example SOA, factual
                             information, financial advice scenario, financial product, financial product
                             advice, Financial Services Guide, FSG, general advice, goals and objectives,
                             life insurance, life insurance advice, PDS, personal advice, personal
                             insurance, Product Disclosure Statement, retail client, scaled advice, scope
                             of the advice, SOA, Statement of Advice, subject matter of advice sought by
                             the client


                             Regulatory guides
                             RG 168 Disclosure: Product Disclosure Statements (and other disclosure
                             obligations)

                             RG 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—Conduct and disclosure

                             RG 221 Facilitating digital financial services disclosures

                             RG 244 Giving information, general advice and scaled advice

                             RG 246 Conflicted and other banned remuneration


                             Reports
                             REP 413 Review of retail life insurance advice


                             Information sheets
                             INFO 182 Super switching advice: Complying with your obligations


                             Legislation
                             Corporations Act, Pts 7.6 and 7.7, Divs 2, 4 and 5 of Pt 7.7A, s942B, 942C,
                             947B, 947C, 947D, 961B, 961H, 961J

                             Corporations Regulations

                             Corporations Amendment (Future of Financial Advice) Act 2012

                             Corporations Amendment (Life Insurance Remuneration Arrangements) Act
                             2017

                             Corporations Amendment (Life Insurance Remuneration Arrangements)
                             Regulations 2017




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                            Page 27
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




Appendix 1: Financial advice scenario for example
SOA

              RG 90.94       We based our example SOA on a hypothetical and limited financial advice
                             scenario developed in consultation with stakeholders.

              RG 90.95       Table 6 and Table 7 describe the advice scenario, while the example SOA is
                             set out in Appendix 2.

              RG 90.96       The scenario deals with Brad and Zara Black—a married couple with two
                             young children who have asked a financial planner, Sally Chong, to advise
                             them on personal insurance cover in the event of death or disability, taking
                             into account their current income and assets. Sally is an authorised
                             representative of AFS licensee Planforit Pty Ltd.

Table 6:     Financial advice scenario

 Relevant area              Description

 Personal circumstances     Brad is 43 and Zara is 41. They are married with two children aged 10 and 7. Both
                            children are at public schools and it is not expected that they will go to private
                            schools in the future. Brad and Zara are both in excellent health and have standard
                            private hospital cover.

                            Brad’s job pays $85,000 a year before tax. Zara works part time, earning $16,000 a
                            year before tax. They receive a Family Tax Benefit from the Government of $1,896.

 Assets                     Brad and Zara have no significant savings (they currently have $5,000 in a joint-
                            access savings account). Brad and Zara jointly own a house valued at $550,000,
                            with a $440,000 mortgage. They also own other assets valued at $10,000. Brad has
                            $100,000 in a superannuation fund. Zara has $30,000 in a superannuation fund.

 Debts/expenses             Most of the money that Brad and Zara earn goes towards paying the mortgage and
                            covering living expenses, with about $12,000 of annual estimated surplus cash flow.

 Insurance                  Brad currently holds life and total and permanent disability (TPD) insurance through
                            his superannuation fund, with cover to the amount of $200,000, and income
                            protection insurance through Mantra Financial Services Pty Ltd, with cover to the
                            amount of $5,350 per month. Zara holds life and TPD insurance through her
                            superannuation fund, with cover to the amount of $200,000.

 Reason for seeking         Brad and Zara are seeking a review of their personal insurance needs to ensure that
 advice                     their family has adequate financial support in the event of death, disability or illness.

                            Brad and Zara both recognise the value of having comprehensive insurance cover,
                            especially while they have young children.

                            Where possible, they would prefer any insurance premiums to be funded using their
                            superannuation benefits because they are focused on using their personal cash flow
                            surplus to reduce their mortgage. However, because of the value that they place on
                            insurance, they are willing to spend up to $5,000 of their personal cash flow per year
                            on insurance premiums.

                            Brad and Zara’s personal insurance needs are set out in more detail in Table 7.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                Page 28
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




Table 7:    Brad and Zara’s personal insurance needs

Type of cover     Cover required for Brad                             Cover required for Zara

Death             To ensure that:                                     To ensure that:
                   the mortgage on their home ($440,000) is           the mortgage on their home can be cleared
                    cleared in full;                                    in full;
                   $10,000 will be available to assist with           $10,000 will be available to assist with
                    funeral expenses; and                               funeral expenses; and
                   his family can financially maintain their          her family can financially maintain their
                    current lifestyle                                   current lifestyle

TPD               To ensure that:                                     To ensure that:
                   the mortgage on their home can be cleared          the mortgage on their home can be cleared
                    in full;                                            in full;
                   $100,000 will be available to assist with any      $100,000 will be available to assist with any
                    related medical expenses; and                       related medical expenses; and
                   their family can financially maintain their        their family can financially maintain their
                    current lifestyle                                   current lifestyle

Trauma            To ensure that:                                     To ensure that:
                   $100,000 will be available to assist with any      $100,000 will be available to assist with any
                    related medical expenses; and                       related medical expenses;
                   $50,000 will be available to cover two years’      Brad’s income is replaced for one year so
                    worth of mortgage payments                          he has the option to take some time away
                       Note: Zara’s income is not required to be        from work to support Zara and the children;
                       replaced if she takes time away from work to     and
                       support Brad.
                                                                       $50,000 will be available to cover two years’
                                                                        worth of mortgage payments

Inability to work To ensure that as much of Brad’s salary as          Replacement of Zara’s income is not a high
due to illness    possible is replaced                                priority
or injury




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                                Page 29
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 90: Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client




Appendix 2: Example SOA

              RG 90.97       This example SOA is based on the financial advice scenario set out in
                             Appendix 1.

              RG 90.98       The scaled advice we developed is one of a number of possible outcomes.
                             The purpose of this example SOA is to illustrate clear, concise and effective
                             disclosure, and not to illustrate what we would consider to be the best advice
                             in this scenario.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017                                            Page 30
                      PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




      PLANFORIT Financial Planning
                 Statement of Advice
Prepared by Sally Chong                                         Phone:     03 9280 3200
                                                                Email:     schong@planforit.com.au
                                                                Address: 12 Monet Street Melbourne VIC 3000
For Brad and Zara Black                                         Australian financial services licence no.: 456789
                                                                ABN:       12 345 678 901
                                                                Authorised representative no.: 45678
31 March 2017                                                   Planforit Pty Ltd website: www.planforit.com.au



What this document is about
This document records my financial advice to you, Brad and Zara.

It is called a Statement of Advice (SOA), which I am required to provide to you under the
Corporations Act 2001.

This advice does not cover all aspects of your financial situation. This advice is about your
personal insurance needs and includes a review of your existing arrangements and
recommendations for changes.

I am required by law to act in your best interests when providing you with financial advice.


Attachments
Attached are three Product Disclosure Statements (PDSs) explaining my recommended insurance
policies for you:
•    OZ Insurance PDS Number 5 dated 22 March 2014
•    MNO Insurance PDS Number 4 dated 15 October 2013
•    Mantra Insurance PDS Number 4 dated 1 July 2014.

Each PDS discloses information about the financial products that I am recommending to you.

Also attached is educational material containing factual information about life insurance and
estate planning. To find out more about life insurance, visit ASIC’s MoneySmart website
(www.moneysmart.gov.au).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                       Page 1 of 23
                             PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Table of contents
Summary of my insurance recommendations and commissions ...................................... 3

What you want .................................................................................................................. 5

What you should know about my advice ........................................................................... 6

About you: Brad and Zara ................................................................................................. 7

My advice .......................................................................................................................... 9

Reasons for my recommendations.................................................................................. 14

Consequences of my advice ........................................................................................... 17

How to follow my advice .................................................................................................. 21

My commissions.............................................................................................................. 22

Authority to proceed ........................................................................................................ 23




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                                      Page 2 of 23
                          PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Summary of my insurance
recommendations and commissions
Brad, I recommend that you replace your life and total and permanent disability (TPD) insurance,
retain your income protection insurance and take out trauma insurance. Zara, I recommend that
you increase the amount of cover under your life and TPD insurance and take out trauma
insurance.

The tables below provide a summary of the products I recommend for you. For further
information, see:
•    ‘My advice’ on pages 9–13 for more details about these recommendations
•    ‘Reasons for my recommendations’ on pages 14–16 for explanations of the product
     features.


     Recommended product overview: Brad
Cover and           Insurer/             Amount             Premium         Key features of           First year
product             owner                of cover           paid from       new policy                premium
Life and TPD      MNO/super            $1,110,000              $1,840       Terminal illness           $2,040
cover             and Brad                   (life)            (super)       advancement
(replace life and                       $510,000                 $200       Disability definition:
TPD cover held                              (TPD)               (cash)       ‘Unlikely‘
through First
                                                                            Occupation
Corporate
                                                                             definition: ‘Own
Superannuation
                                                                             occupation‘ (via
Fund)
                                                                             Superlink)
                                                                            Stepped premium
Income              Mantra/                $5,350                Cash       90-day waiting             $1,200
protection          Brad               per month                             period
(retain)                                plus $642                           Benefit to age 65
                                            super
                                                                            Level premium
                                     contributions
                                                                            Agreed value
                                                                            Super contribution
                                                                             option
Trauma              MNO/Brad             $150,000                Cash       Stepped premium              $900
(establish)

Total               n/a                               n/a n/a               n/a                        $4,140




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                        Page 3 of 23
                          PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




     Recommended product overview: Zara
Cover and              Insurer/            Amount           Premium         Key features         First year
product                owner               of cover         paid from       of new policy        premium
Life and TPD cover OZ Industry    $840,000                  Super           Stepped premium            $650
(increase)         Superannuation
                   Fund/super
Trauma (establish) MNO                     $235,000         Cash            Stepped premium           $1,300

Total                  n/a                 n/a              n/a             n/a                    $1,950

It is important that you understand the consequences and risks of my advice. For an explanation
of these consequences, see ‘Consequences of my advice’ on pages 17–20.


Payments to me and Planforit
If you buy the financial products I recommend, Planforit and I will receive regular payments from
the insurers who sell these products. These payments are called commissions.

These commission payments from the insurers to me and Planforit are made up of:
•    60% of the amount you pay in premiums to the insurers in the first year
•    20% of the amount you pay in premiums in the following years.

These commissions are split between me and Planforit. I get 90% and Planforit gets 10%.

Planforit and I will also receive commissions of 20% of your premium for Brad’s existing income
protection policy. We will not receive commissions for Zara’s existing life and TPD policies.


     Total commissions
Detail                         Planforit                    Me                       Total
First year                     $278                         $2,506                   $2,784
Following years                $109 per year                $979 per year            $1,088 per year

This table outlines all the payments Planforit and I will receive through commissions paid from your
premiums if you follow the advice set out in this Statement of Advice. For full details, see ‘My
commissions’ on page 22.

I do not charge you a fee for my advice in this Statement of Advice.


Conflicts of interest
Aside from the commissions we receive from insurers, Planforit and I do not have any other
relationships that may create a conflict of interest or potentially influence our advice to you.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                   Page 4 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




What you want
I met you both on 15 March 2017 for the first time. We had a discussion about your insurance
preferences and needs. This section outlines my understanding of your needs.


     What you both want
What we discussed                                       Explanation
At that meeting, you said you were worried              You both recognise the value of having comprehensive
about whether or not you had enough personal             personal insurance cover, especially while you have
insurance.                                               young children.
                                                        You want to ensure that if either of you dies or suffers a
                                                         total and permanent disability, your mortgage can be
                                                         cleared, your family can maintain their current lifestyle,
                                                         and funds will be available to help with any funeral
                                                         costs or medical costs.
                                                        You also want to ensure that if either of you suffers a
                                                         severe illness or injury, funds will be available to cover
                                                         2 years’ worth of mortgage payments, help with
                                                         medical costs, and replace Brad’s salary for a year if he
                                                         needs to help care for Zara.
                                                        Finally, if Brad is unable to work due to illness and
                                                         injury, you want to ensure that as much of his salary as
                                                         possible is replaced.
                                                        You expect that as your debts decrease and your
                                                         children become less dependent on you, the level of
                                                         insurance cover required will reduce.
We discussed the availability of trauma                 You were not interested in obtaining advice on child
insurance cover for children.                            insurance. This is because you have flexibility with your
                                                         working arrangements, access to your cash reserves,
                                                         and both your parents live nearby to help if one of your
                                                         children becomes ill.
Because of the value you place on insurance,              We agreed that I would provide you with a full review
you confirmed that you are willing to spend up             of your personal insurance needs, to ensure that your
to $5,000 per year of your surplus cash on                 family has adequate financial support in the event of
personal insurance premiums ($3,800 more                   death, disability or illness.
than you currently spend), rather than directing
these funds to your mortgage.
You told me that, where possible, you would like  You agreed that it is important to balance your need
all available surplus cash to be used to reduce    for appropriate personal insurance cover with your
your mortgage.                                     goal to reduce your mortgage debt as quickly as
                                                   possible. You would prefer any personal insurance
                                                   premiums to be funded using your superannuation
                                                   benefits.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                      Page 5 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




What you should know about my advice
What my advice covers
As agreed, I am providing a full review of your personal insurance needs to ensure your family has
adequate financial support in the event of death, disability or illness. Specifically, my advice:
•    aims to ensure you are fully protected in the event of premature death, disablement, serious
     illness or injury as detailed in the ‘What you want’ section above
•    recommends appropriate types of insurance and insurance products
•    recommends how to pay for the insurance premiums
•    recommends superannuation contribution strategies to offset the effect of insurance
     premiums on your retirement benefits
•    informs you of the impact of these arrangements on your cash flow and your superannuation
     benefits
•    recommends that you make appropriate death benefit nominations so your superannuation
     assets and insurance cover are passed on in accordance with your wishes and needs.


What my advice does not cover
My advice is limited to the above, and does not cover:
•    strategies about repayment of your home loan
•    any other aspect of your financial affairs (including child insurance)
•    the suitability of your existing superannuation arrangements
•    whether you will have enough superannuation for your retirement
      I can give advice about these if you want it, for an additional cost
•    taxation advice
      I am not a tax adviser. However, I am registered with the Tax Practitioners Board and I am limited to
       only providing tax advice that is directly related to the matters that my advice covers.


My advice is limited
My advice expires on 30 April 2017. You should not rely on my advice after that time, if you haven’t
acted on it by then.

I am able to recommend products from the Planforit approved product list (APL) and products that
are not on the APL. If I recommend a product that is not on the Planforit APL, I must seek approval
from Planforit.

The Planforit APL is put together by a Planforit research team and is regularly reviewed. Ask me for
a copy of the list, if you are interested. When I prepared your advice, I looked only at products on
that list and at your existing products. I did not look at other products available on the market.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                  Page 6 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




About you: Brad and Zara
     Personal details
Brad                                                         Zara
43 years old                                                 41 years old
Employed as an IT project manager earning $85,000            Employed part time at a primary school as a
per year plus 9.5% superannuation guarantee                  teacher’s aide earning $16,000 per year plus 9.5%
contributions (paid by your employer); currently has         superannuation guarantee contributions (14 hours
3 months’ sick leave available                               per week)
Excellent health                                             Excellent health
Non-smoker                                                   Non-smoker
No family history of hereditary diseases or early            Family history of cancer
death
Standard private hospital cover                              Standard private hospital cover
Has a current will (last updated 2015)                       Has a current will (last updated 2015)
Has a current power of attorney (last updated 2015) Has a current power of attorney (last updated 2015)

You have two children: Lola (10) and Noah (7). They are currently at public primary schools, and
not expected to go to private schools. You are not planning to have any other children at this stage.


     What you own and what you owe
You own                                        Owner           Value          You owe      Amount          Total
House                                          Both            $550,000       Mortgage     $440,000             n/a
ABC Bank joint-access savings account          Both               $5,000      n/a                n/a            n/a
ABC Bank mortgage offset account               Both             $25,000       n/a                n/a            n/a
Superannuation: First Corporate                Brad            $100,000       n/a                n/a            n/a
Superannuation Fund
Superannuation: OZ Industry                    Zara             $30,000       n/a                n/a            n/a
Superannuation Fund
Other assets                                   Both             $10,000       n/a                n/a            n/a

Total                                          n/a           $720,000         n/a         $440,000              n/a

Net wealth                                            n/a               n/a         n/a         n/a      $280,000




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                        Page 7 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200



     What you earn each year
Details                                                                                          Amount
Brad’s annual net income (after tax)                                                               $63,903
Zara’s annual net income (after tax)                                                               $16,000
Payment from Centrelink (Family Tax Benefit)                                                        $1,896

Total annual income (after tax)                                                                  $81,799


     What you spend each year
Details                                                                                           Amount
Mortgage repayments (principal and interest, 4% interest rate)                                     $25,000
Living expenses                                                                                    $45,000

Total annual expenses                                                                            $70,000

Estimated annual surplus cash                                                                    $11,799

Your $45,000 living expenses includes $1,200 for income protection insurance (see the following
table).

You are happy living in your current house and have no immediate plans to move or renovate. You
have no major expenditure planned.


     Your current personal insurance
Cover and product                           Insurer                  Owner       Amount of      Annual
                                                                                   cover       premium
Income protection (Brad): Mantra            Mantra Financial         Brad            $5,350            $1,200
Income Protection cover – 90-day            Services Pty Ltd                     per month     paid from cash
waiting period until age 65, agreed         (Mantra)                              plus $642
value, level premium, super                                                           super
contribution option
Life and total and permanent                First Corporate          Super        $200,000               $615
disability (TPD) (Brad):                    Superannuation                                    paid from super
First Term Life and TPD                     Fund (provided by
                                            ABC Insurance)
Life and TPD (Zara):                        OZ Industry              Super        $200,000               $280
OZ Life and TPD                             Superannuation                                    paid from super
                                            Fund (provided by
                                            XYZ Insurance)

Total annual premium                        n/a                      n/a                n/a          $2,095




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                  Page 8 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




My advice
This is my advice as at 31 March 2017. My advice should be reviewed annually to ensure that your
goals of comprehensive insurance cover and debt reduction are balanced, while taking into
account any impacts on your superannuation.


Insurance needs: Brad

     Life insurance
Financial need           Amount of cover              Explanation
Clear mortgage                  $440,000              In the event of your death, your mortgage can be cleared.
Funeral costs                     $10,000             In the event of your death, $10,000 will be available to
                                                       help with funeral costs.
Replacement of                  $760,000              In the event of your death, your family will receive
income                                                 $760,000 to replace approximately 50% of your salary to
                                                       age 65, to help them to maintain their current way of life
                                                       (based on inflation at 3% per year and investment returns
                                                       of 5% per year).
Subtotal                      $1,210,000              This is the subtotal of all life insurance required to meet
                                                       Brad’s needs.

Total                       $1,110,000                The total is the subtotal minus total superannuation
                                                       ($100,000). This is because it is assumed that your
                                                       superannuation benefit will be available if/when you die.


     Total and permanent disability (TPD) insurance
Financial need           Amount of cover             Explanation
Clear mortgage                  $440,000             If you become totally and permanently disabled, your
                                                      mortgage can be cleared.
Medical costs                   $100,000             If you become totally and permanently disabled, you will
                                                      receive $100,000 to cover medical costs.
Replacement of                         N/A           If you become totally and permanently disabled, your
income                                                income protection policy will replace 75% of your salary
                                                      and cover employer superannuation guarantee
                                                      contributions. Additionally, your household expenses will
                                                      be reduced as a result of the mortgage being cleared.
Subtotal                        $540,000             This is the subtotal of all TPD insurance required to meet
                                                      Brad’s needs.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                      Page 9 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Financial need           Amount of cover             Explanation

Total                       $510,000                 The total is the subtotal minus existing superannuation
                                                      ($100,000) and including tax ($70,000).
                                                     If you become totally and permanently disabled, your
                                                      superannuation benefit is assumed to be available.
                                                     Based on your current position, if you make a TPD claim,
                                                      you would have to pay approximately $70,000 in tax on
                                                      your superannuation (insurance claim and current
                                                      superannuation benefit). Because of this, I have
                                                      increased the required amount to cover this liability.


     Trauma insurance
Financial need           Amount of cover              Explanation
Reduce mortgage                 $50,000               If you suffer a severe illness or injury (i.e. trauma), you will
                                                       receive $50,000 to cover 2 years’ worth of mortgage
                                                       repayments.
Medical costs                 $100,000                If you suffer a severe illness or injury (i.e. trauma), you will
                                                       receive $100,000 to cover medical costs.

Total                       $150,000                  This is the total of all trauma insurance required to meet
                                                       Brad’s needs.


     Income protection insurance
Financial need                                       Explanation
You obtain coverage for 75% of your salary           This is the maximum percentage of your salary you are
($5,312.50 per month) plus an additional              generally able to insure.
amount to cover employer superannuation
guarantee contributions.
Noting that you have $25,000 in a mortgage  You have access to 3 months’ sick leave and therefore
offset account, a 90-day waiting period and a   do not need the money immediately.
benefit period to age 65 is appropriate.       You have indicated that you expect to work until you are
                                                65 years of age.
                                               Please note that these policies make payments monthly
                                                in arrears, including the first payment, so it is important
                                                to retain access to cash via your savings and mortgage
                                                offset accounts.

 Note that premiums paid on income protection insurance are generally tax deductible. However,
  it should also be noted that payments received under income protection insurance are generally
  assessable as taxable income.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                        Page 10 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200



     Superannuation contribution strategy
Recommendation                                       Explanation
You do not make additional contributions to          One of your stated goals is to reduce your mortgage.
superannuation to offset the impact of the            Making additional contributions to superannuation
insurance premiums at this time.                      would adversely impact that goal.
                                                     Your current employer contributions substantially
                                                      exceed the recommended insurance premiums that will
                                                      be deducted from your superannuation.



Insurance needs: Zara

     Life insurance
Financial need           Amount of cover             Explanation
Clear mortgage                  $440,000             In the event of your death, your mortgage can be
                                                      cleared.
Funeral costs                     $10,000            In the event of your death, $10,000 will be available to
                                                      help with funeral costs.
Income supplement               $240,000             In the event of your death, your family will receive an
                                                      amount of $240,000 to generate an income stream of
                                                      about $30,000 per year. This will help them to maintain
                                                      their current lifestyle until the children are less
                                                      dependent (in about 9 years, when Noah is 16). The
                                                      income stream has been calculated based on inflation
                                                      at 3% per year and investment returns of 5% per year.
Subtotal                        $690,000             This is the subtotal of all life insurance required to meet
                                                      Zara’s needs.

Total                         $660,000               The total is the subtotal minus existing superannuation
                                                      ($30,000). This is because it is assumed that your
                                                      superannuation benefit will be available if/when you
                                                      die.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                     Page 11 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200



     Total and permanent disability (TPD) insurance
Financial need           Amount of cover             Explanation
Clear mortgage                  $440,000             If you become totally and permanently disabled, your
                                                      mortgage can be cleared.
Medical costs                   $100,000             If you become totally and permanently disabled, you
                                                      will receive $100,000 to cover medical costs.
Income supplement               $240,000             If you become totally and permanently disabled, you
                                                      will receive $240,000 to generate an income stream of
                                                      about $30,000 per year. This will help your family to
                                                      maintain their current lifestyle until the children are less
                                                      dependent (in about 9 years, when Noah is 16). The
                                                      income stream has been calculated based on inflation
                                                      at 3% per year and investment returns of 5% per year.
Subtotal                        $780,000             This is the subtotal of all TPD insurance required to
                                                      meet Zara’s needs.

Total                         $840,000               The total is the subtotal minus existing superannuation
                                                      ($30,000) and including tax ($90,000).
                                                     In the event of your death, or if you become totally and
                                                      permanently disabled, your superannuation benefit is
                                                      assumed to be available.
                                                     Based on your current position, if you make a TPD claim,
                                                      you would have to pay approximately $90,000 in tax on
                                                      your superannuation (insurance claim and current
                                                      superannuation benefit). Because of this, I have
                                                      increased the required amount to cover this liability.


     Trauma insurance
Financial need           Amount of cover              Explanation
Reduce mortgage                   $50,000             If you suffer a severe illness or injury (i.e. trauma), you
                                                       will receive $50,000 to cover 2 years’ worth of mortgage
                                                       repayments.
Medical costs                   $100,000              If you suffer a severe illness or injury (i.e. trauma), you
                                                       will receive $100,000 to cover medical costs.
Replacement of                    $85,000             If you suffer a severe illness or injury (i.e. trauma),
income                                                 $85,000 will allow Brad the flexibility to take one year
                                                       away from work to support the family.

Total                         $235,000                This is the total of all trauma insurance required to meet
                                                       Zara’s needs.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                       Page 12 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200



     Income protection insurance
Financial need                                       Explanation
You are not eligible for income protection           This is because you are employed for only 14 hours per
insurance.                                            week.
                                                     There are other ‘home maker’ products, similar to
                                                      income protection insurance, which pay an agreed
                                                      monthly benefit if you become significantly disabled.
                                                      However, taking into account the other types of
                                                      insurance recommended, I do not recommend these
                                                      products to you because covering your income is not a
                                                      high priority.


     Superannuation contribution strategy
Recommendation                                       Explanation
You make a non-concessional contribution             This will enable you to receive a co-contribution
of $1,000 to your superannuation this                 amount.
financial year.                                      A non-concessional contribution is an ‘after-tax’
                                                      contribution. If you earn less than $51,021 per year
                                                      (before tax) and make after-tax superannuation
                                                      contributions, you are eligible to receive matching
                                                      contributions from the Government. This is called the
                                                      Government co-contribution. If you earn less than
                                                      $36,021, the maximum co-contribution is $500 based
                                                      on $0.50 from the Government for every $1 you
                                                      contribute.
                                                     This recommendation will have a small impact on your
                                                      goal to reduce your mortgage. However, it is a small
                                                      contribution which, when matched with the co-
                                                      contribution, will benefit your superannuation balance
                                                      because it will help to offset the impact of the
                                                      premiums.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                  Page 13 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Reasons for my recommendations
Brad and Zara, I have recommended that you obtain higher levels of life and TPD cover and that you obtain
trauma cover. The amounts I have recommended take into account your salary, your cover under your
existing superannuation, your current assets including savings, investments and superannuation balances,
and the cost of hiring help to replace the work carried out by Zara. Ensuring that you have the right types
and levels of insurance is important for you both because of the roles you play in the family. Brad, your
family relies on your salary to meet the majority of expenses. Zara, you have significant carer
responsibilities.

My advice will leave you in a better position because in the event of death, accident or illness your family
will have adequate protection that you can afford. Your insurance will be funded through a combination of
your surplus cash flow and superannuation, not only to ensure that you meet your goal of reducing your
mortgage, but also to account for the impact of premiums on your superannuation balances. As a result of
my advice, Zara’s superannuation balance will also benefit from a Government co-contribution.


     How my advice is appropriate
Recommendation              Why it is appropriate
You both obtain higher  Brad, your recommended level of life cover will provide Zara with a lump sum in
levels of life and TPD   the event of your death.
cover; you both obtain  The amount of life cover (if invested) will generate enough to replace 50% of
trauma cover.            what you currently earn, to age 65.
                        This will give some financial protection to Zara and the children because there
                         will be no mortgage to pay.
                        Your recommended level of TPD cover takes into consideration that if you
                         become totally and permanently disabled, your income protection policy will
                         provide you with $5,350 per month, which would be sufficient because you will
                         have no mortgage to pay.
                        Funds will also be provided to cover additional expenses, such as medical or
                         recovery costs.
                        If you suffer a severe illness or injury (i.e. trauma), your recommended trauma
                         cover will provide funds to meet medical expenses and also to cover 2 years’
                         worth of mortgage repayments.
                        Zara, your recommended level of life cover is higher than the amount identified
                         to meet your needs, because OZ Industry Superannuation Fund requires the levels
                         of life and TPD cover to match. Your life cover will therefore be $180,000 (that is,
                         $840,000 minus $660,000) above your identified need.
                        Your recommended level of TPD cover will provide supplementary income for
                         about 9 years until your children are less dependent. This takes into account your
                         inability to obtain income protection cover given your current working hours.
                        Funds will also be provided to cover additional expenses, such as medical or
                         recovery costs.
                        If you suffer a severe illness or injury (i.e. trauma), the recommended trauma
                         policy will provide funds to meet medical expenses and also to cover 2 years’
                         worth of mortgage payments.
                        It will also provide funds to replace Brad’s income for 12 months so he can take
                         time off work to support you.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                  Page 14 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Recommendation              Why it is appropriate
Brad, you replace your         Brad, I first considered increasing your existing First Corporate Superannuation
First Corporate                 Fund Term Life and TPD policy up to the recommended levels. The initial annual
Superannuation Fund             premium would have been $1,920, which is $120 per year cheaper than the
Term Life and TPD cover         MNO recommended policy.
and you both obtain            However, the First Corporate Superannuation Fund TPD policy would only pay if
trauma cover through            your disability left you unable to work in any occupation for which you are
MNO insurance.                  reasonably qualified given your education, training or experience. This is called
                                an 'any occupation' definition or condition. Given you currently work in a
                                specialised occupation, it is beneficial that you obtain TPD cover which would pay
                                if you are unable to work in your own occupation. This is called an an ‘own
                                occupation’ definition or condition.
                               Researching your existing products and the products available on Planforit’s
                                approved product list, I found that MNO Insurance ranked well in relation to cost
                                and quality of cover with respect to life, trauma and TPD.
                               This is primarily due to MNO Insurance’s favourable classification of your
                                occupation for the purposes of the TPD cover.
                               The MNO policy will make a TPD benefit payment when, in the opinion of
                                medical specialists, you are unlikely to ever work again due to injury or illness.
                               In addition, the MNO Life policy contains ‘terminal illness advancement’, which
                                means if you are diagnosed with a terminal illness you may be eligible to receive
                                the benefit payment before your death.
                               Brad and Zara, MNO Trauma Insurance also offers advantageous terms. For
                                example, it will make partial payments for certain conditions such as benign
                                tumours, where other providers of trauma cover will not, without an additional
                                cost. This is important for you, Zara, given your family history.
                               The superior terms and conditions provided by MNO should provide broader
                                coverage and more certainty if you make a claim, and therefore I consider the
                                higher premium is justified.
                               MNO Insurance allows policy holders to link policies to reduce costs. By linking
                                the trauma cover to the life and TPD cover, you pay only one policy fee.
                               In my experience, MNO Insurance is efficient during the claims process.
You both hold life and         Brad and Zara, paying for life and TPD cover from your superannuation fund will
TPD insurance within            have less impact on your cash flow. It will, however, affect your superannuation
superannuation. Brad,           fund balance. Please see the ‘Consequences of my advice’ section for more
your TPD cover is               details.
recommended to be              Brad, a ‘Superlink’ arrangement means your TPD cover will be owned inside and
held under a ‘Superlink’        outside of superannuation. This means a portion of the premium will be funded
arrangement.                    from your superannuation and the balance from your personal cash flow. A
                                ‘Superlink’ arrangement will enable access to more comprehensive cover and
                                improved terms and conditions, which are not accessible for policies held solely
                                within superannuation.
Your life, trauma and  A stepped premium means that the premium you pay to maintain your cover
TPD cover be arranged   increases each year with your age.
with a stepped         A stepped premium is more affordable in the short term and appropriate
premium.                because you aim to reduce the sum insured when your mortgage balance has
                        reduced and your children are less dependent on you.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                   Page 15 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Recommendation              Why it is appropriate
Brad, you retain your          Brad, I reviewed your Mantra Income Protection cover to ensure that it was
existing income                 appropriate given your personal circumstances. When this policy commenced
protection policy               7 years ago, it was structured on a ‘level’ premium basis, so the premium has
without changes and,            remained level over the life of the policy.
Zara, you retain your          When compared with a similar policy with a ‘stepped’ premium, funded through
insurance through your          superannuation, the initial annual premium was $1,100 per year, which is slightly
existing OZ Industry            cheaper than your current policy.
Superannuation Fund.
                               However, when projected over the longer term, your current level premium will
                                be significantly more cost effective. This is important given that you plan to
                                retain your income protection policy until much closer to retirement.
                               Because your current income protection policy is an agreed value policy, you may
                                be able to claim up to the full $5,350 per month. As most income protection
                                policies will only insure up to 75% of your income, your current income protection
                                policy will pay $37.50 per month above the maximum amount that a new policy
                                is likely to pay. Therefore, this policy meets your goal of ensuring that as much of
                                your salary as possible is replaced.
                               In addition, because the policy contains the superannuation contribution option,
                                $642 per month will be contributed to your superannuation. This will ensure your
                                superannuation balance continues to grow while you are unable to work.
                               Zara, I reviewed your insurance through the OZ Industry Superannuation Fund to
                                ensure it was appropriate for your personal circumstances. Its terms and
                                conditions compared well to other products available, and the cost of the cover
                                also compared well.
                               By retaining your insurance cover within your existing superannuation fund, the
                                payment of the insurance premiums is a straightforward process because the
                                premium is simply deducted from your account balance.
                               Also, by retaining your insurance cover within your existing superannuation fund,
                                which you have held since 2005, you will not restart the 3-year period in relation
                                to innocent non-disclosure (which is explained in the ‘Consequences of my advice’
                                section)
                               To offset the impact of premiums on your superannuation balance, I recommend
                                that you make a $1,000 non-concessional contribution to your superannuation
                                this financial year. This will not only offset the effect of premiums on your
                                superannuation, but it will enable you to receive a co-contribution amount of
                                $500.
Brad and Zara, you       Because your life insurance is held in superannuation, it is important to ensure
nominate each other as    that you nominate a beneficiary to formally record with the fund the person who
the beneficiary on your   you wish to receive your benefits in the event of your death.
superannuation and life
insurance.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                    Page 16 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Consequences of my advice

Consequences of replacing products
Brad, the tables below compare the relevant costs and features of your current First Corporate
Superannuation Fund Term Life and TPD cover with the recommended MNO Insurance Term Life
and TPD cover. I have also included relevant cost information if you modify your insurance in the
First Corporate Superannuation Fund and increase the level of life and TPD cover to match my
recommendations.


     Comparison of replacement and existing insurance products: Brad
Details                    Current cover                   Modified cover based          Recommended cover
                                                           on current products
Insurer                    First Corporate                 First Corporate               MNO Insurance
                           Superannuation Fund             Superannuation Fund
Term life insurance             $200,000                         $1,110,000               $1,110,000
TPD insurance                   $200,000                           $510,000                $510,000
Premium                              $615                            $1,920                  $2,040
                                  per year                          per year                per year


     Comparison of features and definitions of replacement and existing
     insurance products
Insurance type                         First Corporate Superannuation MNO Insurance Term Life
                                       Fund Term Life and TPD cover and TPD cover
Term life insurance:                   No                                        Yes
Terminal illness advancement
TPD insurance:                         ‘Unable’ to work                          ‘Unlikely’ to work
Disability definition
TPD insurance:                         ‘Any occupation’                          ‘Own occupation’ – via
Occupation definition                                                              Superlink




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                     Page 17 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200



     Additional consequences and risks you should understand
Recommendation                  Consequences and risks
You both obtain higher          Your overall combined premiums will increase from $2,095 per year to
levels of life and TPD cover;    $6,090 per year.
you both obtain trauma          You will need to fund an additional $2,400 per year (on top of the $1,200
cover.                           you are already paying for Brad’s income protection) from your surplus
                                 cash.
                                Before the insurance company agrees to insure you for the level of cover you
                                 need, they will require you to complete a personal statement answering
                                 questions relating to your health and lifestyle. Zara, your family history of
                                 cancer, for example, will be disclosed in your personal statement. You may
                                 also be asked to complete a medical examination. This is called underwriting
                                 and you should be aware that as a result of this process your application for
                                 new or increased cover may be accepted, or it may be offered, but with
                                 special terms, including a higher premium or with exclusions, or it may be
                                 declined.
                                The insurance premiums you will pay as outlined in this Statement of
                                 Advice are indications only and are subject to change depending on your
                                 responses to the personal statement relating to your health and lifestyle.
                                Any new policy you buy may provide the insurer with the right to refuse
                                 a claim if you have not met your obligation to give them all relevant
                                 information at the time you apply. This applies even when you have made
                                 an honest mistake (‘innocent non-disclosure’). The insurer’s right to refuse a
                                 claim in this situation lasts for 3 years.
                                As your existing life and TPD policies have been in force for more than
                                 3 years, your current insurer cannot refuse a claim due to innocent non-
                                 disclosure.
                                Brad, if you change your insurer, the 3-year period starts over again.
                                Zara, if you increase your existing life and TPD cover, the 3-year period
                                 relates only to the increased amount.
                                No payments will be made under the recommended trauma policies in
                                 relation to certain illnesses if they occur within 3 months of the policy start
                                 date.
                                Zara, your life and TPD insurance held within your OZ Industry
                                 Superannuation Fund is offered as units of cover with the amount of
                                 insurance attached to each unit determined by your age. Currently, you
                                 have 2 units of cover, which, given your current age, equates to $200,000 in
                                 life and TPD insurance. Oz Industry’s unitised structure is designed to
                                 gradually reduce the amount insured on an annual basis until age 50. After
                                 age 50, the amount insured will decrease more rapidly. As such, it is
                                 important to review your insurance needs regularly, especially at age 50.
                                The new or increased amount on your recommended respective life cover
                                 policies will have exclusions for death due to suicide for the first 13 months.
                                 Brad, this exclusion applies to the recommended life cover. Zara, this
                                 exclusion only applies to the increase in your life cover.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                   Page 18 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Recommendation                  Consequences and risks
You both hold life and TPD         If you accept the recommendations, your retirement savings will decrease
insurance within                    due to the increase in insurance premiums to be funded using your
superannuation.                     superannuation.
                                   Brad, an additional $1,225 per year of insurance premiums (on top of the
                                    current $615) will be deducted from your superannuation. Based on the
                                    expected level of annual superannuation guarantee contributions ($8,075)
                                    and the amount of premiums ($1,840), the premiums represent 23% of
                                    contributions.
                                   Zara, an additional $370 per year of insurance premiums (on top of the
                                    current $280) will be deducted from your superannuation. Based on the
                                    expected level of annual superannuation guarantee contributions ($1,520)
                                    and the amount of premiums ($650), the premiums represent 43% of
                                    contributions.
                                   Brad and Zara, because the insurance premiums will be funded from your
                                    superannuation, I estimate (based on modelling) that in 9 years’ time:
                                    - Brad’s superannuation will be $17,730 lower
                                    - Zara’s superannuation will be $5,300 lower.
                                    This excludes any additional contributions above annual superannuation
                                    guarantee contributions and assumes 5% investment returns and an annual
                                    premium increase of 7% per year.
                                   Brad, I considered whether you should make additional contributions to
                                    superannuation to offset the impact of the premiums. However, given that
                                    you want to reduce your mortgage, I do not recommend this action at
                                    present.
                                   Additionally, the recommended levels of cover rely on using your existing
                                    superannuation balances to meet your financial needs if one of you dies or
                                    becomes totally and permanently disabled.
                                   If you make a TPD claim, the proceeds paid to you as a lump sum from your
                                    TPD insurance (held within superannuation) and from your superannuation
                                    benefit may be partially or fully taxable up to 22%. A calculation has been
                                    done based on your current tax liability in the event of a TPD claim, and this
                                    amount is included in the recommended TPD cover.
                                   Brad, if you make a successful claim under an ‘own occupation’ definition,
                                    this tax will not apply – which may mean you are over-insured. A TPD policy
                                    provided on an ‘own occupation’ basis is one that pays if your disability
                                    leaves you unable to work in your own occupation.
                                   Zara, given that your TPD policy is provided on an ‘any occupation’ basis,
                                    your policy would only pay if your disability left you unable to work in any
                                    occupation for which you are reasonably qualified given your education,
                                    training or experience.
                                   If you suffer a TPD event, a delay of 3 months will apply before your claim is
                                    assessed. This is called a qualifying period and will impact the timing of you
                                    receiving a TPD benefit payment. This is also a condition of your existing
                                    products.
You link your insurance         By bundling your life cover with TPD cover, you reduce your amount of life
policies where possible.         cover when a TPD benefit is paid. This is also a condition of your existing
                                 product.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                     Page 19 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Recommendation                  Consequences and risks
Brad, you make a partial           This should be done as an enduring rollover, meaning that the rollover will
rollover (payment) from             occur each year when your policy is renewed.
your First Corporate               Please note that your First Corporate Superannuation Fund allows members
Superannuation Fund to              one partial rollover each year without incurring an exit fee (subsequent
MNO Super Life to fund the          rollovers are $40). As your First Corporate Superannuation Fund is a unitised
superannuation                      fund, there are not expected to be any buy/sell costs or capital gains tax
component of the                    relating to units that will be sold to fund the insurance premium.
recommended MNO
Insurance Term Life and
TPD cover.
Zara, you make a $1,000         The investment management fees on your OZ Industry Superannuation Fund
non-concessional                 will increase by $5 per year (being $1,000 x 0.5% per year for the ‘Balanced’
contribution to your             investment option).
superannuation using            Your joint ABC Bank account will be reduced by $1,000. If you require access
funds held in your joint         to cash, you can access funds from your mortgage offset account.
ABC Bank account.
                                There are no fees and costs associated with withdrawing $1,000 cash from
                                 ABC Bank.
                                There are eligibility criteria and limits to the amount of non-concessional
                                 contributions you are permitted to make and co-contributions you are
                                 eligible to receive.
                                If your income for this financial year exceeds $36,021, you will not be
                                 eligible for the full co-contribution payment.
                                If your income exceeds $51,021, you will not be eligible for a co-contribution
                                 payment at all.
Brad and Zara, you                 Superannuation is not a personal asset and therefore does not
nominate each other as the          automatically form part of your estate. The superannuation fund trustees
beneficiary on your                 will use their discretion on how, and to whom, they pay death benefits,
superannuation and life             which may include insurance proceeds. Therefore, it is important to
insurance.                          nominate each other as beneficiaries.

 The attached PDSs provide more information about the products that I have recommended in
  this Statement of Advice.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                    Page 20 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




How to follow my advice
     Steps you should take to follow my advice: Brad
Step               Description
1                 Apply for $1,110,000 life cover and $510,000 TPD cover through MNO Insurance, using a
                  ‘Superlink’ ownership structure.
                   A ‘Superlink’ ownership structure means that the TPD cover ownership will be split
                     between you and your superannuation fund.
2                  Roll over $1,840 from your First Corporate Superannuation Fund to MNO Super Life to
                   fund the superannuation premium component of your MNO Insurance Term Life and TPD
                   cover.
3                  Apply for $150,000 of trauma cover through MNO Insurance. Link the MNO Insurance
                   Trauma cover in your personal name to the MNO Insurance Term Life and TPD cover held
                   in superannuation.
4                 Cancel your existing First Corporate Superannuation Fund Term Life and TPD cover once
                  the MNO insurance is approved.
                   WARNING: Do not cancel your existing insurance until your new insurance is in place.
5                  Maintain your existing Mantra Income Protection cover.
6                  Nominate Zara as your beneficiary on your First Corporate Superannuation Fund.
7                 Nominate Zara as your beneficiary on your MNO Life Insurance policy plan.
                   If circumstances change, review your death benefit nominations to ensure they remain
                    appropriate.


     Steps you should take to follow my advice: Zara
Step               Description
1                  Increase your existing OZ Industry Superannuation Fund Life and TPD cover by $640,000,
                   bringing it to a total of $840,000.
2                  Apply for $235,000 of trauma cover through MNO Insurance.
3                  Make a non-concessional contribution of $1,000 to your OZ Industry Superannuation Fund
                   using personal cash reserves.
4                 Nominate Brad as your beneficiary on your OZ Industry Superannuation Fund.
                   If circumstances change, review your death benefit nominations to ensure they remain
                    appropriate.

I will assist you with the completion of the required paperwork to implement my
recommendations as well as the application process.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                  Page 21 of 23
                           PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




My commissions
The providers of some of the recommended personal insurance products pay commissions to
Planforit, who share that commission with me.

     Commission for Brad’s Mantra Income Protection policy:
     Annual premium $1,200
Time period                                                  Planforit                                     Me
Each year                                                           $24                                  $216


     Commission for Brad’s MNO Insurance Term Life and TPD policy:
     Annual premium $2,040
Time period                                                  Planforit                                     Me
First year                                                        $122                                  $1,102
Following years                                                     $41                                  $367


     Commission for Brad’s MNO Insurance Trauma policy:
     Annual premium $900
Time period                                                  Planforit                                     Me
First year                                                          $54                                  $486
Following years                                                     $18                                  $162


     Commission for Zara’s MNO Insurance Trauma policy:
     Annual premium $1,300
Time period                                                  Planforit                                     Me
First year                                                          $78                                  $702
Following years                                                     $26                                  $234


     Total all commissions
Time period                                                  Planforit               Me                  Total
First year                                                         $278           $2,506                $2,784
Following years                                                   $109              $979               $1,088
                                                               per year          per year             per year

These figures comprise 60% of the premiums in the first year and 20% in the following years. Of
this, 90% goes to me and 10% goes to Planforit. There is no fee for my advice.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                  Page 22 of 23
                            PLANFORIT SOA for Brad and Zara Black • 31 March 2017 • by Sally Chong • 03 9280 3200




Authority to proceed
Before you sign this authority, I would like you to check that I have:
     given you my Financial Services Guide (FSG)
     given you a Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) for each financial product that I have
      recommended
     talked to you about your personal circumstances, insurance needs and financial goals in a
      way you understand, and answered your questions
     discussed any commissions I will receive.

If I haven’t done all of these things, do not sign the authority to proceed.

Before you sign this authority, please also make sure that you have:
     read all the documents I have given you
     checked that your personal information in this document is accurate
     asked me questions about anything that you want clarified.

By signing below, you agree to representatives of Planforit applying on your behalf for the products
recommended in this Statement of Advice.

     Signed ....................................................................................Zara Black
         Date: ....... / ..... / 20 .....


     Signed ....................................................................................Brad Black
         Date: ....... / ..... / 20 .....


Continuing review service
I recommend that your needs and products be reviewed at least once a year to accommodate
changes to your personal goals or circumstances, such as births, marital status, employment, debt
levels, and tax implications of insurance.

 To confirm that you wish to participate in an ongoing review service, please let me know and I
  can provide details of services and costs.


Cooling-off period
If you apply for a life insurance product recommended in this Statement of Advice, and then
change your mind, you are entitled to cancel the product within a 14-day cooling-off period.

 Refer to the Product Disclosure Statements for further information.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2017 (Example SOA)                                Page 23 of 23
