REGULATORY GUIDE 83


Reinstatement of companies

March 2018




About this guide
This guide is for company officeholders, third parties and liquidators who
want a company to be reinstated.

It explains:
    how to apply for reinstatement of a company;
    when ASIC will reinstate a company; and
    the consequences of reinstating a company deregistered under the
     Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) and under previous
     legislation.
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     •    explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers
                                          under legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     •    explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     •    describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     •    giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process
                                          such as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                          regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in March 2018 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                  Superseded Policy Statement 83, issued 20 March 2006, rebadged as
                                   a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                            Page 2
                                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                             B      Deregistration of companies .......................................................... 6
                                    When we will deregister a company .................................................. 6
                                    Consequences of deregistration ........................................................ 7
                             C      Administrative reinstatement ......................................................... 8
                                    When we may reinstate a company .................................................. 8
                                    How to apply for administrative reinstatement................................... 9
                                    When ASIC may not administratively reinstate a company............. 11
                                    Company name ............................................................................... 12
                             D      Applying to a court for reinstatement ......................................... 13
                                    Who can apply to a court for reinstatement ..................................... 13
                                    How to apply for court reinstatement ............................................... 13
                                    Requirements for making a reinstatement application to a court .... 14
                                    Relevant considerations .................................................................. 15
                                    ASIC’s role in a court proceeding .................................................... 15
                                    Requirements following a court reinstatement order ....................... 15
                             E      Consequences of administrative and court reinstatement ....... 16
                                    Requirements of directors, secretaries and members following a
                                    reinstatement application ................................................................. 16
                                    Effect of reinstatement ..................................................................... 16
                                    Property ........................................................................................... 16
                                    Directors........................................................................................... 17
                                    Liquidator and winding up ................................................................ 17
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 18
                             Related information ............................................................................... 19




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                                                          Page 3
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               This guide explains:
                               • our approach to deregistration of companies;
                               • when ASIC may reinstate a company, and how to apply;
                               • when a court may reinstate a company, and how to apply; and
                               • the consequences of reinstatement.




Deregistration of companies
              RG 83.1        We may deregister a company if the conditions set out in the Corporations
                             Act have been met (see Section B).

              RG 83.2        We must deregister a company in certain circumstances, such as a court
                             order or when the liquidator lodges an end of administration return on the
                             basis that the affairs of the company are fully wound up.



Administrative reinstatement
              RG 83.3        ASIC may reinstate a company’s registration if we are satisfied that the
                             company should not have been deregistered. We refer to this as an
                             ‘administrative reinstatement’ (see Section C).

              RG 83.4        We may also reinstate a company’s registration if the company was
                             deregistered for non-payment of the levy imposed by the ASIC Supervisory
                             Cost Recovery Levy Act 2017 and we have received an application for
                             reinstatement and payment of the company’s outstanding levy and related
                             penalties.

              RG 83.5        A person who was a director, secretary or member of a company at the time
                             of deregistration, or a third party, may apply to ASIC for reinstatement of a
                             deregistered company.



Applying to a court for reinstatement
              RG 83.6        Regardless of whether ASIC can reinstate a company, an application may be
                             made to a court for reinstatement. This is referred to as a ‘court
                             reinstatement’ (see Section D).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                            Page 4
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




              RG 83.7        A former liquidator of the company or a person who is aggrieved by the
                             deregistration of the company may make the court application.

              RG 83.8        Generally, we will not object to an application if the requirements for court
                             reinstatement of a company are met.

              RG 83.9        If a court makes an order to reinstate a company, a copy of the order must be
                             served on ASIC to ensure the reinstatement takes place.



Consequences of administrative and court reinstatement
              RG 83.10       When a company is reinstated it is taken to have continued in existence as if
                             it had not been deregistered and is subject to all the requirements of the
                             Corporations Act (see Section E).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                            Page 5
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




B          Deregistration of companies

                               Key points

                               We may deregister a company if the conditions set out in the Corporations
                               Act are met. We must deregister a company in certain circumstances, such
                               as a court order or when the liquidator lodges an end of administration return
                               on the basis that the affairs of the company are fully wound up.



When we will deregister a company
              RG 83.11       We may deregister a company if the conditions set out in the Corporations
                             Act are met (see Table 1).

Table 1: When we may deregister a company

 Circumstances                                                                                 Corporations Act

 All the following circumstances apply:                                                        s601AB(1)
  the response to a return of particulars given to the company is at least six months late;
  the company has not lodged any other documents under the Corporations Act in the
   last 18 months; and
  we have no reason to believe that the company is carrying on business.

 The company’s review fee for a review date has not been paid in full at least 12 months       s601AB(1A)
 after the due date.

 The company has not paid the following in full at least 12 months after the due date:         s601AB(1B)
  the levy imposed by the ASIC Supervisory Cost Recovery Levy Act 2017;
  any related late payment penalty; and
  any related shortfall penalty.

 The company is being wound up and we have reason to believe that:                             s601AB(2)
  the liquidator is no longer acting;
  the company’s affairs have been fully wound up and a return to be lodged by the
   liquidator is at least six months late; or
  the company’s affairs have been fully wound up under Pt 5.4 and the company
   cannot cover the costs of obtaining a court order for its deregistration.

 On application by the company, a director or member of the company or a liquidator of         s601AA
 the company. A person may apply only if:
  all the members of the company agree to the deregistration;
  the company is not carrying on business;
  the company’s assets are worth less than $1,000;
  the company has paid all fees and penalties payable under the Corporations Act;
  the company has no outstanding liabilities; and
  the company is not a party to any legal proceedings.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                               Page 6
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




              RG 83.12       We must deregister a company if the liquidator of the company lodges an
                             end of administration return on the basis that the affairs of the company are
                             fully wound up or if ordered by the court (see Table 2).

Table 2: When we must deregister a company

 Circumstances                                                                             Corporations Act

 After the liquidator of the company lodges an end of administration return on the basis   s509(1)
 that the affairs of the company are fully wound up.

 When the court has ordered that ASIC deregister the company on a specified day.           s509(2)

 When a court order has been lodged to deregister the company and release the              s481(5)(b)
 liquidator.

 When a court order has been lodged to deregister the company in relation to a             s413(3)
 compromise or arrangement.




Consequences of deregistration
              RG 83.13       When a company is deregistered it is recorded on ASIC’s companies register
                             as a deregistered company and ceases to exist—it cannot commence or
                             continue legal proceedings and its property vests in ASIC.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                            Page 7
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




C          Administrative reinstatement

                               Key points

                               We may reinstate a company’s registration under s601AH(1) of the
                               Corporations Act if we are satisfied that the company should not have been
                               deregistered.

                               We may also reinstate a company’s registration under s601AH(1A) if the
                               company was deregistered under s601AB(1B) and we have received an
                               application for reinstatement and payment of the company’s outstanding
                               levy and related penalties.

                               A person who was a director, secretary or member of a company at the
                               time of deregistration, or a third party, may apply to ASIC for reinstatement
                               of a deregistered company.

                               Regardless of whether ASIC can reinstate a company, an application may
                               be made to a court for reinstatement.

                               The requirements for administrative reinstatement are set out in Table 3.




When we may reinstate a company
              RG 83.14       We may reinstate a company’s registration under s601AH(1) of the
                             Corporations Act if we are satisfied that the company should not have been
                             deregistered, even if at the time of deregistration we were satisfied that the
                             company met the requirements of s601AA, s601AB(1) or s601AB(1A).

              RG 83.15       We may reinstate a company’s registration under s601AH(1A) if:
                             (a)   the company was deregistered under s601AB(1B) for non-payment of
                                   the levy imposed by the ASIC Supervisory Cost Recovery Levy Act
                                   2017; and
                             (b)   ASIC receives an application to reinstate the company’s registration; and
                             (c)   the levy and any late payment or shortfall penalties are all paid in full.

              RG 83.16       We may also reinstate a company’s registration if we are satisfied that a
                             company should not have been deregistered under former s574 of the
                             Corporations Law. That is, we may reinstate companies that were
                             deregistered between 1 January 1991 and 30 June 1998.

              RG 83.17       To be satisfied that a company should not have been deregistered, we must
                             consider whether an error was made in the circumstances of its deregistration.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                            Page 8
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




              RG 83.18       Some instances where ASIC may reinstate a company’s registration are:
                             (a)   there was a procedural defect or oversight in the procedure leading to
                                   the deregistration. For example, if a company was deregistered for
                                   unpaid review fees and the review fee had actually been received by
                                   ASIC before the company was deregistered;
                             (b)   not all members agreed to deregistration of the company as a voluntary
                                   deregistration;
                             (c)   the company had assets of more than $1,000 at the time of voluntary
                                   deregistration,
                             (d)   the company had outstanding liabilities at the time of voluntary
                                   deregistration,
                             (e)   the company was carrying on a business at the time of deregistration; and
                             (f)   legal proceedings were underway at the time of deregistration.

              RG 83.19       A person who was a director, secretary or member of a company at the time
                             of deregistration may apply to reinstate a company where the company was
                             deregistered:
                             (a)   at ASIC’s initiation; or
                             (b)   voluntarily, by the company or a representative lodging a Form 6010
                                   Application for voluntary deregistration of a company.

              RG 83.20       A third party may apply to reinstate a company where, for example:
                             (a)   the applicant is a third party who had started legal proceedings against
                                   the company before its deregistration; or
                             (b)   the company had outstanding debt(s) at the time of deregistration.



How to apply for administrative reinstatement
              RG 83.21       A Form 581 Application for ASIC reinstatement must be completed,
                             including making the relevant declarations.

              RG 83.22       Reasons and supporting documentation must be provided to demonstrate that
                             the company should not have been deregistered.

              RG 83.23       Examples of supporting documentation that may be provided are:
                             (a)   a letter from a person who was a director, secretary or member of the
                                   company at the time of deregistration declaring that not all members
                                   agreed to the voluntary deregistration;
                             (b)   a bank statement or contract entered into by the company that
                                   demonstrates the company was carrying on a business at the time of
                                   deregistration;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                            Page 9
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




                             (c)   land title documentation in the company’s name or motor vehicle
                                   registration papers that demonstrate the company had assets of more
                                   than $1,000 at the time of voluntary deregistration;
                             (d)   company invoices or bank statements that demonstrate the company had
                                   outstanding liabilities at the time of deregistration; and
                             (e)   court documents showing that legal proceedings were underway at the
                                   time of deregistration.

               RG 83.24      An application for administrative reinstatement must be accompanied by
                             evidence that all persons who were directors of the company at the time of
                             deregistration have been notified about the reinstatement application.

               RG 83.25      The requirements for ASIC reinstatement are set out in Table 3 below.

Table 3:    Requirements for ASIC reinstatement

 Requirement                        Description

 Application                        Form 581 Application for ASIC reinstatement, including the relevant
                                    declarations, must be completed.

 Reasons and supporting             Reasons and supporting documentation must be provided to support the
 documentation                      view that the company should not have been deregistered.

 Statement that all former          A statement that all persons who were directors at the time of deregistration
 directors have been notified       have been notified about the reinstatement application and the
                                    consequences of reinstatement if the application is successful must be
                                    provided.
                                          Note: Reasons must be provided if all persons who were directors at the time of
                                          deregistration have not been notified about the reinstatement application.

 Application fee                    The application fee for the reinstatement application must be paid to ASIC:
                                    see Information Sheet 4 Reinstating a deregistered company.
                                          Note: If the company was deregistered because of an administrative oversight on
                                          ASIC’s part, this fee may not be charged.

 Outstanding fees                   All money owing to ASIC at the time of deregistration and annual review fees
 (former director, secretary or     since the date of deregistration must be paid to ASIC.
 member applications only)

 Outstanding penalties              All outstanding penalties due under penalty notices issued to the company
 (former director, secretary or     must be paid to ASIC.
 member applications only)

 Legal costs                        All legal costs ordered by a court to be paid to ASIC by the company in
 (former director, secretary or     proceedings conducted before the company’s deregistration must be paid to
 member applications only)          ASIC.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                                      Page 10
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




                             Where to send your reinstatement application

              RG 83.26       Initial steps for applying to ASIC for reinstatement are set out on our
                             website. The subsequent written applications and supporting documentation
                             for reinstatement by ASIC should be addressed to:

                                     Reinstatement Applications
                                     Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                                     PO Box 4000
                                     Gippsland Mail Centre VIC 3841



When ASIC may not administratively reinstate a company

                             The company was wound up by a liquidator

              RG 83.27       We will not ordinarily reinstate a company that was wound up before its
                             deregistration, as reinstatement of a company that was under external
                             administration does not automatically restore a liquidator.

              RG 83.28       In this case, the former directors of the company would be restored to
                             manage the company’s business. In these circumstances, it is appropriate for
                             a court to consider the application and decide whether the reinstatement of a
                             company registration is just.

              RG 83.29       An application may be made to a court to reinstate the company and appoint
                             a liquidator: JP Morgan Portfolio Services Ltd v Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu
                             (2008) 167 FCR 212.


                             The company was deregistered under the Companies
                             Codes or previous legislation

              RG 83.30       We cannot reinstate a company that was deregistered under the Companies
                             Codes of the relevant states and territories (see Re Jury & Spiers Pty Ltd
                             [2016] NSWSC 900), or previous companies legislation (see Re Rocha Pty
                             Ltd [2016] NSWSC 899).


                             The company would have no directors

              RG 83.31       We will not ordinarily reinstate a company where, on reinstatement, the
                             company would not have a director, as there would be nobody to manage the
                             company’s business. For example, this may be because the previous
                             company director has been disqualified from managing corporations under
                             the Corporations Act or because the director(s) are now deceased.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                          Page 11
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




              RG 83.32       An application may be made to a court to reinstate the company, and on the
                             making of a reinstatement order ASIC must be notified of any new
                             director(s) by updating the company details online.



Company name

                             When the company name is no longer available

              RG 83.33       If the company name is no longer available, we will reinstate the company
                             with its name as the Australian Company Number followed by the legal
                             elements (e.g. ACN 901 901 901 Pty Ltd). After being reinstated, the
                             company may change its name by passing a special resolution in accordance
                             with the Corporations Act and lodging a Form 205 Notification of resolution.


                             Reservation of the company name

              RG 83.34       If the former name of the company is available at the time of lodging a
                             reinstatement application with ASIC, a Form 410 Application for reservation
                             of a name may be lodged to reserve the former name. This will prevent
                             another entity from selecting and using the former name during the period
                             between lodgement and reinstatement. The reservation lasts for two months
                             from the date when the application is lodged.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                          Page 12
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




D          Applying to a court for reinstatement

                               Key points

                               Where a company was deregistered under the Corporations Act, an
                               application for reinstatement may be made to a court under s601AH(2).

                               A former liquidator of the company or a person who is aggrieved by the
                               deregistration of the company may make the application.

                               The requirements for court reinstatement are set out in Table 4. Generally,
                               we will not object to an application if these requirements are met.

                               If a court makes an order to reinstate a company, a copy of the order must
                               be served on ASIC to ensure the reinstatement takes place.




Who can apply to a court for reinstatement
              RG 83.35       A reinstatement application may be made to a court for an order that ASIC
                             reinstate a company by:
                             (a)   a former liquidator of the company; or
                             (b)   a person who is aggrieved by the deregistration of the company.



How to apply for court reinstatement

                             Companies deregistered under the Corporations Act

              RG 83.36       For companies deregistered under the Corporations Act, an application to a
                             court for reinstatement is made under s601AH(2).

              RG 83.37       The rules of the relevant court should be checked before drafting the court
                             documents for the application. In some jurisdictions, ASIC is required to be
                             named as a respondent.


                             Companies dissolved under the Companies Code or
                             previous companies legislation

              RG 83.38       Section 601AH(2) does not apply to companies dissolved under the state and
                             territory Companies Codes or previous companies legislation: Re Rocha Pty
                             Ltd [2016] NSWSC 899; Re Jury & Spiers Pty Ltd [2016] NSWSC 900.

              RG 83.39       For these companies, it may be possible to seek reinstatement under the laws
                             of the relevant state or territory. The position may differ depending on when
                             the company was deregistered, whether the relevant legislation is still in



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                          Page 13
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




                             force in some way and whether there are any applicable savings and
                             transitional provisions. You should consider seeking professional advice.



Requirements for making a reinstatement application to a court
              RG 83.40       The requirements for making an application to a court for reinstatement
                             under the Corporations Act are listed in Table 4 below and can generally be
                             addressed in affidavits filed in support of the application.

Table 4: Requirements for court reinstatement application

 Requirement                        Description

 Made in the appropriate            The application must be to a court as defined in s58AA(1) of the
 court                              Corporations Act, which means it must be a superior court such as the
                                    Supreme Court, the Federal Court or the Family Court.

 Meets legislative                  The applicant must be the liquidator who was appointed at the time of
 requirements                       deregistration or a person aggrieved by the deregistration of the company.

 Grounds are stated                 The application must state the grounds on which it is made to satisfy the
                                    court that it is just that the company’s registration be reinstated. The
                                    application should include satisfactory material to support the grounds.

 If the company’s name is not       If the company name is no longer available, the application must seek an
 available                          order that ASIC reinstate the company with its name being the Australian
                                    Company Number followed by the legal elements.

 Sufficient information about       The application must provide sufficient information to satisfy the court that
 solvency                           the company would be solvent if its registration was reinstated.

                                    If you are a creditor or liquidator you do not need to give this information.

 Appointment of liquidator          The application must seek the appointment of a liquidator if the company was
                                    being wound up prior to its deregistration, unless the reinstatement
                                    application also seeks an order terminating the liquidation of the company
                                    under s482 of the Corporations Act at the same time.

 Directors are aware of             The applicant must produce evidence that all persons who were directors at
 application                        the time of the deregistration of the company have been notified of the court
                                    application and that, if the application for reinstatement is successful, their
                                    roles and responsibilities as officeholders will resume.

 Copy of the application is         A copy of the reinstatement application should be served on ASIC so the
 served on ASIC                     court can seek ASIC’s position before it decides the application.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                                  Page 14
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




Relevant considerations
              RG 83.41       In deciding whether to reinstate a deregistered company, the court may
                             consider:
                             (a)   the circumstances in which the company came to be dissolved;
                             (b)   whether good use could be made of the order if granted;
                             (c)   whether any person was likely to be prejudiced by the reinstatement; and
                             (d)   the public interest (see Australian Competition and Consumer
                                   Commission v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                                   (2000) 174 ALR 688).



ASIC’s role in a court proceeding
              RG 83.42       A copy of the application should be served on ASIC as a court generally
                             seeks ASIC’s position on an application for reinstatement before making a
                             decision: Reid v Action Insulation Engineers Pty Ltd [2009] NSWSC 1182.

              RG 83.43       Generally, we will not object to an application if the requirements listed in
                             Table 4 are met.

              RG 83.44       The fact that we do not object to the reinstatement of a company’s
                             registration does not mean a court will necessarily approve the reinstatement
                             application.

              RG 83.45       ASIC will not usually appear at the hearing of an application for a
                             reinstatement to which we do not object. Instead, we will advise the
                             applicant in writing that we have no objection to the application.



Requirements following a court reinstatement order
              RG 83.46       Following a court order to reinstate a company, you must notify ASIC by
                             lodging the order(s) with us.

              RG 83.47       You must include a Form 105 Cover page for an office copy of a court order
                             that identifies:
                             (a)   the legislative provision under which the order was made; and
                             (b)   the nature of the order.

              RG 83.48       After we have reinstated the company’s registration, we will publish a notice
                             of the reinstatement in the Commonwealth of Australia ASIC Gazette.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                          Page 15
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




E          Consequences of administrative and court
           reinstatement

                               Key points

                               When a company’s registration is reinstated, the company is taken to have
                               continued in existence as if it had not been deregistered and is subject to
                               all the requirements of the Corporations Act.




Requirements of directors, secretaries and members following a
reinstatement application
              RG 83.49       Where a reinstatement application is made by, or on behalf of, a person who
                             was a director, secretary or member of the company at the time of
                             deregistration, either the applicant or the relevant officeholders must ensure
                             the following within 14 days of lodging the reinstatement order with ASIC:
                             (a)   lodge notification of the company’s registered office, change of
                                   officeholders and any other company details that need to be updated on
                                   our companies register;
                             (b)   pay all outstanding fees and penalties payable to ASIC; and
                             (c)   meet all outstanding judgments against the company or any officer of
                                   the company about failure to lodge documents with ASIC.



Effect of reinstatement
              RG 83.50       Under s601AH(5), if a company is reinstated, it is taken to have continued in
                             existence as if it had not been deregistered.

              RG 83.51       The company and officeholders of a reinstated company must follow the
                             requirements set out in the Corporations Act. These include keeping records,
                             paying fees and updating changes to company details with ASIC.



Property
              RG 83.52       On reinstatement, property of the company that was vested in ASIC as a
                             result of deregistration, and that has not been disposed of or otherwise dealt
                             with by ASIC under its powers, vests again in the company.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                          Page 16
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




Directors
              RG 83.53       Persons who were directors at the time of deregistration become directors
                             from the time the company is reinstated. However, if the company was in
                             liquidation at the time of deregistration, it will be taken to have continued in
                             liquidation before and after its reinstatement unless the court orders that the
                             liquidation be terminated under s482 of the Corporations Act at the time of
                             the company’s reinstatement.

              RG 83.54       A director is not deemed to have remained in office during the period that a
                             company is deregistered. This means that the conduct of a person purporting
                             to be a director during the period of deregistration may be invalid and
                             agreements purportedly entered into during the period of deregistration by a
                             director on behalf of the company may not be valid. You should seek legal
                             advice if you think you may be affected by this issue. An administrative
                             reinstatement may not be appropriate in these circumstances, as only a court
                             can make orders to rectify such deficiencies.



Liquidator and winding up
              RG 83.55       When applying for a court reinstatement, orders can be sought to place the
                             reinstated company immediately into liquidation under s459A or s461 of the
                             Corporations Act. Under s489EA(3), ASIC may order the winding up of a
                             company if we have reinstated the registration of the company in the last six
                             months and it is in the public interest to do so: see Regulatory Guide 242
                             ASIC’s power to wind up abandoned companies (RG 242).

              RG 83.56       Where a company was wound up before its deregistration and a liquidator is
                             reappointed, or a new liquidator appointed upon reinstatement of the
                             company, the commencement date for the appointment or winding up is the
                             date of the court order and is the relevant date for the purposes of the
                             liquidator’s lodgement obligations under section 70–5 of Sch 2 of the
                             Corporations Act.

              RG 83.57       The liquidator appointed under the court order must consider all other
                             obligations under the Corporations Act and relevant regulations, then finalise
                             the liquidation when the affairs of the company are fully wound up.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                          Page 17
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




Key terms

                                Term                      Meaning in this document

                                administrative            Reinstatement of a company’s registration by ASIC
                                reinstatement

                                ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                                Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                                court reinstatement       A court order that ASIC reinstate a company’s registration

                                liquidator                A person appointed to wind up the affairs and distribute
                                                          the property of an externally administered company

                                s601AB (for example)      A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 601AB), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                                  Page 18
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             administrative reinstatement, court reinstatement, deregistration


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 242 ASIC’s power to wind up abandoned companies


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 4 Reinstating a deregistered company


                             Legislation

                             ASIC Supervisory Cost Recovery Levy Act 2017

                             Companies (New South Wales) Code

                             Companies (Northern Territory) Code

                             Companies (South Australia) Code

                             Companies (Tasmania) Code

                             Companies (Victoria) Code

                             Companies (Western Australia) Code

                             Corporations Act s58AA(1), 413(3), 459A, 481(5)(b), 482, 489EA(3),
                             509(1), 509(2), 601AA, 601AB(1), 601AB(1A), 601AB(1B), 601AB(2),
                             601AH(1), 601AH(1A), 601AH(2), 601AH(5)

                             Corporations Law former s574


                             Cases

                             Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Australian Securities
                             and Investments Commission (2000) 174 ALR 688

                             JP Morgan Portfolio Services Ltd v Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (2008) 167
                             FCR 212.

                             Re Jury & Spiers Pty Ltd [2016] NSWSC 900

                             Re Rocha Pty Ltd [2016] NSWSC 899

                             Reid v Action Insulation Engineers Pty Ltd [2009] NSWSC 1182




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                          Page 19
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 83: Reinstatement of companies




                             Forms

                             Form 105 Cover page for office copy of a court order

                             Form 205 Notification of resolution

                             Form 410 Application for reservation of a name

                             Form 581 Application for ASIC reinstatement (see Applying to ASIC for
                             reinstatement)

                             Form 6010 Application for voluntary deregistration of a company




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2018                                          Page 20
