REGULATORY GUIDE 36

Licensing: Financial product
advice and dealing

June 2016




About this guide
This guide is for persons who provide financial product advice or deal in a
financial product as defined in the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act)
and their professional advisers (such as lawyers).

It gives guidance on the meaning of ‘provide financial product advice’ and
the meaning of ‘deal in a financial product’. It also provides guidance on the
obligations that apply to providers of financial services.
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in June 2016 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. Notes were added at RG 36.63 and
                             RG 36.64 on 20 November 2020 to refer to a new information sheet,
                             Information Sheet 251 AFS licensing requirement for trustees of
                             unregistered managed investment schemes (INFO 251). In March 2022 we
                             updated RG 36.96(a) (including Note 1) to reflect the breach reporting
                             reforms that commenced on 1 October 2021.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 36, issued April 2011, reissued August
                                     2013
                                    Superseded guide Licensing: The scope of the licensing regime:
                                     Financial product advice and dealing, issued November 2001, reissued
                                     November 2002, May 2005 and May 2007, and rebadged as a
                                     regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                    Page 2
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




Contents

                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    What is a ‘financial service’?.............................................................. 4
                                    What is the meaning of ‘provide financial product advice’? ............... 5
                                    What is the meaning of ‘deal in a financial product’? ........................ 5
                                    What is the meaning of ‘arranging’? .................................................. 6
                                    What obligations apply to providers of financial services? ................ 6
                             B      What is the meaning of ‘provide financial product advice’? ....... 7
                                    What is financial product advice? ...................................................... 7
                                    When do you ‘provide’ financial product advice? ............................ 12
                             C      What is the meaning of ‘deal in a financial product’? ............... 16
                                    What is dealing? .............................................................................. 16
                                    What is arranging? ........................................................................... 16
                                    What conduct is exempt from the definition of dealing? .................. 17
                             D      What is the meaning of ‘arranging’? ........................................... 19
                                    What is arranging? ........................................................................... 19
                                    What is not arranging? ..................................................................... 20
                                    Examples of our approach to determining what is arranging .......... 22
                             E      What obligations apply to providers of financial services?...... 26
                                    The need to hold an AFS licence .................................................... 26
                                    When do you satisfy the business test? .......................................... 26
                                    Does an exemption from the requirement to hold an AFS licence
                                    apply? .............................................................................................. 27
                                    What obligations are imposed on licensees? .................................. 33
                                    When do representatives need to hold an authorisation? ............... 36
                                    What obligations are imposed on representatives? ........................ 37
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 38
                             Related information ............................................................................... 41




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                                              Page 3
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               To determine your obligations under the licensing provisions you first need to
                               consider whether you provide a ‘financial service’: see RG 36.1–RG 36.2.

                               You provide a financial service if (among other things) you:
                               • ‘provide financial product advice’ (see RG 36.3–RG 36.6); or
                               • ‘deal in a financial product’ (see RG 36.7–RG 36.8).
                               Arranging for a person to engage in certain conduct, such as applying for or
                               acquiring a financial product (see RG 36.36), will constitute dealing unless
                               it amounts to providing financial product advice or is exempt: see RG 36.9–
                               RG 36.11.
                               If you provide a financial service you need to consider whether you must
                               hold an Australian financial services (AFS) licence or hold an authorisation
                               from a licensee: see RG 36.12–RG 36.14.
                               Licensees and their representatives must comply with certain obligations:
                               see RG 36.15–RG 36.18.




What is a ‘financial service’?
              RG 36.1        To determine your obligations under the licensing provisions you first need
                             to consider whether you provide a ‘financial service’.

              RG 36.2        Generally, a person provides a financial service if they:
                             (a)   provide financial product advice;
                             (b)   deal in a financial product;
                             (c)   make a market for a financial product;
                             (d)   operate a registered scheme;
                             (e)   provide a custodial or depository service;
                             (f)   provide traditional trustee company services; or
                             (g)   engage in conduct of a kind prescribed in the Corporations Regulations
                                   2001 (Corporations Regulations) (see s766A of the Corporations Act
                                   2001 (Corporations Act)).

                                   Note: This guide does not provide guidance on the types of financial service set out in
                                   RG 36.2(c)–RG 36.2(g).




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                           Page 4
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




What is the meaning of ‘provide financial product advice’?
              RG 36.3        The licensing provisions apply to persons who ‘provide financial product
                             advice’. To determine whether you provide financial product advice, it is
                             necessary to separately consider two questions:
                             (a)   What is ‘financial product advice’?
                             (b)   When do you ‘provide’ financial product advice?


                             What is financial product advice?

              RG 36.4        A recommendation or a statement of opinion, or a report of either of those
                             things, constitutes financial product advice under s766B if:
                             (a)   it is intended to influence a person or persons in making a decision about
                                   a particular financial product or class of financial products, or an interest
                                   in a particular financial product or class of financial products, or could
                                   reasonably be regarded as being intended to have such an influence; and
                             (b)   it is not exempted from the definition of ‘financial product advice’.


                             When do you ‘provide’ financial product advice?

              RG 36.5        The licensing provisions apply to persons who ‘provide’ financial product
                             advice. The person who provides the advice will generally include the
                             author(s) of the advice as well as the principal for whom they act. It also
                             includes any other person who endorses the advice, or any person who
                             causes or authorises the provision of the advice: see s52. However, a person
                             does not provide financial product advice in certain circumstances specified
                             in the Corporations Act (e.g. where the person’s conduct occurs in the course
                             of work of a kind ordinarily done by clerks and cashiers).

              RG 36.6        The meaning of ‘provide financial product advice’ is considered in more
                             detail in Section B.



What is the meaning of ‘deal in a financial product’?
              RG 36.7        The licensing provisions apply to persons who ‘deal in a financial product’.
                             To determine whether you deal in a financial product it is necessary to
                             consider the following questions:
                             (a)   What is ‘dealing’ within the meaning of s766C(1)?
                             (b)   What is ‘arranging’ within the meaning of s766C(2)?
                             (c)   What conduct is exempt from the definition of ‘dealing’?

              RG 36.8        The meaning of ‘deal in a financial product’ is considered in more detail in
                             Section C.



Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                    Page 5
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




What is the meaning of ‘arranging’?
              RG 36.9        ‘Arranging’ for a person to engage in certain conduct, such as applying for
                             or acquiring a financial product (see RG 36.36), constitutes dealing unless:
                             (a)   the actions concerned amount to providing financial product advice
                                   (s766C(2)); or
                             (b)   the conduct is exempt from the definition of dealing—for example, if
                                   the clerks and cashiers exemption applies (s766A(3)).

              RG 36.10       Arranging occurs when a person brings into effect the issue, variation,
                             disposal or acquisition of, or application for, a financial product. Ultimately,
                             whether a person’s activities constitute arranging is a question of degree.

              RG 36.11       The meaning of ‘arranging’ is considered in more detail in Section D.



What obligations apply to providers of financial services?
              RG 36.12       If you provide a financial service you may need to hold an AFS licence.

              RG 36.13       You will need to hold an AFS licence if you carry on a financial services
                             business in this jurisdiction, unless an exemption in s911A(2) (or regulations
                             made for the purposes of that provision) applies. For example, due to the
                             exemption in s911A(2)(a), you do not need an AFS licence to provide
                             financial services as a representative of a licensee.

              RG 36.14       To determine whether you need to hold an AFS licence to provide a financial
                             service it is necessary to consider the following questions:
                             (a)   When do you satisfy the business test? (see RG 36.59)
                             (b)   Does an exemption from the requirement to hold an AFS licence apply?
                                   (see RG 36.60)

              RG 36.15       Licensees must comply with various obligations, including the general
                             licensee obligations set out in s912A and 912B.

              RG 36.16       If you provide financial services as a representative of a licensee, you may
                             need to hold an authorisation from that licensee.

              RG 36.17       While the primary obligation to ensure compliance with the financial
                             services laws is imposed on licensees, some obligations in the law apply
                             directly to representatives.

              RG 36.18       The obligations that apply to providers of financial services are considered in
                             more detail in Section E.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                    Page 6
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




B          What is the meaning of ‘provide financial
           product advice’?

                               Key points

                               The licensing provisions apply to persons who ‘provide financial product
                               advice’.

                               To determine whether you provide financial product advice it is necessary
                               to separately consider two questions:
                               • What is financial product advice? (see RG 36.19–RG 36.32); and
                               • When do you ‘provide’ financial product advice? (see RG 36.33–
                                 RG 36.35).




What is financial product advice?
              RG 36.19       A recommendation or a statement of opinion, or a report of either of those
                             things, constitutes financial product advice under s766B if:
                             (a)   it is intended to influence a person or persons in making a decision
                                   about a particular financial product or class of financial products, or an
                                   interest in a particular financial product or class of financial products, or
                                   could reasonably be regarded as being intended to have such an
                                   influence; and
                             (b)   it is not exempted from the definition of financial product advice.

                                   Note: There are two types of financial product advice under the Corporations Act—
                                   personal advice and general advice: see s766B(2)–(4). For a brief description of these
                                   two types of advice, see RG 36.97–RG 36.100. These paragraphs describe some key
                                   obligations that apply depending on whether a person is providing personal or general
                                   advice. For further guidance about the distinction between personal advice and general
                                   advice and your obligations, see Regulatory Guide 175 Licensing: Financial product
                                   advisers—Conduct and disclosure (RG 175) and Regulatory Guide 244 Giving
                                   information, general advice and scaled advice (RG 244).

              RG 36.20       Financial product advice will generally involve a qualitative judgement
                             about, or an evaluation, assessment or comparison of, some or all of the
                             features of one or more financial product(s).

                                   Note: For example, a service that involves rating some or all of the features of one or
                                   more superannuation products will generally constitute financial product advice. Such a
                                   service involves making an evaluation, assessment or comparison of some or all of the
                                   features of one or more financial products.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                         Page 7
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             Consider the overall impression and circumstances

              RG 36.21       You will need to take into account the overall impression created by a
                             communication, and all the surrounding circumstances in which it is
                             provided, to determine whether it constitutes financial product advice under
                             the test set out in s766B.

              RG 36.22       This will mean you need to consider, among other things:
                             (a)   the means by which the provider(s) of the communication (and their
                                   associates) are remunerated; and
                             (b)   any representations made to the person to whom the communication is
                                   provided (who may be a retail or wholesale client).

                             For example, a communication is more likely to be financial product advice
                             if its provider (or associate) is remunerated by the client or stands to benefit
                             depending on the decisions made by a client. This is because an intention to
                             influence may be more readily inferred.

                             The distinction between factual information and financial
                             product advice

              RG 36.23       If a communication is a recommendation or a statement of opinion, or a
                             report of either of those things, that is intended to, or can reasonably be
                             regarded as being intended to, influence a client in making a decision about a
                             particular financial product or class of financial product (or an interest in
                             either of these), it is financial product advice. Communications that consist
                             only of factual information (i.e. objectively ascertainable information whose
                             truth or accuracy cannot be reasonably questioned) will generally not
                             involve the expression of an opinion or a recommendation and will not,
                             therefore, constitute financial product advice.

                                   Note: For example, factual information will generally include information about the
                                   rights and obligations of persons under relevant legislation (such as the Superannuation
                                   Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992).

              RG 36.24       However, in some circumstances, a communication that consists only of
                             factual information may amount to financial product advice. Where factual
                             information is presented in a manner that may reasonably be regarded as
                             suggesting or implying a recommendation to buy, sell or hold a particular
                             financial product or class of financial products, the communication may
                             constitute financial product advice (e.g. where the features of two financial
                             products are described in such a manner as to suggest that one compares
                             more favourably than the other).

              RG 36.25       We will not treat factual information given by you as general or personal
                             advice if:
                             (a)   you clarify at the outset that you are giving the client factual
                                   information where there is a reasonable likelihood of doubt; and


Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                          Page 8
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             (b)   the information is not intended to imply any recommendation or
                                   opinion about a financial product.

                                   Note: See RG 244.29–RG 244.32 for more guidance on how we distinguish factual
                                   information from general or personal advice.

              RG 36.26       The examples in Table 1 illustrate the distinction between factual
                             information and financial product advice.

Table 1:     Examples of the distinction between factual information and financial advice

 Example                     Explanation of the distinction between factual information and financial advice

 Superannuation              A client asks a fund representative about salary sacrifice arrangements and
                             superannuation. The representative informs the client what is generally understood
                             by the term ‘salary sacrifice arrangement’. This is likely to constitute the provision of
                             factual information.

                             If, however, the representative expresses a qualitative or comparative judgement
                             about salary sacrifice arrangements (e.g. ‘sacrificing salary into a superannuation
                             fund is very tax effective’ or ‘sacrificing salary into a superannuation fund is more tax
                             effective than negative gearing’), this would be likely to constitute the provision of
                             financial product advice.

 Call centres and            A client contacts a call centre wanting to buy insurance for their motor vehicle. The
 general insurance           client asks the operator to explain the difference between third-party liability and
                             comprehensive cover and asks for two quotes.
                               Note: Telling an inquirer the cost or estimated cost of a financial product does not constitute
                               the provision of financial product advice: see s766B(6).

                             The operator simply explains the differences in policy coverage between the two
                             policies and provides the requested quotations. This is likely to constitute the
                             provision of factual information.

                             However, suppose the client has obtained two quotes to insure their motor vehicle:
                             one covers third-party liability, the other is for comprehensive cover. The client asks
                             whether it is worth taking out comprehensive cover. The operator explains the
                             differences in policy coverage between the two policies. Without referring to any
                             particular circumstances of the client, the operator says that comprehensive cover is
                             the best choice for most people. This is likely to constitute the provision of financial
                             product advice, because the context in which the response is given suggests a
                             value judgement about the comparative merits of the two policies.

 Branch staff and a          A client visits their local bank branch with $10,000 to deposit. The client asks for the
 spare $10,000               different interest rates on a savings account and a term deposit and is referred to a
                             customer service officer. The officer provides the interest rates for each of these
                             facilities. This is likely to constitute the provision of factual information.

                             However, suppose the officer not only explains the interest rates for each of these
                             facilities but also adds that there is an ‘attractive special rate’ available on term
                             deposits for a six-month term. This is likely to constitute the provision of financial
                             product advice because it is a matter of opinion as to whether the special rate is
                             ‘attractive’ and the teller could reasonably be regarded as intending to influence the
                             client to choose the term deposit.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                               Page 9
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




 Example                       Explanation of the distinction between factual information and financial advice

 Seminars                      A financial institution organises a seminar on investment. Fifteen people attend the
                               seminar. The presenter merely provides a general description of the different types
                               of financial products that are available for investment purposes. This is likely to
                               constitute the provision of factual information only.

                               However, suppose the presenter claims that, during periods of stock market
                               volatility, property trusts are more desirable than shares because they offer more
                               consistent returns. This is likely to constitute the provision of financial product
                               advice. The desirability of property trusts is a matter of opinion and the presenter’s
                               statements could reasonably be regarded as intending to influence the attendees to
                               invest in property trusts.

 Cross-selling                 A client approaches a financial institution to ask about a home mortgage. The client
                               also asks the customer service representative about income protection insurance.
                               The representative confirms that the financial institution also offers income
                               protection insurance products. This is likely to constitute the provision of factual
                               information.

                               However, suppose that the customer service representative suggests that the client
                               should consider taking out income protection insurance because it can give ‘peace
                               of mind’ in meeting mortgage payments. This is likely to constitute the provision of
                               financial product advice because whether income protection insurance provides
                               peace of mind or not is a matter of opinion. The representative’s suggestion could
                               reasonably be regarded as intending to influence the client to purchase income
                               protection insurance.

Note: For further guidance and examples illustrating the difference between factual information and financial product advice,
see RG 244.



                                A decision on a particular financial product or class

                RG 36.27        A specific issue that arises is the meaning in s766B(1) of ‘decision in
                                relation to a particular financial product or class of financial products, or an
                                interest in a particular financial product or class of financial products’. This
                                expression includes any decision to buy, sell or hold a particular financial
                                product or class of financial products. Examples include a decision to:
                                (a)   exercise a right or option to acquire or dispose of a financial product;
                                (b)   acquire an equitable interest in a financial product; or
                                (c)   accept or reject a takeover offer.

                RG 36.28        Section 766B(1) encompasses decisions made by consumers to make
                                additional payments or contributions in relation to financial products held by
                                them (whether or not the making of such additional payments or
                                contributions involves the issue of a financial product: see s761E). It also
                                encompasses decisions made by consumers about investment strategies or
                                options that they may select within a fund.

                RG 36.29        In the context of superannuation, s766B(1) encompasses (but is not limited
                                to) decisions made by consumers about:
                                (a)   joining a superannuation fund;


Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                              Page 10
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             (b)   the level of contributions to be paid to a superannuation fund (including
                                   altering the level of contributions);
                             (c)   selecting a particular investment or insurance option within a
                                   superannuation fund;
                             (d)   moving funds between sub-plans within a fund;
                             (e)   claiming superannuation benefits; and
                             (f)   moving funds from one fund to another fund.

              RG 36.30       Clearly, decisions that relate only to things that are not financial products
                             (e.g. a credit facility as defined in s765A(1)(h)(i) and related regulations) are
                             not caught by s766B(1). However, these may be caught by other legislation
                             such as the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009.


                             Use of disclaimers

              RG 36.31       If your communications include information about financial products, but do
                             not constitute financial product advice, you should consider giving
                             consumers a disclaimer to the effect that you are not providing financial
                             product advice, and that consumers should consider obtaining independent
                             advice before making any financial decisions. This will help avoid
                             misleading or confusing consumers about the purpose of the communication.

                                   Note: A disclaimer will not, of itself, determine whether a communication constitutes
                                   financial product advice.


                             When is a communication exempt from the definition of
                             financial product advice?

              RG 36.32       A communication is exempt from the definition of financial product advice
                             in s766B if it is:
                             (a)   advice given by a lawyer in the circumstances set out in s766B(5)(a) or
                                   (b);
                             (b)   advice given by a registered tax agent in the circumstances set out in
                                   s766B(5)(c); or
                             (c)   a quote relating to the cost of a financial product or the rate of return on
                                   a financial product in the circumstances set out in s766B(6) or (7).

                                   Note: Apart from these exemptions, you will not be providing financial product advice
                                   in any of the circumstances listed in RG 36.34. Even if you are providing financial
                                   product advice, you may not need an AFS licence or authorisation, depending on the
                                   circumstances: see Section E.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                        Page 11
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




When do you ‘provide’ financial product advice?
              RG 36.33       The licensing provisions apply to persons who ‘provide’ financial product
                             advice. The person who provides the advice will generally include the
                             author(s) of the advice as well as the principal for whom they act. It also
                             includes any other person who endorses the advice, or any person who
                             causes or authorises the provision of the advice: see s52.

                                   Note 1: For further guidance on s52 and the provision of financial services through a
                                   licensed intermediary, see RG 175.

                                   Note 2: Financial product advice may be provided by traditional means (e.g. verbally or
                                   by paper) or electronically (e.g. via a website).


                             Circumstances where a person does not provide financial
                             product advice

              RG 36.34       You are not providing financial product advice when:
                             (a)   you provide an exempt document or statement (s766B(1A)). The
                                   expression ‘exempt document or statement’ is defined in reg 7.1.08;

                                   Note 1: We have given relief from the requirement to hold an AFS licence for the issue
                                   of certain documents that contain general advice (e.g. documents prepared for the
                                   purposes of the Corporations Act): see ASIC Corporations (Financial Product Advice—
                                   Exempt Documents) Instrument 2016/356 and [CO 03/911] Licensing relief for self-
                                   dealers who provide general product advice about own securities.

                                   Note 2: A recommendation or statement of opinion made by an ‘outside expert’
                                   (defined in s766B(9)(b)), or a report of such a recommendation or statement of opinion,
                                   that is included in an exempt document or statement is financial product advice. Under
                                   the law, the advice is provided by the outside expert and not the issuer of the exempt
                                   document: see also reg 7.6.01(1)(u).

                             (b)   you provide certain kinds of business, structural and risk-related advice
                                   in the circumstances set out in reg 7.1.29(3);

                                   Note: These services are an ‘exempt service’ within the meaning of reg 7.1.29(1).

                             (c)   you are registered as an auditor under Pt 9.2 and perform any of the
                                   functions of a cover pool monitor mentioned in s30(4) of the Banking
                                   Act 1959 (reg 7.1.29(3A));
                             (d)   the conduct is the provision of advice about the taxation implications of
                                   a financial product in the circumstances set out in reg 7.1.29(4);

                                   Note: This is an ‘exempt service’ within the meaning of reg 7.1.29(1).

                             (e)   you provide advice about the establishment, operation, structuring or
                                   valuation of a superannuation fund (other than advice for inclusion in an
                                   exempt document or statement) in the circumstances set out in reg
                                   7.1.29(5);

                                   Note 1: This is an ‘exempt service’ within the meaning of reg 7.1.29(1).




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                         Page 12
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                                   Note 2: The requirement in reg 7.1.29(5)(c)(ii) (that the advice does not include a
                                   recommendation that a person acquire or dispose of a superannuation product) does not
                                   apply to a recommendation by a recognised accountant in relation to a self-managed
                                   superannuation fund: see reg 7.1.29A. The term ‘recognised accountant’ is defined in
                                   reg 7.1.29A(2).

                             (f)   your conduct consists only of passing on, publishing, distributing or
                                   otherwise disseminating a document that contains financial product
                                   advice in the circumstances described in reg 7.1.31. This may include a
                                   publisher or internet portal operator;
                             (g)   your conduct occurs in the course of work of a kind ordinarily done by
                                   clerks and cashiers (s766A(3) and RG 36.35);
                             (h)   your conduct consists only of advising another person about the manner
                                   in which voting rights attaching to securities or interests in managed
                                   investment schemes may or should be exercised in the circumstances
                                   set out in reg 7.1.30;
                             (i)   you provide advice to another person that relates only to the structuring of
                                   remuneration packages for that other person’s employees (reg 7.1.32);
                             (j)   your conduct consists only of providing a recommendation or statement
                                   of opinion in the course of, and as a necessary or incidental part of, the
                                   handling or settlement of claims or potential claims for an insurance
                                   product (reg 7.1.33(1));
                             (k)   your conduct consists only of providing a recommendation or statement
                                   of opinion about the allocation of the funds among the general asset
                                   types listed in reg 7.1.33A. This exemption does not apply if the
                                   recommendation or statement of opinion relates to specific financial
                                   products or specific classes of financial product;
                             (l)   you prepare general advice, as a product issuer, about your own
                                   product(s), but only where a third party licensee gives the advice to its
                                   recipients (reg 7.1.33B). In this situation the licensee will be taken to be
                                   the provider of the financial product advice;
                             (m)   you provide advice about the existence of a custodial or depository
                                   service in the circumstances set out in reg 7.1.33E;
                             (n)   you provide general advice intended to influence a decision on school
                                   banking and you are employed by a school or provide the service on
                                   behalf of a school in the circumstances set out in reg 7.1.33F;
                             (o)   you provide general advice that is not about a particular financial
                                   product and is not intended to influence a person in making a decision
                                   about a particular financial product or an interest in a particular
                                   financial product (or could not reasonably be regarded as being
                                   intended to have such an influence), and you or your associate does not
                                   receive any remuneration, commission or other benefit for the advice
                                   (reg 7.1.33G); or




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                      Page 13
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             (p)   you provide general advice, as a product issuer, about your own
                                   products in circumstances where you are not licensed to provide
                                   financial product advice and, at the time of giving the advice, advise the
                                   client that you are not licensed, recommend that the client obtain and
                                   read a copy of the Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) or Short-Form
                                   PDS for the product before making a decision about the product and
                                   notify the client about any cooling-off period (reg 7.1.33H).

                                   Note 1: Apart from the circumstances set out in RG 36.34, you will not be providing
                                   financial product advice if the communication in question falls within an exemption
                                   listed in RG 36.32. Even if you are providing financial product advice, you may not
                                   need an AFS licence or authorisation, depending on the circumstances: see Section E,
                                   especially RG 36.60.

                                   Note 2: The list of circumstances in RG 36.34 that do not amount to financial product
                                   advice under the Corporations Act is not exhaustive. In determining whether or not your
                                   conduct constitutes financial product advice you should look at the Corporations Act,
                                   relevant regulations and ASIC instruments, as well as other ASIC publications. ASIC
                                   instruments and other ASIC publications are available at www.asic.gov.au.

                                   Note 3: Certain products are subject to specific disclosure regimes. Superannuation
                                   products, simple managed investment schemes and margin lending facilities are subject
                                   to a shorter PDS regime. For more information on the shorter PDS regime that applies
                                   to these products, see Information Sheet 133 Shorter PDS regime: Superannuation,
                                   managed investment schemes and margin lending (INFO 133). A modified disclosure
                                   regime also applies to general insurance products: see Pt 7.9 of the Corporations
                                   Regulations.


                             Clerks and cashiers

              RG 36.35       A person’s conduct occurs in the course of work of a kind ordinarily done by
                             clerks and cashiers (and, therefore, the person does not ‘provide financial
                             product advice’) if it merely involves:
                             (a)   posting, handing out, or otherwise distributing or displaying, documents
                                   such as prospectuses, PDSs, Short-Form PDSs or Financial Services
                                   Guides (FSGs);
                             (b)   answering routine questions from consumers by giving factual
                                   information (see RG 36.23–RG 36.25), such as minimum investment
                                   amounts of funds accepted, whether a particular offer is still open or the
                                   nature of investments made by a specific trust;
                             (c)   collecting payments (e.g. subscription money) and issuing receipts;
                             (d)   performing the routine or administrative function of assisting
                                   consumers to complete application forms and send completed
                                   application forms to the relevant product issuer; or

                                   Note: This applies only where the consumer has already made the decision to acquire
                                   the financial product. It does not apply where the person helps the consumer make their
                                   decision to acquire the financial product.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                        Page 14
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             (e)   performing other routine or administrative functions that do not involve
                                   a judgement about what financial products, or classes of financial
                                   products, are appropriate or should be considered by a consumer.

                                   Note: This is not intended to be an exhaustive list of conduct that may fall within
                                   s766A(3). In interpreting s766A(3), it is important to note that the provision is prefaced
                                   with the words ‘to avoid doubt’. Licensees must monitor and supervise their clerks and
                                   cashiers to ensure that the licensee complies with its obligations relating to the provision
                                   of financial services: see Regulatory Guide 104 Licensing: Meeting the general
                                   obligations (RG 104) and Regulatory Guide 105 Licensing: Organisational competence
                                   (RG 105).




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                            Page 15
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




C          What is the meaning of ‘deal in a financial
           product’?

                               Key points

                               The licensing provisions apply to persons who deal in a financial product.

                               To determine whether you deal in a financial product it is necessary to
                               consider the following questions:
                               • What is dealing within the meaning of s766C(1)? (see RG 36.36);
                               • What is arranging within the meaning of s766C(2)? (see RG 36.37–
                                 RG 36.40); and
                               • What conduct is exempt from the definition of dealing? (see RG 36.41).




What is dealing?
              RG 36.36       The following conduct constitutes dealing in a financial product within the
                             meaning of s766C(1) (unless the conduct is exempt from the definition of
                             dealing: see RG 36.41):
                             (a)   applying for or acquiring a financial product;
                             (b)   issuing a financial product;
                             (c)   for securities or managed investment schemes, underwriting the
                                   securities or interests;
                             (d)   varying a financial product; or
                             (e)   disposing of a financial product.



What is arranging?
              RG 36.37       Arranging for a person to engage in conduct referred to in RG 36.36 also
                             constitutes dealing unless:
                             (a)   the actions concerned amount to providing financial product advice
                                   (s766C(2)); or
                             (b)   the conduct is exempt from the definition of dealing—for example, if
                                   the clerks and cashiers exemption applies (s766A(3)).

              RG 36.38       Arranging refers to the process by which a person negotiates for, or brings
                             into effect, a dealing in a financial product (e.g. an issue, variation, disposal,
                             acquisition or application). The person who is arranging may be acting for a
                             product issuer, seller or consumer.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                   Page 16
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




              RG 36.39       Arranging includes ‘arranging contracts of insurance’ as that expression has
                             been interpreted in relation to the Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Act 1984
                             (now repealed). However, arranging is not limited to arranging contracts of
                             insurance—it extends to all financial products.

              RG 36.40       For further guidance on our approach to arranging, see Section D.



What conduct is exempt from the definition of dealing?
              RG 36.41       You are not dealing when:
                             (a)   you deal on your own behalf, unless you are a product issuer dealing in
                                   your own products (s766C(3));
                             (b)   you are a government or local government authority, a public authority
                                   or instrumentality or agency of the Crown, or a body corporate or an
                                   unincorporated body, and you deal in your own securities (s766C(4));

                                   Note: A body corporate or an unincorporated body is not exempt under s766C(4) if it is
                                   an investment company: see s766C(5).

                             (c)   you act as a sub-underwriter (s766C(6));
                             (d)   your conduct occurs in the course of work of a kind ordinarily done by
                                   clerks and cashiers (s766A(3): see RG 36.35);
                             (e)   you arrange for another person to deal in interests in a self-managed
                                   superannuation fund in the circumstances set out in regs 7.1.29(5)(b)
                                   and (c) (reg 7.1.29(3)(f));
                             (f)   you arrange for another person to deal in a financial product by
                                   preparing a document of registration or transfer in order to complete
                                   administrative tasks on instruction from the person (reg 7.1.29(3)(g));
                             (g)   you deal in an insurance product as a necessary or incidental part of
                                   handling or settling insurance claims or potential claims (reg 7.1.33(2));
                             (h)   you arrange for the issue or acquisition of a school banking product and
                                   are employed by a school or provide the service on behalf of a school in
                                   the circumstances set out in reg 7.1.33F;
                             (i)   you enforce rights under a credit facility, including under a power of
                                   attorney (reg 7.1.34(2)(a));
                             (j)   you dispose of a financial product that is subject to a mortgage or
                                   transfer such a product to the mortgagor, whether the disposal or
                                   transfer is carried out at the direction of the mortgagor or occurs as a
                                   result of the mortgagor fulfilling its obligations under the mortgage
                                   (reg 7.1.34(2)(b));

                                   Note: Regulations 7.1.34(2)(a) and 7.1.34(2)(b) do not apply to a margin lending
                                   facility.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                        Page 17
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             (k)   you deal in a product held on trust for another person and the holding of
                                   the financial product does not constitute the provision of a custodial or
                                   depository service under reg 7.1.40 (reg 7.1.35(1)); or
                             (l)   you are a lawyer and you arrange for a person to deal in a financial
                                   product or you deal in a financial product as the agent of a client, an
                                   associate of a client or a relative of a client, and you do so in the
                                   circumstances set out in reg 7.1.35A.

                                   Note 1: Even if you are dealing, you may not need an AFS licence or authorisation,
                                   depending on the circumstances: see Section E, especially RG 36.60.

                                   Note 2: The list of circumstances in RG 36.41 that do not amount to dealing under the
                                   Corporations Act is not exhaustive. In determining whether or not your conduct
                                   constitutes dealing in a financial product, see the Corporations Act, relevant regulations
                                   and ASIC instruments, as well as other ASIC publications at www.asic.gov.au.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                           Page 18
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




D          What is the meaning of ‘arranging’?

                               Key points

                               ‘Arranging’ is a broad concept under the Corporations Act. Whether a
                               person’s activities constitute arranging is a question of degree.

                               This section details the indicators we look for when assessing whether a
                               person is arranging (see RG 36.45), as well as indicators that conduct may
                               amount to arranging (see RG 36.46).

                               Some types of conduct are not arranging within the meaning of the
                               Corporations Act: see RG 36.47. However, this conduct may constitute the
                               provision of another financial service.

                               The final part of this section contains examples to help determine whether
                               particular conduct is arranging: see RG 36.55–RG 36.56.




What is arranging?
              RG 36.42       Arranging is a broad concept under the Corporations Act and its scope has
                             not been fully determined by the courts. Arranging occurs when a person
                             brings into effect the issue, variation, disposal or acquisition of, or
                             application for, a financial product.

              RG 36.43       Your conduct may constitute arranging if:
                             (a)   your involvement in the chain of events leading to the relevant dealing
                                   is of sufficient importance that without that involvement the transaction
                                   would probably not take place (e.g. where you are the main or only
                                   person consumers deal directly with in a particular transaction);
                             (b)   your involvement significantly ‘adds value’ for the person for whom
                                   you are acting; and
                             (c)   you receive benefits depending on the decisions made by the person for
                                   whom you are acting.

                                   Note: This is not intended to be an exhaustive list of potentially relevant factors. In
                                   determining whether you are arranging, the presence (or absence) of any one or more of
                                   the listed factors is not conclusive.

              RG 36.44       As an example, the activities of an order router will generally involve
                             arranging (i.e. where a service provider takes steps to bring into effect an
                             acquisition or disposal of a financial product, albeit that another intermediary
                             is also involved in the process and executes the customer’s order). On the
                             other hand, the operator of a business introduction service will probably not
                             be arranging where the operator does not play a significant role and does not
                             benefit from investment decisions made by consumers.



Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                        Page 19
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




              RG 36.45       Table 2 shows what we look for when assessing whether a person is
                             arranging, to assist you in understanding our approach. Ultimately, whether a
                             person’s activities constitute arranging is a question of degree.

Table 2:     Indicators of arranging

 Indicator                     Behaviours that exemplify this conduct

 The intermediary plays        The consumer communicates with the intermediary as a key person about the
 an important role for the     transaction
 consumer in relation to
 the financial product and
 the transaction probably
 would not have
 proceeded without the
 intermediary’s
 involvement

 The intermediary adds         The intermediary negotiates the terms of the financial product between the product
 value for one or more of      issuer and the consumer. Generally, the more active the intermediary is in
 the parties to the            facilitating the transaction between a consumer and a product issuer, the more
 transaction                   likely their activity is to be arranging


              RG 36.46       Table 3 shows indicators that particular conduct may amount to arranging,
                             especially when they occur alongside other activities. Ordinarily, one of
                             these indicators alone would not amount to arranging.

Table 3:     Indicators that conduct may amount to arranging

 Indicator                     Behaviours that may exemplify this conduct

 The collection and            The intermediary receives money and passes it on to the product issuer to pay for
 transmission of money         the acquisition of a financial product

 Receipt of benefits based     The intermediary is paid by the product issuer if a person purchases a financial
 on sales.                     product. The receipt of benefits is an indication of the intermediary’s motivation to
                               effect a transaction and may suggest a more active involvement by the
                               intermediary in the completion of the transaction
                                 Note: This kind of benefit could amount to conflicted remuneration if the intermediary is
                                 providing financial product advice to a retail client and would be banned unless it falls
                                 under an exclusion, such as benefits for advice on some basic banking products. See
                                 Regulatory Guide 246 Conflicted remuneration (RG 246) for more information.




What is not arranging?
              RG 36.47       The conduct listed and described in RG 36.48–RG 36.54 is not arranging
                             within the meaning of the Corporations Act. However, it is important to note
                             that this conduct may constitute the provision of another financial service.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                            Page 20
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             Dealing in a financial product as principal

              RG 36.48       Dealing in financial products in your own name is not arranging. In most
                             cases, dealing as principal does not require a licence: see s766C(3)–(5).


                             Dealing in a financial product as agent

              RG 36.49       When you are dealing as agent you are not arranging. Dealing as agent
                             includes issuing, applying for, acquiring or disposing of a financial product
                             in a second person’s name where you have power to bind that second person.
                             Example 1 sets out when an agent may require an AFS licence or
                             authorisation from an AFS licensee.

                               Example 1: Dealing in a financial product as agent

                               Scenario

                               A consumer appoints a real estate professional (the agent) to manage a
                               rental property on the consumer’s behalf. As part of this arrangement, the
                               agent has the power to bind the consumer in relation to a number of
                               transactions, including acquiring insurance for loss of income should the
                               rental property become vacant (usually by organising the insurance cover
                               and paying the premium out of the rent account managed by the real estate
                               agent).

                               Commentary

                               Here, the agent has acquired a financial product (general insurance) as
                               agent for the consumer, and the agent would need a licence with an
                               authorisation to deal (by acquiring a financial product) on behalf of another,
                               or be authorised to provide that service on behalf of a licensee with the
                               relevant authorisation.

                               A person acting as agent may also engage in conduct that amounts to
                               arranging. The licence authorisation to ‘deal on behalf of another’ also
                               covers arranging activities.


                             Making a recommendation or statement of opinion about a
                             financial product

              RG 36.50       Where conduct amounts to the provision of financial product advice, that
                             conduct is not arranging: see s766C(2). This will occur where your conduct
                             is intended to influence a decision about a financial product or if it could be
                             reasonably construed as such: see s766B.


                             Merely providing purely factual information

              RG 36.51       Providing a person with information that is objectively ascertainable (i.e.
                             information whose truth or accuracy cannot be reasonably questioned) is
                             unlikely to constitute arranging.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                   Page 21
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                                   Note: See Section B of RG 244 for more guidance on providing factual information.


                             Acting within the scope of the clerks and cashiers
                             exemption

              RG 36.52       The clerks and cashiers exemption is set out in s766A(3): see RG 36.35. This
                             kind of work is generally of a merely routine and administrative nature or a
                             merely processing or receipting nature. It does not generally require
                             technical competence or skills. This conduct is of a kind that typically is
                             carried on by individual staff members, rather than by corporations or other
                             operators of businesses.

              RG 36.53       We consider that, in the case of a corporation or a business, the aggregation
                             of the individual clerical activities carried out within that economic entity
                             may (in many, but not all, cases) amount to a financial services business of
                             dealing, arranging and/or advising, even if each individual clerical activity is
                             itself exempt under s766A(3).


                             Operating a market or a licensed clearing and settlement
                             facility

              RG 36.54       Operating a market may constitute arranging and/or dealing; however, a
                             person who provides a service that is (or that is provided incidentally to) the
                             operation of a licensed market is exempt: see s911A(2)(d). Operating a
                             licensed clearing and settlement facility is also exempt. If your arranging
                             activity involves the operation of a financial market, you will need to comply
                             with Pt 7.2: see Regulatory Guide 172 Australian market licences:
                             Australian operators (RG 172).



Examples of our approach to determining what is arranging
              RG 36.55       The examples in Table 4 illustrate our general approach to determining
                             whether particular activities constitute arranging.

Table 4:     Examples to help determine whether particular activities are arranging

 Example                       Scenario                                     Commentary

 Completing an                 You assist a consumer to complete an         Without any further actions, this is likely
 application form              application form for a financial product     to be merely processing at the direction
                               by pointing out where the consumer           of the consumer and unlikely to be
                               should complete their details on a form,     arranging.
                               or typing those details into an electronic
                               form (e.g. the details of the client’s
                               name and address).




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                      Page 22
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




 Example                       Scenario                                    Commentary

 Completing an                 You assist a consumer to complete an        Without any further actions, this is likely
 application form with         application form by explaining the          to be merely processing at the direction
 explanation                   meaning of questions on the form or         of the consumer and unlikely to be
                               suggesting answers to those questions.      arranging.
                               Where the form involves a choice, you
                               guide the consumer in their choice.

 Displaying brochures          You display brochures and advertising       Without any further actions, you are
 and advertising               literature for another person’s products.   unlikely to be arranging, as your
 literature for another        You have no other role in relation to       conduct does not provide a sufficiently
 person’s products             these products.                             close connection in facilitating any
                                                                           subsequent transaction between the
                                                                           consumer and product issuer. In this
                                                                           instance the consumer independently
                                                                           decides whether to purchase the
                                                                           advertised product. This is the case
                                                                           whether or not you actively refer the
                                                                           consumer to the existence of the
                                                                           advertising material.

 Forwarding brochures          You forward brochures and advertising       You are not likely to be arranging if you
 and advertising               literature for another person’s products.   merely direct the consumer to the
 literature for another        You have no other role in relation to       product issuer and you have nothing
 person’s products             these products.                             further to do with the transaction.

 Displaying or                 You display brochures and advertising       Without any further actions, you are not
 forwarding brochures          literature for another person’s financial   likely to be arranging.
 and receiving benefits        products, or forward that material to
                               consumers, and you receive benefits
                               based on sales of the financial products
                               attributable to you.

 Forwarding brochures          You forward brochures and advertising       You are more likely to be arranging as
 with your contact             literature for another person’s products    you are taking on a more active role in
 details                       to consumers and you include                bringing into effect a dealing in a
                               instructions for consumers to contact       financial product. One reason for this is
                               you if they wish to acquire the product.    that the transaction would be less likely
                                                                           to occur if you had not been involved
                                                                           (because you are likely to be a key
                                                                           person with whom the consumer
                                                                           communicates about the particular
                                                                           transaction)

 Displaying advertising        You display advertising material relating   When this conduct is viewed as a whole
 material and receiving/       to the insurance product, you receive       it is highly likely to amount to arranging
 transmitting premium          the premium for the insurance product
                               and transmit that premium to the
                               relevant insurance company

 Providing direct access       You provide a computer or telephone         Without further action, this is not likely
 to a product issuer           on your premises so a consumer can          to be arranging. This is the case
                               contact a product issuer directly.          whether or not you actively refer the
                                                                           person to the existence of the link to a
                                                                           product issuer.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                      Page 23
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




 Example                       Scenario                                    Commentary

 Providing direct access       You provide a computer as an internet       You are not likely to be arranging, as
 to a product issuer           link between the consumer and the           this is merely a processing task which
                               product issuer. Either the consumer or      the consumer could have done
                               a clerk enters the consumer’s details       themselves on their own computer.
                               and their credit card details to pay for
                               the product. The consumer acquires the
                               product when the computer notifies that
                               payment has been accepted.

 Providing direct access       You provide a computer as a special         You are likely to be arranging, as you
 to a product issuer           direct link between the consumer and        have a sufficiently close connection
                               the product issuer. The link cannot be      with the completion of the relevant
                               accessed in any way apart from              transaction. The transaction is unlikely
                               through your business.                      to occur without that special link. In this
                                                                           example, the activities of your business
                                                                           (which are likely to amount to
                                                                           arranging) should not be confused with
                                                                           the activities of individual staff members
                                                                           who undertake some of the routine or
                                                                           administrative activities that would fall
                                                                           within the scope of the clerks and
                                                                           cashiers exemption (and would not be
                                                                           arranging).

 Payment facilities            A financial intermediary offers a general   Without further action, this is not likely
                               purpose facility for making payments        to be arranging for the purpose of the
                               that can be used to purchase                end-product. Your bank is not arranging
                               insurance.                                  for you to purchase insurance merely
                                                                           because it pays an insurer on a cheque
                                                                           you write or it makes available a facility
                                                                           for electronic transfer of funds to the
                                                                           insurer.


              RG 36.56       Example 2 sets out the type of different activities that, although they
                             individually do not constitute arranging, when taken together are highly
                             likely to constitute arranging.

                               Example 2: Collection and transmission of money

                               Scenario

                               A travel agency business organises the travel insurance for its clients (by
                               having travel insurance brochures on the front desk and assisting the
                               consumer to fill in the application form). The travel agent is paid the
                               premium that the travel agency then forwards to a product issuer.

                               Commentary

                               The travel agency business is highly likely to be arranging. Where you
                               receive money and pass it on to the product issuer to pay for the
                               acquisition of a financial product and you combine this activity with other
                               conduct that relates to the dealing in that product, even though that activity
                               might not by itself be arranging, those activities in combination are highly



Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                     Page 24
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                               likely to be arranging. This is because the travel agency business is taking
                               on a role where its involvement is fundamental to the finalisation of the
                               relevant transaction. We consider that the consumer protection protections
                               afforded by the AFS licensing regime are intended to apply where
                               intermediaries are collecting and transmitting money on behalf of other
                               parties.

                               The activities of the travel agency should not be confused with the activities
                               of the individual clerk or cashier who actually receives the money on behalf
                               of the agency. The mere receipt of money is work ordinarily done by clerks
                               and cashiers and should be distinguished from the collection and
                               transmission of money on behalf of third parties, which requires additional
                               skill and a system within the organisation as a whole. In this example, the
                               travel agency business is highly likely to need a licence with an
                               authorisation to deal by arranging, or be authorised to arrange general
                               insurance products on behalf of a licensee with the relevant authorisation.
                               Individual staff members may require an authorisation if the conduct they
                               engage in extends beyond mere receipting and includes arranging.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                   Page 25
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




E          What obligations apply to providers of financial
           services?

                               Key points

                               If you provide a financial service you may need to hold an AFS licence: see
                               RG 36.57–RG 36.58.

                               To determine whether you need to hold an AFS licence to provide a
                               financial service it is necessary to consider the following questions:
                               • When do you satisfy the business test? (see RG 36.59); and
                               • Does an exemption from the requirement to hold an AFS licence apply?
                                 (see RG 36.60–RG 36.93).

                               Licensees must comply with the various obligations, including the general
                               licensee obligations set out in s912A and 912B: see RG 36.94–RG 36.100.

                               If you provide financial services as a representative of a licensee, you may
                               need to hold an authorisation from that licensee: see RG 36.101–RG 36.104.

                               Some obligations in the law apply directly to representatives: see RG 36.105.




The need to hold an AFS licence
              RG 36.57       You will need to hold an AFS licence if you carry on a financial services
                             business in this jurisdiction, unless an exemption in s911A(2) (or regulations
                             made for the purposes of that provision) applies. For example, due to the
                             exemption in s911A(2)(a), you do not need an AFS licence to provide
                             financial services as a representative of a licensee.

              RG 36.58       In the absence of an exemption, you will need to hold an AFS licence
                             whether you provide financial services to retail or wholesale clients
                             (provided the business test is satisfied).



When do you satisfy the business test?
              RG 36.59       The business test is satisfied where a person provides financial services with
                             system, repetition and continuity. Paragraph 11.5 of the Explanatory
                             Memorandum to the Financial Services Reform Bill 2001 states that ‘one-off
                             transactions relating to the provision of financial services and financial
                             products are unlikely to be caught by the new regime’. There is no
                             requirement for a profit motive for the business test to be satisfied.

                                   Note: For more guidance on the business test, see Regulatory Guide 121 Doing
                                   financial services business in Australia (RG 121).




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                        Page 26
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




Does an exemption from the requirement to hold an AFS licence
apply?

                             Exemptions under s911A(2)

              RG 36.60       The exemptions from the requirement to hold an AFS licence are set out in
                             s911A(2) and regulations made for the purposes of that provision.
                             RG 36.63–RG 36.88 set out the circumstances in which you do not need to
                             hold an AFS licence.

              RG 36.61       You need to consider this list of exemptions only if you are providing a
                             financial service. If you are not providing a financial service, you do not
                             need to hold an AFS licence.

              RG 36.62       This list of exemptions is not exhaustive. To determine whether or not your
                             conduct is exempt from the requirement to hold an AFS licence, see the
                             Corporations Act, relevant regulations and ASIC instruments, as well as
                             other ASIC publications at www.asic.gov.au.

                             Representatives of licensees

              RG 36.63       If you provide financial services as a representative of a licensee (or as a
                             representative of a person exempt from the requirement to hold an AFS
                             licence), you do not need to hold an AFS licence: see s911A(2)(a). See
                             RG 36.90–RG 36.93 for more information.

                                   Note: For more information on the application of the exemption in s911A(2)(a) to
                                   trustees issuing, varying or disposing of interests in unregistered managed investment
                                   schemes that are financial products, see Information Sheet 251 AFS licensing
                                   requirement for trustees of unregistered managed investment schemes (INFO 251).


                             Product providers

              RG 36.64       If you are a product provider who issues, varies or disposes of a financial
                             product under an arrangement with a licensee as specified in s911A(2)(b),
                             you do not need to hold an AFS licence.

                                   Note: For more information on the application of the exemption in s911A(2)(b) to
                                   trustees issuing, varying or disposing of interests in unregistered managed investment
                                   schemes that are financial products, see INFO 251.


                             Product issuers

              RG 36.65       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you are a product issuer who
                             varies or disposes of a financial product at the direct request of the product
                             holder (rather than through an intermediary): see s911A(2)(c). An AFS
                             licence is also not required for providing general advice in the media in the
                             circumstances set out in reg 7.6.01(1)(o).




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                         Page 27
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             Providing general advice

              RG 36.66       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you provide general advice:
                             (a)   by publishing a newspaper or periodical that is generally available to
                                   the public (otherwise than only on subscription) and where the sole or
                                   principal purpose of the newspaper or periodical is not the provision of
                                   financial product advice (s911A(2)(ea));
                             (b)   in transmissions made by means of an information service where the
                                   transmissions are generally available to the public and where the sole or
                                   principal purpose of the transmissions is not the provision of financial
                                   product advice (s911A(2)(eb)); or
                             (c)   in sound recordings, video recordings or data recordings that are made
                                   publicly available and where the sole or principal purpose of the
                                   recordings is not the provision of financial product advice
                                   (s911A(2)(ec)).

                                   Note: The media exemptions referred to in RG 36.66 are subject to a condition
                                   concerning the disclosure of remuneration and pecuniary or other interests set out in
                                   reg 7.6.01B.


                             Wholesale clients

              RG 36.67       If you provide the service only to wholesale clients and you are a body
                             regulated by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) and the
                             service is one for which APRA has regulatory or supervisory responsibilities
                             (s911A(2)(g)), you do not need to hold an AFS licence. Similarly, if you are
                             regulated by an overseas regulatory authority, and the provision of the
                             service is covered by an exemption specified by ASIC (s911A(2)(h)), you do
                             not need to hold an AFS licence.

                                   Note: For information about our approach to applications under this provision, see
                                   Regulatory Guide 176 Licensing: Discretionary powers—Wholesale foreign financial
                                   services providers (RG 176).


                             Dealing in a financial product

              RG 36.68       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you deal in a financial product in
                             the capacity of trustee of a non-public offer superannuation entity
                             (reg 7.6.01(1)(a)) or a pooled superannuation trust (PST) where:
                             (a)   the PST is not used for the investment of assets of a regulated
                                   superannuation fund (reg 7.6.01(1)(d));
                             (b)   the regulated superannuation fund investing its assets in the PST has net
                                   assets of at least $10 million (reg 7.6.01(1)(b)); or
                             (c)   the regulated superannuation fund investing its assets in the PST has net
                                   assets of at least $5 million where you reasonably expect that the
                                   superannuation fund will have net assets of at least $10 million within
                                   three months (reg 7.6.01(1)(c));



Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                          Page 28
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




              RG 36.69       If you are a trustee of a superannuation fund dealing in a financial product
                             only by paying the benefits of a member into a superannuation product or
                             retirement savings account (RSA) product (reg 7.6.01(1)(ha)), you do not
                             need to hold an AFS licence.

              RG 36.70       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you are an employer-sponsor
                             dealing in a financial product only by:
                             (a)   paying contributions on behalf of an employee into a superannuation
                                   product or RSA product (reg 7.6.01(1)(h)); or
                             (b)   arranging for the issue of a superannuation product to an employee
                                   (reg 7.6.01(1)(hc));

              RG 36.71       If you are an RSA provider dealing in a financial product only by paying the
                             benefits of an RSA product holder into a superannuation product or RSA
                             product (reg 7.6.01(1)(hb)), you do not need to hold an AFS licence.

                             Referrals

              RG 36.72       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you provide a financial service
                             that consists only of a referral—that is:
                             (a)   informing another person that a licensee (or one of its representatives) is
                                   able to provide a particular financial service or class of financial
                                   services; and
                             (b)   giving that other person contact details for the licensee or
                                   representative.

              RG 36.73       Unless you are a representative of the licensee (or a related body corporate
                             of the licensee), you must disclose any benefits (including commission) that
                             you (and your associates) are to receive in respect of, or that are attributable
                             to, the service: regs 7.6.01(1)(e) and 7.6.01(1)(ea).

                             Sub-custodians

              RG 36.74       If you provide the service as a sub-custodian in the circumstances set out in
                             reg 7.6.01(1)(k), you do not need to hold an AFS licence.

                             Non-cash payment systems

              RG 36.75       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you advise other persons about,
                             and arrange for the use of, non-cash payment facilities in the ordinary course
                             of your business, but only if you do not provide financial services as a
                             significant part of your business (reg 7.6.01(1)(l)).

                                   Note: See also regs 7.6.01(1)(la), 7.6.01(lb) and 7.6.01(lc) and ASIC Corporations
                                   (Non-cash Payment Facilities) Instrument 2016/211 for other licensing exemptions for
                                   the provision of financial services in relation to non-cash payment facilities.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                      Page 29
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             Dealing on your own behalf

              RG 36.76       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you deal on your own behalf in
                             (but do not make a market in) derivatives or foreign exchange contracts for
                             the purpose of managing a financial risk that arises in the ordinary course of
                             a business, but only if you do not deal in derivatives or foreign exchange
                             contracts as a significant part of your business (reg 7.6.01(1)(m)).

                             Dealing in regulated emissions units

              RG 36.77       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you deal in regulated emissions
                             on your own behalf (e.g. acquiring regulated emissions units for your own
                             use). This does not constitute dealing and is not an activity that requires an
                             AFS licence (s766C(3)). However, this exemption does not extend to
                             dealings that involve the issue of derivatives over emissions units. When two
                             parties enter into a derivative contract, both are considered to be issuing a
                             financial product. Both parties may require a licence, if they are carrying on
                             a financial services business.

                                   Note: See also reg 7.6.01(1)(ma) for the circumstances in which dealing in regulated
                                   emissions units or their derivatives is exempt. For more guidance on AFS licensing
                                   exemptions for types of dealings in regulated emissions units by particular entities, see
                                   Section E of Regulatory Guide 236 Do I need an AFS licence to participate in carbon
                                   markets?


                             Takeover bids or offers

              RG 36.78       If you provide advice in a document that is issued in connection with a
                             takeover bid or an offer of a financial product and the advice relates to matters
                             other than financial products (e.g. a geologist’s report) in the circumstances set
                             out in reg 7.6.01(1)(u), you do not need to hold an AFS licence.

                             Nominee companies

              RG 36.79       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you are a nominee company that
                             is a wholly owned subsidiary of a licensed market participant and you hold a
                             financial product, or the beneficial interest in a financial product, on trust for
                             a client of the participant in the circumstances set out in reg 7.6.01(1)(v).

                             Entities located and providing financial services outside Australia

              RG 36.80       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you are located and provide a
                             financial service outside Australia to a person who is an Australian citizen or
                             resident in Australia and you do not engage in conduct that is intended to or
                             likely to induce people in Australia to use the service: reg 7.6.02AG, which
                             inserts s911A(2A) into the Corporations Act.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                           Page 30
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




              RG 36.81       Similarly, you do not need to hold an AFS licence if you provide the
                             financial service to another person and you:
                             (a)   believe on reasonable grounds that the person to whom you are
                                   providing the financial service is also not located in Australia;
                             (b)   are a participant in a financial market in Australia that is licensed under
                                   s795B(2); and
                             (c)   provide a financial service that relates to a financial product traded on
                                   the licensed market (reg 7.6.02AG, which inserts s911A(2B) into the
                                   Corporations Act).

              RG 36.82       You will also not need to hold an AFS licence if you provide the financial
                             service to another person who holds an AFS licence, or is exempt from the
                             requirement to hold a licence under s911A(2)(h), and is not, in relation to the
                             service:
                             (a)   acting as a trustee;
                             (b)   acting as a responsible entity of a registered managed investment
                                   scheme; or
                             (c)   otherwise acting on someone else’s behalf (reg 7.6.02AG, which inserts
                                   s911A(2C) into the Corporations Act).

              RG 36.83       If you are providing the financial service to another person in Australia and
                             the service relates to a financial product acquired while the person was not in
                             Australia or on the application or enquiry of the person and you do not
                             actively solicit the person or persons in Australia in relation to financial
                             products (reg 7.6.02AG, which inserts s911A(2D) into the Corporations
                             Act), you will not need to hold an AFS licence.

              RG 36.84       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you are providing the financial
                             service to another person who is a professional investor and the service
                             consists only of any or all of the following:
                             (a)   dealing in derivatives or foreign exchange contracts;
                             (b)   providing advice on derivatives or foreign exchange contracts; or
                             (c)   making a market in derivatives or foreign exchange contracts
                                   (reg 7.6.02AG, which inserts s911A(2E) into the Corporations Act).

                             Eligible employee share schemes

              RG 36.85       If you are giving general advice in connection with an eligible employee
                             share scheme and you are the issuer of the financial products covered by the
                             scheme (e.g. you are the employer) or an entity controlled by the issuer
                             (s911A(2)(ed)), you do not need to hold an AFS licence.

                                   Note: Eligible employee share scheme is defined in s9 of the Corporations Act.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                          Page 31
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




              RG 36.86       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you are dealing in a financial
                             product in connection with an eligible employee share scheme where:
                             (a)   the scheme requires that any purchase or disposal of the financial
                                   product under the scheme occurs through either an AFS licensee or a
                                   foreign entity licensed to deal in their own country; and
                             (b)   you are the issuer of the financial products covered by the scheme (e.g.
                                   you are the employer) or an entity controlled by the issuer
                                   (s911A(2)(ee)).

              RG 36.87       You do not need to hold an AFS licence if you are providing a custodial or
                             depository service dealing in a financial product in connection with an
                             eligible employee share scheme and you are the issuer of the financial
                             products covered by the scheme (e.g. you are the employer) or an entity
                             controlled by the issuer: see s911A(2)(ef).

              RG 36.88       If you are dealing in an interest in a contribution plan that you operate in
                             relation to an eligible employee share scheme and you are the issuer of the
                             financial products covered by the scheme (e.g. you are the employer) or an
                             entity controlled by the issuer (s911A(2)(eg)), you do not need to hold an
                             AFS licence.

                             Power to exempt

              RG 36.89       We have the power to exempt a person or a class of persons from the need to
                             hold an AFS licence for conduct that amounts to the provision of a financial
                             service. See Regulatory Guide 167 Licensing: Discretionary powers (RG
                             167) for details about how we might use our exemption power.


                             Factors to consider to determine whether you are acting as
                             a principal or representative

              RG 36.90       In order to determine whether the exemption from the requirement to hold an
                             AFS licence in s911A(2)(a) applies, you need to consider whether you are
                             acting as a principal or as a representative of a principal. The exemption
                             applies only if you are acting as a representative of a principal.

              RG 36.91       You may be acting as a principal and not as a representative if:
                             (a)   your conduct is not monitored and supervised by someone else;
                             (b)   you hold out that you are a principal;
                             (c)   your conduct is not covered by anyone else’s compensation
                                   arrangements (e.g. professional indemnity insurance);
                             (d)   client assets are held in an account in your name;
                             (e)   clients are directed to pay any fees owing for the provision of financial
                                   services to you or into an account in your name;




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                   Page 32
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             (f)   you receive commissions directly from product issuers; and
                             (g)   you have ownership of, access to, or liability for, client information.

                                   Note: This is not intended to be an exhaustive list of potentially relevant factors. In
                                   determining whether you are acting as a principal, the presence (or absence) of any one
                                   or more of the listed factors is not conclusive.

              RG 36.92       You may handle money without being treated as a principal; specifically,
                             when you perform purely administrative or mechanical functions, such as
                             accepting and banking cheques drawn in favour of a licensee or accepting
                             and depositing insurance premiums in an insurance broker’s trust account.

              RG 36.93       You will not be holding yourself out to be a principal merely by placing your
                             name on your business documentation (such as letterhead, business cards
                             and promotional material) provided:
                             (a)   the documentation makes it clear that you are acting as a representative
                                   of a licensee (and not as a principal); and
                             (b)   the licensee for whom you act is clearly disclosed.

                                   Note: It is also important to ensure that the documentation is not confusing or
                                   misleading to consumers.




What obligations are imposed on licensees?

                             General licensee obligations

              RG 36.94       If you are a licensee you must comply with the obligations set out in s912A
                             and 912B, which may be summarised as follows. You must:
                             (a)   do all things necessary to ensure that the financial services covered by
                                   the AFS licence are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly;
                             (b)   have adequate arrangements in place to manage your conflicts of interest;
                             (c)   comply with your AFS licence conditions;
                             (d)   comply with the financial services laws;
                             (e)   take reasonable steps to ensure that your representatives comply with
                                   the financial services laws;
                             (f)   have available adequate resources;
                             (g)   maintain the competence to provide the financial services;
                             (h)   adequately train your representatives and ensure that they are competent
                                   to provide the financial services;
                             (i)   have a dispute resolution system that satisfies s912A(2) where financial
                                   services are provided to retail clients;
                             (j)   have adequate risk management systems; and




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                           Page 33
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             (k)   have compensation arrangements where financial services are provided
                                   to retail clients. The type of compensation arrangement that a licensee
                                   must have is set out in s912B, which is affected by regs 7.6.02AA and
                                   7.6.02AAA.

                                   Note 1: RG 36.94(f) and RG 36.94(j) do not apply if the licensee is a body regulated by APRA
                                   within the meaning of s3(2) of the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998.

                                   Note 2: For information about how to comply with these obligations, see our other
                                   regulatory guides on licensing under ‘Related information’.

              RG 36.95       The licensee remains ultimately responsible for all the financial services
                             provided under its AFS licence, regardless of how those services are provided.


                             Conduct and disclosure obligations

              RG 36.96       Licensees must also comply with various obligations under the Corporations
                             Act and other financial services laws, including (but not limited to):
                             (a)   various obligations in Pt 7.6, including the obligation to notify us of
                                   reportable situations, the obligation to provide us with assistance and
                                   the obligation to quote the AFS licence number in documents under
                                   s912F;
                                   Note 1: Section 912DAA sets out the obligation to notify ASIC of reportable situations.
                                   For guidance on complying with this obligation, see Regulatory Guide 78 Breach
                                   reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees (RG 78).

                                   Note 2: For details about the obligation to cite AFS licence numbers in documents, see
                                   s912F and reg 7.6.01C.

                             (b)   the financial services disclosure obligations in Pt 7.7 where the licensee
                                   is the providing entity. This includes an obligation, in most
                                   circumstances, for the providing entity to give an FSG where the
                                   financial service is being provided to a retail client (s941A);
                                   Note: For information about complying with the FSG and other disclosure obligations
                                   in Pt 7.7, see RG 175.

                             (c)   the further financial services conduct obligations set out in Pt 7.8;
                             (d)   some product disclosure obligations under Ch 6D (in the case of
                                   securities) or Pt 7.9 (in other cases);
                                   Note: For further information about complying with the product disclosure obligations
                                   in Pt 7.9 and how we will approach applications for relief, see our regulatory guides on
                                   disclosure under ‘Related information’.

                             (e)   the market misconduct and other prohibited conduct provisions in
                                   Pt 7.10; and
                             (f)   the consumer protection provisions of the Australian Securities and
                                   Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act).

                                   Note: Some of these obligations also apply to persons other than licensees.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                          Page 34
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             Additional obligations: Financial product advice

              RG 36.97       There are additional obligations under Pts 7.7 and 7.7A where the providing
                             entity or advice provider provides financial product advice to retail clients.
                             These obligations vary depending on whether the advice is personal advice
                             or general advice. Personal advice is financial product advice given or
                             directed to a person (including by electronic means) in circumstances where:
                             (a)   the advice provider has considered one or more of the person’s
                                   objectives, financial situation and needs; or
                             (b)   a reasonable person might expect the provider to have considered one or
                                   more of those matters (s766B(3)).

                             All other financial product advice is general advice.

                                   Note 1: The definition of ‘financial product advice’ is set out in RG 36.19.

                                   Note 2: For further information about the distinction between personal and general
                                   advice, see Section B of RG 175.

              RG 36.98       Generally, if you are the providing entity and the financial service is the
                             provision of personal advice to a retail client, you must give the client a
                             Statement of Advice: see s946A.

              RG 36.99       Generally, if you are the advice provider and the financial service is the
                             provision of personal advice to a retail client, you must:
                             (a)   act in the best interests of your client (s961B);
                             (b)   provide the client with appropriate advice (s961G);
                             (c)   warn the client if the advice is based on incomplete or inaccurate
                                   information (s961H); and
                             (d)   where there is a conflict with their own interests, or those of one of their
                                   related parties, prioritise the client’s interests (s961J).

                                   Note: For further information about complying with these additional obligations, see
                                   Sections D and E of RG 175.

              RG 36.100      If the advice is general advice, you do not need to comply with the
                             obligations referred to in RG 36.98–RG 36.99. However, if general advice is
                             provided to a retail client, the providing entity must warn the client that the
                             advice does not take account of the client’s objectives, financial situation or
                             needs: see s949A.

                                   Note 1: For further information about complying with this obligation, see Section B of
                                   RG 175.

                                   Note 2: We have granted relief to simplify the warning where oral general advice is
                                   provided to a retail client. See ASIC Corporations (General Advice Warning)
                                   Instrument 2015/540.

                                   Note 3: We have granted relief so that no general advice warning is required where a
                                   product issuer gives general financial product advice in advertisements. See ASIC



Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                        Page 35
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                                   Corporations (Advertising by Product Issuers) Instrument 2015/539. The relief in this
                                   legislative instrument is not restricted to a particular form of advertising.




When do representatives need to hold an authorisation?
              RG 36.101      In general, if you provide financial services in this jurisdiction as a
                             representative of another person (a principal), you need to hold an
                             authorisation under the Corporations Act from that principal (who must in
                             general hold an AFS licence). You do not need to hold an authorisation if
                             you:
                             (a)   are not providing financial services;
                             (b)   are an employee or director of the principal (or a related body corporate
                                   of the principal) and the principal holds an AFS licence and the other
                                   requirements of s911B(1)(a) are satisfied;
                             (c)   are an employee of an authorised representative of the principal, but
                                   only if the principal holds an AFS licence, the other requirements of
                                   s911B(1)(c) are satisfied and the financial service is the provision of a:
                                   (i)     basic deposit product;
                                   (ii)    facility for making non-cash payments that is related to a basic
                                           deposit product; or
                                   (iii)   travellers’ cheque;
                             (d)   you are a licensee providing the financial service under your own AFS
                                   licence (s911B(1)(d) and 911B(3)); or

                                   Note: As a licensee you cannot be the authorised representative of another licensee
                                   except in relation to a binder: see s916D and 916E.

                             (e)   provide financial services that would be exempt under s911A(2) if they
                                   were instead provided by the principal (s911B(1)(e)).

              RG 36.102      Accordingly, if you provide financial services as a representative of a
                             licensee, you will generally need to hold an authorisation from that licensee
                             (unless you are an employee or director of that licensee or a related body
                             corporate).

              RG 36.103      We have given relief to allow licensees who are authorised to deal in basic
                             deposit and general insurance products to appoint distributors to deal in these
                             products on their behalf without the need to appoint the distributors as
                             authorised representatives. However, those distributors must still be
                             authorised by the licensee in writing: see ASIC Corporations (Basic Deposit
                             and General Insurance Product Distribution) Instrument 2015/682.

              RG 36.104      Under s766A(4) a person is not regarded as operating a registered scheme
                             merely because they act as an agent or employee of another person who
                             does. This means that if an agent of the operator of a registered scheme



Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                         Page 36
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             merely acts in connection with the operation of the scheme, and does not
                             provide a financial service of a type referred to in s766A(1)(a), (b), (c), (e) or
                             (f), they will not have to hold an authorisation.

                                   Note: The responsible entity remains responsible for the acts of its agents: see
                                   s601FB(2).




What obligations are imposed on representatives?
              RG 36.105      The primary obligation to ensure compliance with the financial services laws
                             is imposed on licensees, who are responsible for the conduct of their
                             representatives (as defined in s910A). However, some obligations in the law
                             apply directly to representatives, including (but not limited to):
                             (a)   the financial services disclosure obligations in Pt 7.7 where the
                                   representative is the providing entity (including the additional
                                   obligations relating to financial product advice described in RG 36.97–
                                   RG 36.100);
                             (b)   the best interests duty and related obligations in Pt 7.7A;
                             (c)   the hawking prohibitions in Pt 7.8;

                                   Note: For further information about the hawking prohibitions, see Regulatory Guide 38
                                   The hawking prohibitions (RG 38).

                             (d)   some product disclosure obligations under Ch 6D (in the case of
                                   securities) or Pt 7.9 (in other cases);
                             (e)   the market misconduct and other prohibited conduct provisions in
                                   Pt 7.10; and
                             (f)   the consumer protection provisions in Div 2 of Pt 2 of the ASIC Act
                                   (e.g. the prohibition against misleading or deceptive conduct in s12DA).

                                   Note: Some of these obligations also apply to persons other than representatives.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                            Page 37
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




Key terms


                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               advice provider            A person to whom the obligations in Div 2 of Pt 7.7A of
                                                          the Corporations Act apply when providing personal
                                                          advice to the client. This is generally the individual who
                                                          provides the personal advice. However, if there is no
                                                          individual that provides the advice, which may be the
                                                          case if advice is provided through a computer program,
                                                          the obligations in Div 2 of Pt 7.7A apply to the legal
                                                          person that provides the advice (e.g. a corporate licensee
                                                          or authorised representative)

                               AFS licence                An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                          the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                          on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                          services
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                             Corporations Act.

                               APRA                       Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

                               ASIC                       Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                   Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                          2001

                               authorised                 A person authorised in accordance with s916A or 916B of
                               representative of a        the Corporations Act to provide a financial service or
                               licensee                   financial services on behalf of the licensee
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                             Corporations Act.

                               [CO 00/241]                An ASIC class order (in this example numbered 00/241)
                               (for example)                 Note: Legislative instruments made from 2015 are referred to
                                                             as ASIC instruments.

                               Corporations Act           Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                               Corporations               Corporations Regulations 2001
                               Regulations

                               financial product          Generally a facility through which, or through the
                                                          acquisition of which, a person does one or more of the
                                                          following:
                                                           makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                           manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                           makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                             Note: See Div 3 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                             definition.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                           Page 38
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               Financial Services        A document that must be given to a retail client in relation
                               Guide                     to the provision of a financial service in accordance with
                                                         Div 2 of Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                             Note: See s761A of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                             definition.

                               FSG                       Financial Services Guide

                               licensee                  A person who holds an AFS licence

                               licensing provisions      The financial services licensing regime under Pts 7.6–7.8
                                                         of the Corporations Act (including regulations made for
                                                         the purposes of those parts)

                               Pt 7.9 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                         7.9)

                               PDS                       Product Disclosure Statement

                               Product Disclosure        A document that must be given to a retail client in relation
                               Statement                 to the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance
                                                         with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                             Note: See s761A of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                             definition.

                               providing entity          A person to whom the obligations in Pt 7.7 of the
                                                         Corporations Act apply. This is the AFS licensee or an
                                                         authorised representative that provides the financial
                                                         product advice.

                               PST                       A pooled superannuation trust as defined in the
                                                         Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993

                               reg 7.6.04                A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                               (for example)             example numbered 7.6.04)

                               regulated emissions       A carbon unit, an Australian carbon credit unit or an
                               units                     eligible international emissions unit, which are:
                                                          emissions units recognised under the Clean Energy
                                                           Legislative Package; and
                                                          financial products under the Corporations Act

                               representative of a       Means:
                               licensee                   an authorised representative of the licensee; or
                                                          an employee or director of the licensee; or
                                                          an employee or director of a related body corporate of
                                                           the licensee; or
                                                          any other person acting on behalf of the licensee
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s910A(a) of the
                                                             Corporations Act.

                               RG 175 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example, numbered 175)




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                             Page 39
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               RSA                       Retirement savings account as defined in the Retirement
                                                         Savings Accounts Act 1997

                               s912A (for example)       A provision of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 912A), unless otherwise specified

                               Short-Form Product        A PDS that complies with the requirements set out in
                               Disclosure Statement      Div 3A of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act, which were
                               (Short-Form PDS)          introduced by the Corporations Amendment Regulations
                                                         2005 (No. 5), and which provide issuers with the option of
                                                         giving retail clients a Short-Form PDS (unless excluded)
                                                         as long as a full PDS is available on request: see s1017H
                                                         as inserted by Sch 10BA of the Corporations Regulations

                               shorter PDS               A PDS that is required to comply with the shorter PDS
                                                         regime

                               shorter PDS regime        The requirements set out in Div 3A of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                         Corporations Act as modified by Subdivs 4.2 to 4.2C and
                                                         Sch B, C, D and E of the Corporations Regulations, which
                                                         prescribe the content and length of the PDS for margin
                                                         loans, superannuation products and simple managed
                                                         investment schemes

                               Statement of Advice       A document that must be given to a retail client for the
                                                         provision of personal advice under Subdiv C and D of
                                                         Div 3 of Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                             Note: See s761A of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                             definition.




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                           Page 40
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             arranging, authorisation, best interests duty, business test, clerks and
                             cashiers, conduct and disclosure obligations, dealing in a financial product,
                             factual information, financial product advice, general licensee obligations,
                             licensing exemptions, obligations that apply to providers of financial
                             services, principal, provide financial product advice, representative


                             ASIC instruments and pro formas

                             ASIC Corporations (Advertising by Product Issuers) Instrument 2015/539

                             ASIC Corporations (Basic Deposit and General Insurance Product
                             Distribution) Instrument 2015/682

                             ASIC Corporations (General Advice Warning) Instrument 2015/540

                             ASIC Corporations (Non-cash Payment Facilities) Instrument 2016/211

                             ASIC Corporations (Financial Product Advice—Exempt Documents)
                             Instrument 2016/356

                             [CO 03/911] Licensing relief for self-dealers who provide general product
                             advice about own securities

                             [PF 209] Australian financial services licence conditions


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 1–RG 3 AFS Licensing Kit

                             RG 38 The hawking prohibitions

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees

                             RG 79 Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment
                             research

                             RG 90 Example Statement of Advice: Scaled advice for a new client

                             RG 98 Licensing: Administrative action against financial services providers

                             RG 104 Licensing: Meeting the general obligations

                             RG 105 Licensing: Organisational competence



Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                   Page 41
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             RG 121 Doing financial services business in Australia

                             RG 126 Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees

                             RG 146 Licensing: Training of financial product advisers

                             RG 165 Licensing: Internal and external dispute resolution

                             RG 166 Licensing: Financial requirements

                             RG 167 Licensing: Discretionary powers

                             RG 168 Disclosure: Product Disclosure Statements (and other disclosure
                             obligations)

                             RG 169 Disclosure: Discretionary powers

                             RG 172 Australian market licences: Australian operators

                             RG 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—Conduct and disclosure

                             RG 176 Licensing: Discretionary powers—Wholesale foreign financial
                             services providers

                             RG 181 Managing conflicts of interest

                             RG 182 Dollar disclosure

                             RG 183 Approval of financial services sector codes of conduct

                             RG 236 Do I need an AFS licence to participate in carbon markets?

                             RG 244 Giving information, general advice and scaled advice

                             RG 246 Conflicted remuneration


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 133 Shorter PDS regime: Superannuation, managed investment
                             schemes and margin lending

                             INFO 251 AFS licensing requirement for trustees of unregistered managed
                             investment schemes


                             Legislation

                             ASIC Act, Pt 2, Div 2, s12DA

                             Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998, s3(2)

                             Banking Act 1959, s30(4)




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                   Page 42
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 36: Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing




                             Corporations Act, Pts 7.1, 7.6, 7.7, 7.7A, 7.8, 7.9, 7.10, s52, 766A, 766B,
                             766C, 910A, 911A, 911B, 912A, 912B, 912DAA, 912F, 946A, 949A, 961B,
                             961G, 961H, 961J

                             Corporations Regulations, regs 7.1.08, 7.1.29–7.1.35, 7.1.40, 7.6.01,
                             7.6.02AG, 7.9.61AA, Sch 10BA

                             Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Act 1984 (now repealed)

                             National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009

                             Retirement Savings Accounts Act 1997

                             Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992


                             Consultation papers and reports

                             REP 51 Report to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on late 2004 (and
                             early 2005) superannuation switching advice surveillance

                             REP 69 Shadow shopping survey on superannuation advice




Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2016                                                   Page 43
