REGULATORY GUIDE 70


Prospectuses for cash box
and investment companies
Chapter 7 Pt 7.12 Div 2 s1022 — Securities
Issued 2/6/1999

From 5 July 2007, this document may be referred to as Regulatory
Guide 70 (RG 70) or Practice Note 70 (PN 70). Paragraphs in this
document may be referred to by their regulatory guide number
(e.g. RG 70.1) or their practice note number (e.g. PN 70.1).


What this guide is about
RG 70.1 This guide explains how ASIC will apply s1022 of the
Corporations Law where the issuer of a prospectus has not formulated
or has only partially formulated an investment plan.


              Contents
              What this guide is about .......................................................1
              Disclosure requirements.......................................................2
                    Our policy ......................................................................2
                    Underlying principles .....................................................3
                    Explanations ..................................................................4
              Related information ...............................................................6




                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 1999
                                                                        Page 1
   REGULATORY GUIDE 70: Prospectuses for cash box and investment companies




Disclosure requirements

Our policy
RG 70.2 We believe that s1022 of the Corporations Law (Law) is not
intended to prevent offers of certain types of investments. Nor do we
consider it a requirement of the Law that all matters relating to the
proposed investment plan of the company be settled prior to the
lodgment of the prospectus. We believe the purpose of s1022 is to
ensure that all relevant matters known to persons associated with the
issue of the prospectus, are fully disclosed.

RG 70.3 An investment in an enterprise that has no investment plan or
only a partially developed investment plan is an investment in the skill
and expertise of its directors and management. In these circumstances
we consider the only means by which an investor can make an
informed assessment about the prospects of the company or scheme is
if they are provided with factual information about the expertise of
those persons who will make the investment decisions.

RG 70.4 We expect, as a minimum, that any disclosure about the
expertise of directors and management should include:

(a) their qualifications and employment history;
(b) their anticipated availability;
(c) the particular expertise that they bring to the enterprise and how
    this expertise will be deployed in making investment decisions.
RG 70.5 There should be an explicit statement detailing how the
background and experience of the individuals will be deployed in the
making of investment decisions.

RG 70.6 In the absence of any factual information about where or
how the proceeds of the offer will be invested, we expect a very high
standard of disclosure about the skill and expertise of those persons
who will be making the investment decisions.

RG 70.7 If an issuer has not determined an investment strategy then it
is incumbent on the issuer to explicitly state and discuss this fact in
the prospectus.

RG 70.8 Those matters associated with the investment strategy which
remain unresolved at the time of lodgment of the prospectus can be
characterised as risks associated with the proposal. We expect such
risks to be explicitly identified and discussed in the prospectus.


                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 1999
                                                                        Page 2
   REGULATORY GUIDE 70: Prospectuses for cash box and investment companies




Partially developed investment plan
RG 70.9 Where the directors or promoters have an investment plan
and have resolved some issues about where and how the proceeds of
the offer will be invested, all material details about their plans must be
included in the prospectus. For example, where a company or
responsible entity plans to establish a portfolio of securities but has
not identified any specific securities, we expect the prospectus to
contain as much information as possible about the probable portfolio
to be established. This may include a hypothetical example of the type
of portfolio that management would be likely to acquire as at the date
of the prospectus. Other information which should be included relate
to risk profile, geographic location, industry classifications of the
portfolio and any other selection parameters associated with specific
assets or securities in which management are likely to invest.


Underlying principles
RG 70.10       Some prospectuses lodged with us for registration have
relied extensively on s1022(2) to provide limited factual information
about where, when or how the proceeds of the offer will be invested.
In some cases these prospectuses have also failed to provide sufficient
factual information on the qualifications, experience and expertise of
those who will be involved in the management of the company.

RG 70.11       In such instances we have formed the view that an
investor would not be able to make an informed assessment of the
prospects of the company and has refused to register these
prospectuses.

Cash box prospectuses — no investment plan
RG 70.12      On a number of occasions prospectuses have been
lodged with us by parties seeking to set up investment vehicles prior
to the formulation of an investment plan. The prospectuses usually say
something like “an investment will be made when the appropriate
opportunity arises”. This can be said with varying degrees of
sophistication but generally the directors will say that they retain a
wide discretion to determine what, how and when to invest.

AAT decision
RG 70.13       Since the introduction of the Corporations Law very few
judicial decisions have been made on the adequacy or otherwise of the
disclosure content of prospectuses. One instance was a determination
on 25 May 1998 by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). In

                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 1999
                                                                        Page 3
   REGULATORY GUIDE 70: Prospectuses for cash box and investment companies




that determination the AAT affirmed a decision of the ASC to refuse
to register a prospectus on the grounds that it contained insufficient
information to enable an intending investor to make a rational
assessment of the prospects of the company: (Exeter Group Limited v
ASC) unreported, 25 May 1998, AAT proceeding N97/1063).

RG 70.14  In the AAT proceeding of Exeter Group Limited v ASC,
Mr BJ McMahon (Deputy President) said:

   “It is not sufficient for the company to say we know nothing about
   our future investments and so we are obliged to disclose nothing
   beyond the fact that we know nothing about our future investment.
   This is no basis upon which any intending investor could make a
   rational assessment of the prospects of the company.”

RG 70.15       The judicial authorities on the interpretation of cl 20 of
Pt A of s750 should assist prospectus issuers when considering
disclosure questions for a cash box which does not have a specific
asset acquisition in mind at the time of issue.

Reliance on s1022(2)
RG 70.16        We consider s1022(2)(b) imposes an active obligation
upon the issuer and its advisers to make all reasonable enquiries in
their efforts to comply with the requirements of s1022(1). In the
context of a cash box company seeking to raise funds for the first time
we consider this obligation extends to the directors and management
of the issuer. We expect those persons to have asked themselves the
rhetorical question of how they would be likely to invest the proceeds
of the offer.


Explanations

Section 1022 — general disclosure test
RG 70.17        Section 1022 of the Law contains the general disclosure
test that is applicable to all prospectuses.

RG 70.18      Subsection 1022(1) states that in addition to the
information required by s1021, a prospectus must contain all such
information as investors and their professional advisers would
reasonably require, and reasonably expect to find in the prospectus,
for the purpose of making an informed assessment of:

(a) the assets and liabilities, financial position, profits and losses, and
    prospects of the corporation;


                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 1999
                                                                        Page 4
   REGULATORY GUIDE 70: Prospectuses for cash box and investment companies




(b) in the case of a managed investment scheme, the merits and risks
    of participation in the scheme;
(c) in the case of managed investment schemes, how scheme property
    is to be held; and,
(d) the rights attaching to the securities.
RG 70.19       The information required by s1022(1) is limited by
s1022(2) to that information which is known to the issuer at the time
of the issue of the prospectus, and such information as reasonable
enquiries would reveal.

RG 70.20       Subsection 1022(3) says that when considering what
information is required by s1022(1), regard shall be had to the nature
of the securities, the responsible entity, the corporation or scheme and
to the kinds of persons likely to consider investing in the offer.

RG 70.21        It also says that consideration can be given to the fact
that certain matters may be reasonably expected to be known to
professional advisers who potential investors may reasonably be
expected to consult. Consideration can also be given as to whether or
not the offer is being made to existing holders of securities in the
corporation or scheme.




                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 1999
                                                                        Page 5
  REGULATORY GUIDE 70: Prospectuses for cash box and investment companies




Related information
RG 70.22

Headnotes
Prospectus, disclosure, cash box, investment company

Regulatory guides
RG 56 Prospectuses

Legislation
Chapter 7 Pt 7.12 Div 2 s1022, 1022(1), 1022(3) and cl 20 of Pt A of
s750

Cases
Exeter Group Limited v ASC (unreported, 25 May 1998, AAT
proceeding N97/1063)

Media and information releases
[MR 98/143]




                 © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 1999
                                                                       Page 6
