REGULATORY GUIDE 46

Unlisted property schemes:
Improving disclosure for
retail investors

March 2012




About this guide
This is a guide for responsible entities, compliance committees, compliance
plan auditors and others involved with the issue of interests in unlisted
property schemes.

It sets out principles for improved disclosure to retail investors to help them
compare risks and returns across investments in the unlisted property
sector.
                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This version was issued in March 2012 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous version:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 46 issued in September 2008


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                          Page 2
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Who this guide applies to .........................................................................4
                                    The need for improved disclosure ...........................................................5
                                    Benchmarks and disclosure principles for unlisted property schemes ....5
                                    Form and method of disclosure ...............................................................7
                                    Advertising ...............................................................................................7
                                    Compliance plans ....................................................................................7
                             B      The unlisted property scheme sector and improved disclosure ......8
                                    Business models of unlisted property schemes ......................................8
                                    Risks to investors .....................................................................................9
                                    Improving disclosure for investors .........................................................11
                             C      Benchmarks for unlisted property schemes ....................................12
                                    Disclosure against the benchmarks: ‘If not, why not’ ............................12
                                    Benchmark 1: Gearing policy.................................................................13
                                    Benchmark 2: Interest cover policy .......................................................13
                                    Benchmark 3: Interest capitalisation ......................................................14
                                    Benchmark 4: Valuation policy ..............................................................14
                                    Benchmark 5: Related party transactions ..............................................16
                                    Benchmark 6: Distribution practices ......................................................17
                             D      Disclosure principles for unlisted property schemes .....................18
                                    Disclosure Principle 1: Gearing ratio .....................................................18
                                    Disclosure Principle 2: Interest cover ratio ............................................20
                                    Disclosure Principle 3: Scheme borrowing ............................................21
                                    Disclosure Principle 4: Portfolio diversification ......................................23
                                    Disclosure Principle 5: Related party transactions ................................25
                                    Disclosure Principle 6: Distribution practices .........................................26
                                    Disclosure Principle 7: Withdrawal arrangements .................................27
                                    Disclosure Principle 8: Net tangible assets ...........................................28
                             E      Form and method of disclosure .........................................................30
                                    The disclosure framework ......................................................................30
                                    Timing for implementing improved disclosure .......................................31
                                    Disclosure in a PDS or supplementary PDS .........................................32
                                    Updating existing investors ....................................................................34
                                    Ongoing disclosure ................................................................................35
                                    Omitting disclosure principle information when misleading ...................38
                                    ASIC review of PDSs and ongoing disclosure.......................................38
                             F      Advertising ...........................................................................................39
                                    Consistency with PDS ...........................................................................39
                                    Use of investment ratings ......................................................................39
                             G      Compliance plans ................................................................................40
                                    The compliance plan ..............................................................................40
                                    Compliance committees ........................................................................41
                                    Compliance plan auditors ......................................................................42
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................43
                             Related information .....................................................................................45




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                                          Page 3
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




A          Overview
                               Key points

                               This guide applies to unlisted property schemes in which retail investors
                               have a direct or indirect investment: see RG 46.1–RG 46.4.

                               ASIC has developed six benchmarks and eight disclosure principles for
                               unlisted property schemes that can help retail investors understand the
                               risks, assess the rewards being offered and decide whether these
                               investments are suitable for them: see RG 46.8–RG 46.10.

                               Responsible entities of unlisted property schemes offered to retail investors or
                               in which retail investors have invested should:
                                  disclose against the benchmarks on an ‘if not, why not’ basis (see
                                  Section C); and
                                  apply the disclosure principles (see Section D).

                               This information should be included in any Product Disclosure Statements
                               (PDSs) and ongoing disclosure for these schemes issued on or after 1
                               November 2012. The information should be communicated in the most
                               effective way possible (e.g. by website or regular updates): see Section E.

                               We have also provided guidance for advertising of all unlisted property
                               schemes to retail investors: see Section F.

                               Those involved with unlisted property schemes (e.g. compliance committees,
                               compliance plan auditors and valuers) should consider these disclosure and
                               advertising obligations when carrying out their responsibilities: see Section G.




Who this guide applies to

                             Unlisted property schemes

              RG 46.1        For the purposes of this guide, an ‘unlisted property scheme’ is an unlisted
                             managed investment scheme that has or is likely to have at least 50% of its
                             non-cash assets invested in real property and/or in unlisted property
                             schemes.

                                   Note: Infrastructure assets are not ‘real property’ for the purposes of the above
                                   definition. Examples of infrastructure assets are roads, railways, ports, airports and
                                   other transport facilities, and facilities for telecommunications, electricity generation,
                                   transmission and distribution, gas transmission and distribution, water supply and
                                   sewerage. Responsible entities of infrastructure schemes should refer to Regulatory
                                   Guide 231 Infrastructure entities: Improving disclosure to retail investors (RG 231)
                                   when considering their disclosure obligations.

              RG 46.2        This guide applies to registered unlisted property schemes in which retail
                             investors invest directly or indirectly (e.g. through an investor directed
                             portfolio service).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                            Page 4
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.3        This guide does not apply to:
                             (a)   listed property schemes;
                             (b)   property securities funds whose only exposure to property is through
                                   investments in listed property schemes;
                             (c)   property schemes that do not have any direct or indirect investment by
                                   retail investors; or
                             (d)   serviced strata schemes or timeshare schemes.


                             Hybrid schemes

              RG 46.4        This guide may apply to hybrid property schemes (schemes that invest in
                             both property and other non-cash assets), depending on the scheme’s
                             proportion of assets in direct real property or unlisted property schemes.



The need for improved disclosure
              RG 46.5        Unlisted property schemes often appeal to retail investors, who may believe
                             that the investment offers capital stability and consistent ongoing returns that
                             are not likely to vary significantly. This is not always the case and retail
                             investors need better information on the risks associated with investment in
                             unlisted property schemes: see RG 46.23–RG 46.24.

              RG 46.6        Disclosure by unlisted property schemes on key issues affecting the
                             assessment of risk and returns has at times been unclear, making it difficult
                             for retail investors to compare investments. Responsible entities of unlisted
                             property schemes need to improve their disclosure so that retail investors can
                             assess the effect of changing economic conditions on their investment: see
                             RG 46.25–RG 46.27.

              RG 46.7        We have analysed the disclosure practices of property schemes in the context
                             of the debt market turbulence that Australia has experienced since mid-2007:
                             see RG 46.26. This analysis led us to develop benchmarks and disclosure
                             principles designed to extract key risk and return information for retail
                             investments in unlisted property schemes.



Benchmarks and disclosure principles for unlisted property schemes
              RG 46.8        We have developed six benchmarks and eight disclosure principles covering
                             information that is key to analysing the risks associated with unlisted property
                             schemes: see Table 1. Clear and prominent disclosure of the benchmark and
                             disclosure principle information will allow retail investors to compare the
                             relative risk and return of investments in unlisted property schemes.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                        Page 5
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Table 1:    Benchmarks and disclosure principles for unlisted property schemes in which retail
            investors invest

 Gearing                        Benchmark 1 addresses a scheme’s policy on gearing at an individual credit
                                facility level. Disclosure Principle 1 addresses disclosure of the gearing ratio of
                                the scheme, the calculation of the ratio and its explanation.

 Interest cover                 Benchmark 2 addresses a scheme’s policy on the level of interest cover at an
                                individual credit facility level. Disclosure Principle 2 addresses disclosure of the
                                interest cover ratio of the scheme, the calculation of the ratio and its explanation.

 Interest capitalisation        Benchmark 3 addresses whether the interest expense of a scheme is
                                capitalised.

 Scheme borrowing               Disclosure Principle 3 addresses disclosure of the scheme’s credit facilities,
                                including the circumstances in which credit facility covenants will be breached.

 Portfolio diversification      Disclosure Principle 4 addresses disclosure of the scheme’s assets, including
                                specific information about development assets.

 Valuations                     Benchmark 4 addresses the way in which valuations are carried out by a
                                responsible entity in relation to the scheme’s assets.

 Related party                  Benchmark 5 addresses a responsible entity’s policy on related party
 transactions                   transactions. Disclosure Principle 5 addresses disclosure about related party
                                transactions.

 Distribution practices         Benchmark 6 addresses a scheme’s practices for paying distributions from cash
                                from operations available for distribution. Disclosure Principle 6 addresses where
                                distributions are sourced from and whether forecast distributions are sustainable.

 Withdrawal                     Disclosure Principle 7 addresses disclosure of the withdrawal arrangements
 arrangements                   within the scheme and risk factors that may affect the unit price on withdrawal.

 Net tangible assets            Disclosure Principle 8 addresses disclosure of the net tangible asset (NTA)
                                backing per unit of the scheme.



                             Disclosure against the benchmarks: ‘If not, why not’

              RG 46.9        Responsible entities of unlisted property schemes offered to retail investors or
                             in which retail investors have invested should disclose against the benchmarks
                             in Section C on an ‘if not, why not’ basis: see RG 46.28–RG 46.30.


                             Applying the disclosure principles

              RG 46.10       The purpose of the disclosure principles in Section D is to improve the
                             consistency and quality of disclosure by responsible entities of unlisted
                             property schemes and to enhance consumer confidence. The disclosure
                             principles cover information that retail investors reasonably need to know to
                             make an informed decision about whether to invest and to monitor whether
                             their expectations are being met.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                        Page 6
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Form and method of disclosure
              RG 46.11       We consider that the benchmark and disclosure principle information should
                             be included in any Product Disclosure Statements (PDSs) and ongoing
                             disclosure for unlisted property schemes issued on or after 1 November
                             2012. After this date, we will review PDSs in use and ongoing disclosure for
                             unlisted property schemes to check that the benchmark and disclosure
                             principle information is adequately disclosed.

              RG 46.12       For an explanation about why the benchmark and disclosure principle
                             information should be included in PDSs and ongoing disclosure, how this
                             information should be disclosed, when disclosure principle information can
                             be omitted, how this information can be updated, and for more information
                             on good practice for ongoing disclosure, see Section E.


                             Transitional arrangements

              RG 46.13       Until 1 November 2012, responsible entities should—at a minimum—
                             continue to apply the disclosure principles that were in place under
                             superseded RG 46 issued in September 2008 to any PDS or ongoing
                             disclosure provided to investors in unlisted property schemes.

                                   Note: We encourage responsible entities to disclose against the benchmarks and apply
                                   the disclosure principles to new PDSs and ongoing disclosure before 1 November 2012
                                   if possible.




Advertising
              RG 46.14       Advertisements for unlisted property schemes should be consistent with all
                             corresponding disclosures in the PDS. See Section F for further guidance on
                             advertising, including the use of investment ratings.



Compliance plans
              RG 46.15       Compliance plans for unlisted property schemes should set out adequate
                             measures to ensure compliance with the law relating to disclosure and
                             advertising obligations: see Section G. Compliance committees should also
                             be aware of the benchmarks and disclosure principles, and monitor the
                             responsible entity’s application of them.

              RG 46.16       As part of their audit, compliance plan auditors should consider whether the
                             compliance plan contains adequate measures to ensure compliance with the
                             disclosure requirements of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) in
                             light of ASIC’s guidance on benchmarks and disclosure principles.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                        Page 7
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




B          The unlisted property scheme sector and
           improved disclosure

                               Key points

                               The business models of unlisted property schemes tend to have some
                               common features: see RG 46.17–RG 46.22. Some of these features can
                               create risks for investors: see RG 46.23–RG 46.24.

                               Clear disclosure can help investors make better informed decisions about
                               these products. Improved disclosure is particularly important when
                               economic volatility increases the risks associated with investments: see
                               RG 46.25–RG 46.27.




Business models of unlisted property schemes
              RG 46.17       Understanding an unlisted property scheme’s business model can help
                             investors to assess the potential risks and returns associated with the
                             investment. We expect responsible entities to give investors adequate
                             information on the scheme’s business model in a PDS: see RG 46.122.

              RG 46.18       Some common features of unlisted property schemes include the following:
                             (a)   The responsible entity raises funds by issuing interests in the scheme to
                                   investors in exchange for money. This money is pooled and used by the
                                   responsible entity on behalf of the scheme to invest a substantial
                                   proportion of its assets directly in real property or to invest in other
                                   unlisted property schemes.
                             (b)   Investors have beneficial but not legal ownership in the property assets
                                   in which the responsible entity chooses to invest.
                             (c)   The return to investors is generally expected to be derived from rental
                                   income from property owned by the scheme and from the net proceeds
                                   the scheme receives if it sells the real property in which it has invested.
                                   Property schemes may also make distributions from capital and/or
                                   unrealised revaluation gains on the investment properties, provided that
                                   cash is available within the fund or from borrowings.
                             (d)   The value of an investor’s investment is subject to change depending on
                                   the value of the property assets held by the scheme, which may
                                   fluctuate from time to time.

              RG 46.19       While unlisted property schemes should be considered as long-term
                             investments, some schemes offer periodic withdrawal facilities whereby
                             investors may withdraw some or all of their investments. Withdrawal
                             facilities are usually subject to restrictions, such as pre-set limits or
                             arrangements if withdrawal demands exceed the cash available.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                        Page 8
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.20       Most unlisted property schemes are geared. In these cases, the ability of the
                             scheme to repay debt principal and interest on time and meet all loan
                             covenants is material to the performance and viability of the scheme.

              RG 46.21       The underlying assets in unlisted property schemes are predominantly real
                             property. A significant feature of real property is that it is a largely illiquid
                             asset. It is not homogenous, it is not traded on an active market, and it has
                             high transaction costs. This highlights the importance of disclosing and
                             understanding the ability of the unlisted property scheme to service debt and
                             interest from cash flows.

              RG 46.22       A relatively small proportion of unlisted property schemes have significant
                             property development assets. Investors in unlisted property schemes with
                             property development assets are exposed to additional construction and
                             development risks. Importantly, while cash outflows are required to fund the
                             construction and development, the cash inflow on those assets does not
                             occur until completion when the asset is available for rental or for sale.


Risks to investors
              RG 46.23       Unlisted property schemes are often attractive to retail investors, who may
                             believe that they offer capital stability and consistent ongoing returns. This is
                             not always the case and there are a number of common risks associated with
                             investments in the unlisted property sector. These key risks, many of them
                             relating to the scheme’s borrowings, are identified in Table 2.

              RG 46.24       These risks do not affect all unlisted property schemes and are not unique to
                             unlisted property schemes. However, disclosure relating to these risks is
                             relevant for investors in unlisted property schemes. The benchmarks in
                             Section C and disclosure principles in Section D address the risks so that
                             investors can make more informed decisions about whether to invest in an
                             unlisted property scheme, including comparing risks and returns across
                             investments in the sector.

Table 2:    Key risk features of unlisted property schemes

 Risk feature        What this means

 Gearing             A higher gearing ratio means a higher reliance on external liabilities (primarily borrowings) to
                     fund assets. This exposes the scheme to increased funding costs if, for example, interest
                     rates rise. A highly geared scheme has a lower asset buffer to rely on in times of financial
                     stress. Disclosure by the responsible entity of its gearing policy, including at an individual
                     credit facility level, helps investors to better understand the risks associated with the
                     responsible entity’s approach to gearing.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                        Page 9
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




 Risk feature        What this means

 Interest cover      A property scheme’s interest cover ratio is a key indicator of its financial health. The lower the
                     interest cover, the higher the risk that the scheme will not be able to meet its interest
                     expense. A scheme with a low interest cover ratio only needs a small reduction in earnings
                     (or a small increase in interest rates or other expenses) to be unable to meet its interest
                     expense. Disclosure by the responsible entity of its interest cover policy, including at an
                     individual credit facility level, helps investors to better understand the risks associated with
                     the responsible entity’s approach to gearing.

 Interest            Interest capitalisation means the scheme is not required to make interest payments until an
 capitalisation      agreed point in time. It generally applies in the context of development because the asset
                     may not generate any income during development to meet any interest obligations under
                     finance facilities. If the property cannot be sold for more than the credit facility, the investor
                     will not receive any return as a result of the sale.

 Scheme              Relatively short-term borrowings and credit facilities with short expiry dates are a risk factor if
 borrowing           they are used to fund assets intended to be held long term.

                     If the scheme has a significant proportion of its borrowings that mature within a short
                     timeframe, it will need to refinance. There is a risk that the refinancing will be on less
                     favourable terms or not available at all. If the scheme cannot refinance, it may need to sell
                     assets on a forced sale basis with the risk that it may realise a capital loss.

                     Breach of a loan covenant may result in penalties being applied, or the loan becoming
                     repayable immediately. The scheme may need to refinance on less favourable terms or sell
                     assets. Termination of critical financing could also mean the scheme is no longer viable.

 Portfolio           Generally, the more diversified a portfolio is, the lower the risk that an adverse event affecting
 diversification     one property or one lease will put the overall portfolio at risk. A concentration of development
                     assets in a scheme exposes investors to increased risks involved in the development of
                     property assets.

 Valuation of real   Investing in a property scheme exposes investors to movements in the value of the scheme’s
 property            assets. Investors therefore need information to assess the reliability of valuations. The more
                     reliable a valuation, the more likely the asset will return that amount when it is sold. However,
                     any forced sale is likely to result in a shortfall compared to the valuation unless the valuation
                     has been made on a forced sale basis.

 Related party       A conflict of interest may arise when property schemes invest in, or make loans or provide
 transactions        guarantees to, related parties.

 Distributions       Some property schemes make distributions partly or wholly from unrealised revaluation
                     gains, capital, borrowings, or support facilities arranged by the responsible entity, rather than
                     solely from cash from operations available for distribution. This may not be commercially
                     sustainable over the longer term, particularly when property values are not increasing.

 Withdrawal          Unlisted property schemes often have limited or no withdrawal rights. This means they are
 rights              usually difficult to exit.

 Net tangible        The net tangible asset (NTA) backing of a scheme gives investors information about the
 assets              value of the tangible or physical assets of the scheme. The initial and ongoing NTA backing
                     may be affected by various factors, including fees and charges paid up-front for the purchase
                     of properties, costs associated with capital raising, or fees paid to the responsible entity or
                     other parties.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 10
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Improving disclosure for investors
              RG 46.25       Unlisted property schemes are difficult to exit easily due to the illiquidity of
                             the underlying assets and the limited withdrawal rights (when they are
                             available). It is therefore important that investors have a good understanding
                             of the true nature of unlisted property schemes and their associated risks
                             before they decide to invest.

              RG 46.26       We have observed that listed property schemes were more likely than
                             unlisted property schemes to disclose information that is important to retail
                             investors when comparing the risks and rewards of different schemes. Listed
                             property schemes were also more likely to update investors on how global
                             financial turbulence was affecting the scheme’s financial circumstances.

              RG 46.27       In this context, we have developed six benchmarks and eight disclosure
                             principles that responsible entities of unlisted property schemes should
                             disclose against and apply in their up-front and ongoing disclosures for retail
                             investors: see Sections C and D. Table 3 sets out our approach to improved
                             disclosure for retail investors in these schemes.

Table 3:    Our approach to improved disclosure for unlisted property schemes

 Our approach                                                                             Related information

 The benchmark and disclosure principle information will enable retail investors          See Sections C and D
 to assess the risks and rewards of unlisted property schemes.

 Responsible entities of unlisted property schemes should disclose against the            See Section E
 benchmarks and apply the disclosure principles to the scheme’s PDS and
 ongoing disclosure for retail investors.

 Ongoing disclosure should be communicated to investors in the most effective             See Section E
 way possible. Responsible entities should be particularly conscious of the need
 to update investors with information on significant events that may affect their
 investment.

 Compliance plans for unlisted property schemes should set out adequate                   See Sections F and G
 measures to ensure compliance with the law relating to disclosure and
 advertising obligations. Compliance committees and compliance plan auditors
 should be aware of the benchmarks and disclosure principles, and of the
 advertising obligations, and monitor the responsible entity’s compliance with
 the compliance plans and obligations under the Corporations Act.

 Additional education will help retail investors use the benchmark and                    See our investor guide,
 disclosure principle information when making investment decisions.                       Investing in property trusts?
                                                                                          under ‘Publications’ at
                                                                                          www.moneysmart.gov.au




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 11
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




C          Benchmarks for unlisted property schemes

                               Key points

                               All responsible entities of unlisted property schemes should disclose
                               against the benchmarks on:
                                   gearing policy (see RG 46.31–RG 46.35);
                                   interest cover policy (see RG 46.36–RG 46.40);
                                   interest capitalisation (see RG 46.41–RG 46.44);
                                   valuation policy (see RG 46.45–RG 46.52);
                                   related party transactions (see RG 46.53–RG 46.56); and
                                   distribution practices (see RG 46.57–RG 46.61).
                               Responsible entities should disclose whether the benchmark is ‘met’ or ‘not
                               met’ on an ‘if not, why not’ basis: see RG 46.28–RG 46.30.
                               This information should be disclosed clearly and prominently in the
                               responsible entity’s PDS and ongoing disclosure: see Section E.



Disclosure against the benchmarks: ‘If not, why not’
              RG 46.28       Responsible entities of unlisted property schemes offered to retail investors
                             and in which retail investors have invested should disclose against the
                             benchmarks on an ‘if not, why not’ basis. This means providing a clear
                             statement that the scheme either:
                             (a)   meets the benchmark; or
                             (b)   does not meet the benchmark and providing an explanation of how and
                                   why the responsible entity deals with the business factor or issues
                                   underlying the benchmark in another way.

              RG 46.29       ‘Why not’ means explaining how a responsible entity deals with the business
                             factor or issue underlying the benchmark, including the alternative systems
                             and controls the responsible entity has in place to deal with the issue
                             underlying the benchmark.

              RG 46.30       If a benchmark contains multiple requirements, all elements of the
                             benchmark and the required disclosure should be addressed (i.e. it is not
                             usually sufficient to explain in general terms why a benchmark has not been
                             met or to address only some aspects of a benchmark). Additionally,
                             disclosure should be made on the basis that a benchmark is either ‘met’ or
                             ‘not met’. If the benchmark is not fully met, the benchmark is regarded as
                             ‘not met’ (rather than partially met) and there should be an explanation of
                             why it is not met.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 12
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Benchmark 1: Gearing policy
              RG 46.31       The responsible entity maintains and complies with a written policy that
                             governs the level of gearing at an individual credit facility level.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.32       Unlisted property schemes tend to use credit facilities to partly finance the
                             purchase of properties. It is important for responsible entities to have
                             policies in place that address the risks associated with these arrangements
                             and to comply with these policies. It is also important for investors in these
                             schemes to understand these policies.

              RG 46.33       We consider that responsible entities of unlisted property schemes should
                             disclose a gearing ratio for the scheme: see Disclosure Principle 1 at
                             RG 46.62–RG 46.70. However, we recognise that disclosure of an overall
                             gearing ratio for a scheme may not adequately highlight to investors the risks
                             associated with different credit facilities within the scheme, or how the
                             responsible entity addresses these risks. We consider that it is appropriate
                             that investors understand whether the responsible entity monitors and
                             manages the gearing levels of individual credit facilities within the scheme.


                             ‘If not, why not’ disclosure

              RG 46.34       If a responsible entity meets this benchmark, it should disclose its gearing
                             policy and whether the scheme currently complies with this policy.

              RG 46.35       If the benchmark is not met, the responsible entity should explain why not,
                             and disclose the risks associated with the approach it has adopted.



Benchmark 2: Interest cover policy
              RG 46.36       The responsible entity maintains and complies with a written policy that
                             governs the level of interest cover at an individual credit facility level.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.37       Another key aspect relating to credit facilities used by unlisted property
                             schemes to finance the purchase of property is interest cover. It is important
                             for responsible entities to have policies in place that address the risks
                             associated with these arrangements and to comply with these policies. It is
                             also important for investors in these schemes to understand these policies.

              RG 46.38       We consider that responsible entities of unlisted property schemes should
                             disclose an interest cover ratio for the scheme: see Disclosure Principle 2 at
                             RG 46.71–RG 46.77. However, we recognise that disclosure of an overall



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 13
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             interest cover ratio for a scheme may not adequately highlight to investors
                             the risks associated with the different credit facilities that may exist within
                             the scheme, or how the responsible entity addresses these risks. We consider
                             that it is appropriate that investors understand whether the responsible entity
                             monitors and manages interest cover at an individual credit facility level.


                             ‘If not, why not’ disclosure

              RG 46.39       If a responsible entity meets this benchmark, it should disclose its interest
                             cover policy and whether the scheme currently complies with this policy.

              RG 46.40       If the benchmark is not met, the responsible entity should explain why not,
                             and disclose the risks associated with the approach it has adopted.


Benchmark 3: Interest capitalisation
              RG 46.41       The interest expense of the scheme is not capitalised.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.42       We consider that when a scheme capitalises interest expense, it is important
                             for investors to understand how the scheme will meet its interest obligations
                             when deciding whether to invest in the scheme.


                             ‘If not, why not’ disclosure

              RG 46.43       If a responsible entity meets this benchmark, it should disclose that the
                             interest expense of the scheme is not capitalised.

              RG 46.44       If the benchmark is not met, the responsible entity should explain why not,
                             and disclose the risks associated with the capitalisation of interest. It should
                             also provide details about how it intends to meet its repayment obligations
                             for any borrowing undertaken on behalf of the scheme.


Benchmark 4: Valuation policy
              RG 46.45       The responsible entity maintains and complies with a written valuation
                             policy that requires:
                             (a)   a valuer to:
                                   (i)    be registered or licensed in the relevant state, territory or overseas
                                          jurisdiction in which the property is located (where a registration or
                                          licensing regime exists), or otherwise be a member of an
                                          appropriate professional body in that jurisdiction; and
                                   (ii)   be independent;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 14
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (b)   procedures to be followed for dealing with any conflicts of interest;
                             (c)   rotation and diversity of valuers;
                             (d)   valuations to be obtained in accordance with a set timetable; and
                             (e)   for each property, an independent valuation to be obtained:
                                   (i)    before the property is purchased:
                                          (A)   for a development property, on an ‘as is’ and ‘as if complete’
                                                basis; and
                                          (B)   for all other property, on an ‘as is’ basis; and
                                   (ii)   within two months after the directors form a view that there is a
                                          likelihood that there has been a material change in the value of the
                                          property.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.46       The value of real property assets can be volatile, particularly when access to
                             credit is constrained and more properties are on the market. A significant fall
                             in valuation will mean an increase in gearing ratio and may trigger a breach
                             of loan covenants.

              RG 46.47       Investors should be able to understand and compare how responsible entities
                             value their schemes’ real property assets. This will help investors assess the
                             reliability of the valuations.

              RG 46.48       It is in the interests of investors that the valuations obtained and used by
                             responsible entities are robust and accurate. Responsible entities are
                             responsible for financial statements and other documents that rely on the
                             accuracy of these valuations. We expect that responsible entities will be
                             careful to ensure that their instructions to valuers are comprehensive and
                             contain reasonable terms of reference.

              RG 46.49       We consider that it is important that responsible entities have a valuation
                             policy in place so that valuations are conducted on a timely basis and by
                             suitably qualified experts. Disclosure by responsible entities against the
                             valuation policy benchmark enables investors to better assess the reliability
                             of valuations undertaken for the scheme and to better understand the
                             valuation practices of the responsible entity for the scheme.


                             ‘If not, why not’ disclosure

              RG 46.50       If a responsible entity meets this benchmark, it should disclose a summary of
                             its valuation policy, that the scheme currently complies with this policy, and
                             where an investor can obtain a copy of the full valuation policy.

              RG 46.51       If the benchmark is not met, the responsible entity should explain why not,
                             and disclose the risks associated with this approach.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 15
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.52       When the responsible entity discloses the value of a property under
                             development on an ‘as if complete’ basis, the ‘as is’ basis of the valuation
                             should also be disclosed. The responsible entity should also disclose the
                             risks associated with ‘as if complete’ valuations, including the risk that
                             assumptions on which such valuations are based may prove to be inaccurate.


Benchmark 5: Related party transactions
              RG 46.53       The responsible entity maintains and complies with a written policy on
                             related party transactions, including the assessment and approval processes
                             for such transactions and arrangements to manage conflicts of interest.

                                   Note 1: The term ‘related party’ is defined in s228 (as modified by Pt 5C.7 for
                                   registered schemes) and includes the responsible entity. Responsible entities should
                                   refer to our guidance in Regulatory Guide 76 Related party transactions (RG 76),
                                   including, among other things, the content requirements for prospectuses, PDSs and
                                   other disclosure documents.

                                   Note 2: Responsible entities are Australian financial services (AFS) licensees and have
                                   duties to adequately manage conflicts of interest: s912A(1)(aa). If applicable, responsible
                                   entities may need to obtain investor approval for related party transactions under Pt 5C.7.
                                   For further guidance on disclosing related party transactions in a PDS, see Section E of
                                   RG 76.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.54       We consider that responsible entities of unlisted property schemes that enter
                             into transactions with related parties should disclose information about these
                             related party arrangements that are relevant to a decision to invest in the
                             scheme: see Disclosure Principle 5 at RG 46.98–RG 46.101. It is also
                             important for investors to identify whether responsible entities have adequate
                             arrangements in place to identify, monitor and manage related party
                             transactions.


                             ‘If not, why not’ disclosure

              RG 46.55       If a responsible entity meets this benchmark, it should disclose that it
                             complies with its policy and include a summary of the key elements of the
                             policy and procedures that the responsible entity has in place for entering
                             into related party transactions, including how compliance with these policies
                             and procedures is monitored and that the responsible entity currently
                             complies with its policy and procedures. The responsible entity should also
                             disclose where an investor can obtain more detail on the responsible entity’s
                             policy and procedures for related party transactions.

              RG 46.56       If the benchmark is not met, the responsible entity should explain why not, the
                             implications of not meeting the benchmark and disclose the arrangements it has
                             in place and the risks associated with the approach it has adopted.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 16
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Benchmark 6: Distribution practices
              RG 46.57       The scheme will only pay distributions from its cash from operations
                             (excluding borrowings) available for distribution.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.58       We consider that distributions to investors that include capital, borrowings or
                             support facilities may not always be commercially sustainable. In the past
                             some responsible entities have used these sources to support distributions in
                             the short term. Investors may not realise the risks associated with the use of
                             these sources of funding to maintain distributions.

              RG 46.59       We consider that this benchmark helps investors to better understand the
                             distribution practices of the scheme.


                             ‘If not, why not’ disclosure

              RG 46.60       If a responsible entity meets this benchmark, it should disclose that the
                             scheme will only pay distributions from its cash from operations (excluding
                             borrowings) available for distribution.

              RG 46.61       If the benchmark is not met, the responsible entity should explain why not,
                             provide details of the sources of funds it intends to use to meet distributions,
                             and outline any risks to the scheme of using these funds for this purpose.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 17
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




D          Disclosure principles for unlisted property
           schemes

                               Key points

                               Responsible entities of unlisted property schemes should give retail
                               investors information on the following aspects of the scheme:
                                  gearing ratio (see RG 46.62–RG 46.70);
                                  interest cover ratio (see RG 46.71–RG 46.77);
                                  scheme borrowing (see RG 46.78–RG 46.86);
                                  portfolio diversification (see RG 46.87–RG 46.97);
                                  related party transactions (see RG 46.98–RG 46.101);
                                  distribution practices (see RG 46.102–RG 46.103);
                                  withdrawal rights (see RG 46.104–RG 46.107); and
                                  net tangible assets (see: RG 46.108–RG 46.115)

                               This information should be disclosed clearly and prominently in the
                               responsible entity’s PDS and ongoing disclosure: see Section E.




Disclosure Principle 1: Gearing ratio
              RG 46.62       Responsible entities should disclose a gearing ratio for the scheme calculated
                             using the following formula:

                             Gearing ratio        =     Total interest-bearing liabilities
                                                                  Total assets

                                   Note: If the scheme or a stapled group prepares consolidated financial statements, the
                                   gearing ratio should be based on the consolidated figures.

              RG 46.63       The liabilities and assets used to calculate the gearing ratio should be based
                             on the scheme’s latest financial statements. The latest financial statements
                             would usually be the latest audited or reviewed financial statements, except
                             where the responsible entity is aware of material changes since those
                             statements. If the responsible entity does not base the gearing ratio on the
                             latest financial statements, it should disclose the source(s) and date of the
                             information used to calculate the ratio.

              RG 46.64       If members’ contributions (other than borrowings from members) are
                             classified as liabilities in the financial statements, they should be excluded
                             from liabilities in calculating the gearing ratio. If the scheme has material
                             off-balance-sheet financing, the responsible entity should disclose the
                             following gearing ratios:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 18
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (a)   a ‘look through’ gearing ratio that takes into account such financing;
                                   and
                             (b)   a gearing ratio based on liabilities disclosed in the scheme’s financial
                                   statements.

                                   Note: Examples of off-balance-sheet financing include borrowings of equity-accounted
                                   investments and loans taken out by investors to invest in the scheme where those loans
                                   are secured over the scheme’s assets on a limited recourse basis.

              RG 46.65       Responsible entities should also explain to investors what these ratios mean
                             in practical terms and how investors can use the ratios to determine the
                             scheme’s level of risk.

                                   Note: We do not think it is adequate to simply state what the gearing ratio is. We expect
                                   that an explanation of the gearing ratio should address the risks that may arise as a result
                                   of the gearing within the scheme.

              RG 46.66       If the responsible entity is unable to calculate the gearing ratio and/or the
                             ‘look through’ gearing ratio, this should be disclosed with the reasons why
                             the ratio(s) cannot be calculated, an explanation of the risks and impact of
                             being unable to calculate the ratio(s), and the steps being taken by the
                             responsible entity to address these risks.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.67       The gearing ratio in RG 46.62 indicates the extent to which a scheme’s
                             assets are funded by interest-bearing liabilities. It gives an indication of the
                             potential risks the scheme faces in terms of its level of borrowings due to, for
                             example, an increase in interest rates or a reduction in property values.

              RG 46.68       Retail investors may not have the skills or information to calculate a
                             scheme’s gearing ratio (especially the ‘look through’ gearing ratio) from the
                             scheme’s financial statements. In contrast, responsible entities should be able
                             to calculate the scheme’s gearing ratio and explain its relevance to investors.

              RG 46.69       We consider that a scheme’s gearing ratio is a risk factor that retail investors
                             should weigh up against the scheme’s rate of return. Consistent disclosure of
                             gearing ratios across this sector will enable investors to compare relative
                             risks and returns for unlisted property schemes.

              RG 46.70       We consider that responsible entities should explain to investors the risks
                             associated with the level of gearing of the scheme and the implications of the
                             gearing. For example, if there are assets within the scheme that have a
                             gearing ratio that is significantly different from the overall gearing ratio of
                             the scheme, this type of risk should be highlighted to investors.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                         Page 19
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Disclosure Principle 2: Interest cover ratio
              RG 46.71       The interest cover ratio gives an indication of an unlisted property scheme’s
                             ability to meet the interest payments from earnings. Responsible entities
                             should disclose the scheme’s interest cover ratio calculated using the
                             following formula and based on the latest financial statements:

                             Interest cover ratio       =       EBITDA – unrealised gains + unrealised losses
                                                                           Interest expense

                                   Note: If the scheme or stapled group prepares consolidated financial statements, the
                                   interest cover ratio should be calculated based on the consolidated figures. Interest
                                   expense calculations should take into account any related hedging arrangements.
                                   Unrealised losses and gains include losses and gains relating to revaluations of
                                   properties, hedging arrangements and straight-lining of rental income.

              RG 46.72       The EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation)
                             and interest expense figures used to calculate the interest cover ratio should
                             be consistent with those disclosed in the scheme’s latest financial statements.
                             The latest financial statements would usually be the latest audited or
                             reviewed financial statements, except when the responsible entity is aware of
                             material changes since those statements. If the responsible entity does not
                             base the interest cover ratio on the latest financial statements, it should
                             disclose the source(s) and date of the information used to calculate the ratio.

              RG 46.73       If the responsible entity is unable to calculate the interest cover ratio (e.g. in a
                             property development or when the interest is capitalised), it should disclose the
                             reasons why it is unable to calculate the ratio and provide an explanation of the
                             arrangements it has entered into to meet the payment obligations related to the
                             borrowed funds and the risks associated with these arrangements.

              RG 46.74       Many retail investors may not understand what interest cover means.
                             Responsible entities should explain how investors can use the interest cover
                             ratio to assess the scheme’s ability to meet its interest payments.

                                   Note: We do not think it is adequate to simply state what the interest cover ratio is. We
                                   expect that any explanation of the interest cover ratio should address the relationship
                                   between the income received by the scheme and interest expense under the terms of any
                                   relevant finance facility, and any other financial obligations the scheme has.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.75       The interest cover ratio measures the ability of the scheme to service interest
                             on debt from earnings. It is therefore a critical indication of a scheme’s
                             financial health and key to analysing the sustainability and risks associated
                             with the scheme’s level of borrowing. It is information that many retail
                             investors would be unable to calculate. As with the gearing ratio, the interest
                             cover ratio is information that responsible entities should be able to provide.
                             Consistent disclosure will allow investors to compare relative risks and
                             returns across investments in unlisted property schemes.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 20
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.76       If the responsible entity is unable to calculate the interest cover ratio, this
                             should be disclosed with the reasons why the ratio cannot be calculated, an
                             explanation of the risks and impact of the responsible entity not being able to
                             calculate the ratio, and the steps being taken by the responsible entity to
                             address the risks of not knowing the interest cover ratio.

              RG 46.77       We consider that responsible entities should help investors to interpret the
                             interest cover ratio by providing information that will enable investors to
                             understand the ability of the scheme to continue to pay distributions and
                             expenses of the scheme after the payment of interest, and whether the
                             income of the scheme is sufficient to cover these costs.



Disclosure Principle 3: Scheme borrowing
              RG 46.78       If a scheme has borrowed funds (whether on or off balance sheet),
                             responsible entities should clearly and prominently disclose:
                             (a)   for each borrowing that will mature in five years or less—the aggregate
                                   amount owing and the maturity profile in increments of not more than
                                   12 months;

                                   Note: For borrowings that will mature within 12 months, the responsible entity should
                                   exercise judgement to determine whether it would be appropriate to disclose aggregate
                                   amounts for time bands within 12 months.

                             (b)   for borrowings that will mature in more than five years—the aggregate
                                   amount owing;
                             (c)   the amount (expressed as a percentage) by which either the operating
                                   cash flow or the value of the asset(s) used as security for the facility
                                   must fall before the scheme will breach any covenants in any credit
                                   facility;
                             (d)   for each credit facility:
                                   (i)     the aggregate undrawn amount;
                                   (ii)    the assets to which the facility relates;
                                   (iii)   the loan-to-valuation and interest cover covenants under the terms
                                           of the facility;
                                   (iv)    the interest rate of the facility; and
                                   (v)     whether the facility is hedged;
                             (e)   details of any terms within the facility that may be invoked as a result of
                                   scheme members exercising their rights under the constitution of the
                                   scheme; and
                             (f)   the fact that amounts owing to lenders and other creditors of the scheme
                                   rank before an investor’s interests in the scheme.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 21
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.79       If borrowings and credit facilities will mature within 12 months, the
                             responsible entity should make appropriate disclosure about the prospects
                             of refinancing or possible alternative actions (e.g. sales of assets or further
                             fundraising). If the responsible entity has no reasonable grounds for
                             commenting on the prospect of refinancing or possible alternative actions,
                             it should state this and explain why to investors: see Regulatory Guide 170
                             Prospective financial information (RG 170) at RG 170.91–RG 170.94.

                                   Note: Any forward-looking statements should comply with s769C of the Corporations
                                   Act and RG 170.

              RG 46.80       Responsible entities should explain any risks associated with their borrowing
                             maturity profile, including whether borrowings have been hedged and, if so,
                             to what extent.

              RG 46.81       Responsible entities should also disclose any information about scheme
                             borrowing and breaches of loan covenants that is reasonably required by
                             investors. Responsible entities should update investors about the status of
                             scheme borrowings and any breaches of covenants through ongoing
                             disclosure.

                                   Note: Responsible entities should be aware that, in certain cases, investors would
                                   reasonably require information on likely breaches of loan covenants (e.g. if the
                                   responsible entity has approached the lender about a likely breach and has been
                                   informed that the loan is likely to be terminated if the breach occurs).


                             Explanation

                             Borrowing maturity and credit facility expiry profile

              RG 46.82       Borrowing maturity and credit facility expiry profiles are important
                             information if an unlisted property scheme borrows to invest. Credit
                             facilities that are due to expire within a relatively short timeframe can be a
                             significant risk factor, especially in periods when credit is more difficult and
                             expensive to obtain. A failure to renew borrowing or credit facilities can
                             adversely affect a scheme’s viability.

              RG 46.83       It is important that disclosure on the expiry of credit facilities is clear and
                             prominent enough for retail investors to easily locate and understand the
                             information.

                             Breach of loan covenants

              RG 46.84       Information about breaches of loan covenants that is reasonably required by
                             investors is key risk information in up-front and ongoing disclosure. Breach
                             of a loan covenant may result in the lender being able to require immediate
                             repayment of the loan or impose a freeze on further draw-downs on the
                             credit facility.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 22
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.85       If the lender exercises such rights, the scheme may be forced to arrange
                             alternative financing or asset sales within a short timeframe. This can be
                             problematic, particularly in periods when access to credit is more
                             constrained, when the scheme has a poor history of meeting loan covenants,
                             or when there is a softening of the property market.

                             Ranking of investors

              RG 46.86       Retail investors should be made aware that they will rank behind the
                             creditors of a scheme.



Disclosure Principle 4: Portfolio diversification
              RG 46.87       A responsible entity should disclose the current composition of the property
                             scheme’s direct property investment portfolio, including:
                             (a)   properties by geographic location by number and value;
                             (b)   non-development properties by sector (e.g. industrial, commercial,
                                   retail, residential) and development projects by number and value;
                             (c)   for each significant property, the most recent valuation, the date of the
                                   valuation, whether the valuation was performed by an independent valuer
                                   and, where applicable, the capitalisation rate adopted in the valuation;
                             (d)   the portfolio lease expiry profile in yearly periods calculated on the
                                   basis of lettable area or income and, where applicable, the weighted
                                   average lease expiry;
                             (e)   the occupancy rate(s) of the property portfolio;
                             (f)   for the top five tenants that each individually constitute 5% or more by
                                   income across the investment portfolio, the name of the tenant and
                                   percentage of lettable area or income; and
                             (g)   the current value of the development and/or construction assets of the
                                   scheme as a percentage of the current value of the total assets of the scheme.

              RG 46.88       Disclosure should cover the responsible entity’s investment strategy on these
                             matters, including its strategy on investing in other unlisted property
                             schemes, whether the scheme’s current assets conform to the investment
                             strategy and an explanation of any significant variance from this strategy. A
                             responsible entity should also provide a clear description of any significant
                             non-direct property assets of the scheme, including the value of such assets.

              RG 46.89       Responsible entities of unlisted property schemes involved in property
                             development should also disclose for each significant development asset:
                             (a)   the development timetable with key milestones;
                             (b)   a description of the status of the development against the key milestones
                                   identified;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 23
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (c)   a description of the nature of the funding arrangements for the
                                   development (including the sources of funding and repayment strategies
                                   if borrowing is used to fund the development);
                             (d)   the total amounts of pre-sale and lease pre-commitments, where
                                   applicable;
                             (e)   whether the loan-to-valuation ratio for the asset under development
                                   exceeds 70% of the ‘as is’ valuation of the asset; and
                             (f)   the risks associated with the property development activities being
                                   undertaken.

              RG 46.90       The responsible entity for any scheme that has over 20% of its property assets
                             in development based on an ‘as if complete’ basis should ensure that the scheme
                             is clearly identified as a development and/or construction scheme.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.91       The quality of the properties held by an unlisted property scheme, including
                             the quality of leases entered into over those properties, is a key element in
                             the financial position and performance of the scheme. Generally, the more
                             diversified a portfolio, the lower the risk that an adverse event affecting one
                             property or one lease will put the overall portfolio at risk.

              RG 46.92       It is important that responsible entities disclose their approach to portfolio
                             diversification in their PDSs and ongoing disclosure. Most responsible
                             entities will have a firm policy on the types of properties in which the
                             scheme will invest. This should be disclosed as clearly and prominently as
                             possible to help investors monitor the financial position and performance of
                             the scheme over time.

                             Development

              RG 46.93       We consider development to be the construction of a new building,
                             significant increases to the lettable area of a building, or significant changes
                             to the nature or use of the property. Refurbishment of existing assets need
                             not be considered as development for the purposes of this regulatory guide.

              RG 46.94       When determining whether over 20% of the property assets of the scheme are
                             development assets, we consider that portions of existing assets that are not in
                             development should not be included in this calculation.

              RG 46.95       It is important that investors who invest in schemes that undertake property
                             development have a good understanding of the nature of the developments and
                             the risks associated with specific developments. Further, responsible entities
                             should ensure that investors are kept informed of the progress of the development
                             on an ongoing basis against the development timetable and key milestones.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 24
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.96       Responsible entities should consider whether it is appropriate to disclose
                             development timetables using common key milestones—for example:
                             (a)   land settlement;
                             (b)   planning approval;
                             (c)   construction commencement;
                             (d)   construction completion;
                             (e)   sales settlement; and
                             (f)   project finalisation.

              RG 46.97       Any material delays (e.g. to development works, including the underlying
                             reason) or changes to financing circumstances are important indicators that a
                             development may be experiencing difficulties (or may fail) and should
                             trigger disclosure about these material matters.



Disclosure Principle 5: Related party transactions
              RG 46.98       Responsible entities that enter into transactions with related parties should
                             describe related party arrangements relevant to the investment decision. The
                             description should address:
                             (a)   the value of the financial benefit;
                             (b)   the nature of the relationship (i.e. the identity of the related party and
                                   the nature of the arrangements between the parties, in addition to how
                                   the parties are related for the purposes of the Corporations Act or ASX
                                   Listing Rules—for group structures, the nature of these relationships
                                   should be disclosed for all group entities);
                             (c)   whether the arrangement is on ‘arm’s length’ terms, is reasonable
                                   remuneration, some other exception applies, or we have granted relief;
                             (d)   whether scheme member approval for the transaction has been sought
                                   and, if so, when (e.g. if member approval was obtained before the issue
                                   of interests in the scheme);
                             (e)   the risks associated with the related party arrangement; and
                             (f)   whether the responsible entity is in compliance with its policies and
                                   procedures for entering into related party transactions for the particular
                                   related party arrangement, and how this is monitored.

                                   Note: The term ‘related party’ is defined in s228 (as modified by Pt 5C.7 for registered
                                   schemes) and includes the responsible entity. Responsible entities should refer to our
                                   guidance in Regulatory Guide 76 Related party transactions (RG 76), including, among
                                   other things, the content requirements for prospectuses, PDSs and other disclosure
                                   documents.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 25
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Explanation

              RG 46.99       Related party transactions carry a risk that they could be assessed and
                             monitored less rigorously than arm’s length third party transactions.
                             Investors should therefore be able to assess whether responsible entities take
                             an appropriate approach to related party transactions. A significant number
                             and value of such transactions may mean that investors should consider the
                             financial position of the related group as a whole and the risk of potential
                             conflicts of interest.

              RG 46.100      Related party transactions may include commercial contracts for the supply
                             of goods or services with persons that are related parties. They may also
                             comprise larger transactions, such as asset acquisitions or disposals.

              RG 46.101      Responsible entities should disclose information about existing related party
                             transactions in disclosure documents, except to the extent that:
                             (a)   such disclosure may confuse investors by dealing with inconsequential
                                   matters; or
                             (b)   investors already have adequate information about the related party
                                   transactions as a result of past disclosures, so it is not reasonable for the
                                   information to be repeated in full.

                                   Note: Responsible entities are Australian financial services (AFS) licensees and have duties
                                   to adequately manage conflicts of interest: s912A(1)(aa). If applicable, responsible entities
                                   may need to obtain investor approval for related party transactions under Pt 5C.7. For
                                   further guidance on disclosing related party transactions in a PDS, see Section E of RG 76.




Disclosure Principle 6: Distribution practices
              RG 46.102      If a scheme is making or forecasts making distributions to members, the
                             responsible entity should disclose:
                             (a)   the source of the current distribution (e.g. from cash from operations
                                   available for distribution, capital, unrealised revaluation gains);
                             (b)   the source of any forecast distribution;
                             (c)   whether the current or forecast distributions are sustainable over the
                                   next 12 months;
                             (d)   if the current or forecast distribution is not solely sourced from cash
                                   from operations (excluding borrowings) available for distribution, the
                                   sources of funding and the reasons for making the distribution from
                                   these other sources;
                             (e)   if the current or forecast distribution is sourced other than from cash
                                   from operations (excluding borrowings) available for distribution,
                                   whether this is sustainable over the next 12 months; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 26
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (f)   the impact of, and any risks associated with, the payment of
                                   distributions from the scheme from sources other than cash from
                                   operations (excluding borrowings) available for distribution.
                                   Note: Any forward-looking statements should comply with s769C and RG 170. If a
                                   responsible entity does not have reasonable grounds for disclosing whether current or
                                   forecast distributions sourced other than from cash from operations (excluding borrowings)
                                   available for distribution are sustainable, it should explain this to investors: see RG 170.91.


                             Explanation
              RG 46.103      Some unlisted property schemes make distributions to members from capital
                             and/or unrealised gains where cash is available from either within the fund
                             or from borrowings. If this is the case, the responsible entity should clearly
                             and prominently disclose the risks associated with this and whether these
                             distributions are sustainable.



Disclosure Principle 7: Withdrawal arrangements
              RG 46.104      If investors are given the right to withdraw from a scheme, the responsible
                             entity should clearly disclose:
                             (a)   whether the constitution of the scheme allows investors to withdraw
                                   from the scheme, with a description of the circumstances in which
                                   investors can withdraw;
                             (b)   the maximum withdrawal period allowed under the constitution for the
                                   scheme (this disclosure should be at least as prominent as any shorter
                                   withdrawal period promoted to investors);
                             (c)   any significant risk factors or limitations that may affect the ability of
                                   investors to withdraw from the scheme, or the unit price at which any
                                   withdrawal will be made (including risk factors that may affect the
                                   ability of the responsible entity to meet a promoted withdrawal period);
                             (d)   a clear explanation of how investors can exercise their withdrawal
                                   rights, including any conditions on exercise (e.g. specified withdrawal
                                   periods and scheme liquidity requirements); and
                             (e)   if withdrawals from the scheme are to be funded from an external
                                   liquidity facility, the material terms of this facility, including any rights
                                   the provider has to suspend or cancel the facility.

              RG 46.105      The responsible entity should ensure that investors are updated on any
                             material changes to withdrawal rights through ongoing disclosure. For
                             example, investors should be informed if the responsible entity knows that
                             withdrawal requests will be suspended during an upcoming withdrawal
                             period for whatever reason.

              RG 46.106      Responsible entities should also clearly disclose if investors have no
                             withdrawal rights.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                         Page 27
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Explanation

              RG 46.107      It is important for responsible entities to make investors aware of withdrawal
                             arrangements so that investors form realistic expectations about their ability
                             to withdraw from the scheme.

                                   Note 1: Members will only have a limited ability to withdraw if a scheme is not ‘liquid’
                                   for the purposes of Pt 5C.6.

                                   Note 2: If a responsible entity makes representations about likely future withdrawal
                                   periods, it must have reasonable grounds for those representations: s769C.




Disclosure Principle 8: Net tangible assets
              RG 46.108      The responsible entity of a closed-end scheme should clearly disclose the
                             value of the net tangible assets (NTA) of the scheme on a per unit basis in
                             pre-tax dollars.

              RG 46.109      We consider that responsible entities should calculate the NTA of the
                             scheme using the following formula:

                             NTA      =     Net assets – intangible assets +/– any other adjustments
                                                 Number of units in the scheme on issue

                                   Note: When making this NTA calculation, we expect responsible entities to comply
                                   with all relevant accounting standards. All NTA calculations should consider the joint
                                   unit pricing guide from ASIC and the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
                                   (APRA): see Regulatory Guide 94 Unit pricing: Guide to good practice (RG 94).

              RG 46.110      The responsible entity should disclose the methodology for calculating the
                             NTA and details of the adjustments used in the calculation, including the
                             reasons for the adjustments.

              RG 46.111      Responsible entities should also explain to investors what the NTA
                             calculation means in practical terms and how investors can use the NTA
                             calculation to determine the scheme’s level of risk.

                                   Note: We do not think it is adequate to simply state what the NTA calculation is. We
                                   expect that an explanation of the NTA calculation should address the risks that may
                                   arise as a result of the current NTA for the scheme.


                             Explanation

              RG 46.112      An NTA calculation helps investors understand the value of the assets upon
                             which the value of their unit is determined. Open-end schemes regularly
                             disclose the NTA for the scheme or a similar measure such as net asset
                             backing or net asset value to support the pricing of units in the scheme.
                             These measures are not generally disclosed for closed-end schemes.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 28
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.113      The responsible entity should base the NTA calculation on the scheme’s
                             latest financial statements. The latest financial statements would usually be
                             the latest audited or reviewed financial statements, except where the
                             responsible entity is aware of material changes since those statements were
                             issued. Where the responsible entity does not base the NTA on the latest
                             financial statements, it should disclose the source(s) and date of the
                             information used to calculate the NTA.

                                   Note: Any forward-looking statements should comply with s769C of the Corporations
                                   Act and RG 170.

              RG 46.114      If the responsible entity does not use the above formula to calculate the
                             NTA, it should disclose the formula used, including the reasons why it has
                             chosen a different method of calculation.

              RG 46.115      Responsible entities should consider if disclosing the net asset value per unit
                             of the scheme would help investors to better understand the relationship
                             between NTA and net asset value per unit, and if these measures would help
                             investors to understand the financial position of the scheme.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 29
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




E          Form and method of disclosure

                               Key points

                               Responsible entities of unlisted property schemes should disclose against
                               the benchmarks and apply the disclosure principles in their PDSs because
                               these reflect information required for this disclosure under the
                               Corporations Act: see RG 46.116–RG 46.118 and RG 46.121–RG 46.139.

                               The benchmarks and disclosure principles also reflect information required
                               for ongoing disclosure to investors: see RG 46.140–RG 46.155.

                               For an overview of when responsible entities will need to disclose against
                               the benchmarks and apply the disclosure principles in PDSs and ongoing
                               disclosures, see Table 4.

                               Responsible entities should clearly specify the date on any ongoing
                               disclosure to which this guide applies: see RG 46.147.

                               If applying a disclosure principle would result in misleading or clearly
                               inappropriate information, this should be explained to investors:
                               see RG 46.156–RG 46.159.




The disclosure framework
              RG 46.116      The Corporations Act requires responsible entities of unlisted property
                             schemes to:
                             (a)   disclose in a PDS to retail investors all the information they reasonably
                                   need to know to make a decision to acquire an interest in the scheme;
                                   and
                             (b)   provide ongoing disclosure about material matters to help retail
                                   investors monitor whether their expectations are being met.

              RG 46.117      The benchmarks in Section C and the disclosure principles in Section D
                             reflect information that retail investors reasonably need to make an
                             investment decision and monitor whether their expectations are being met.
                             This information is therefore required under the Corporations Act for both
                             PDSs and ongoing disclosure.

              RG 46.118      Apart from disclosures required by the Corporations Act, it is good practice
                             for responsible entities to update investors on the status of the benchmark
                             and disclosure principle information at least every six months: see
                             RG 46.143–RG 46.145.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 30
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Timing for implementing improved disclosure
              RG 46.119      Table 4 explains how we expect responsible entities for existing and new
                             unlisted property schemes to implement improved disclosure and our views
                             on good practice for updating investors.

              RG 46.120      From 1 November 2012, we will review updated investor disclosures for
                             unlisted property schemes to check that the benchmark and disclosure
                             principle information is being adequately disclosed to investors.

Table 4:    Timetable for implementing the benchmarks and disclosure principles

 Existing schemes—         By 1 November 2012, the responsible entity should provide investors with an update of
 update existing           the benchmark and disclosure principle information: see RG 46.135–RG 46.139. This
 investors by              could be by using the responsible entity’s normal investor communication channels (e.g.
 1 November 2012           in a regular investor update or by including the information on a website that is used to
                           communicate with investors).

 PDSs dated before         By 1 November 2012, if an existing PDS is still in use, responsible entities should either:
 1 November 2012            include the benchmark and disclosure principle information on a website referred to in
 that remain in use—         the PDS (if the omission of the information from the PDS is not materially adverse); or
 update by
                            update the PDS by a new or supplementary PDS so that it includes the benchmark
 1 November 2012
                             and disclosure principle information.
                                Note: PDSs commonly allow information to be updated through a website if the updated
                                information is not materially adverse: see Class Order [CO 03/237] Updated information in
                                Product Disclosure Statements. We consider that if the omission of the benchmark and
                                disclosure principle information from an existing PDS is not materially adverse, the
                                responsible entity will generally be able to rely on [CO 03/237] to update the PDS for this
                                information without the need for a new or supplementary PDS: see RG 46.135–RG 46.139.

 New PDSs issued on        PDSs dated on or after 1 November 2012 should clearly and prominently disclose the
 or after 1 November       benchmark and disclosure principle information and contain an investment overview:
 2012                      see RG 46.121–RG 46.134.

                           The PDS should also explain how the responsible entity intends to update investors for
                           ongoing disclosure.

 Material changes to       If there are material changes to the benchmark or disclosure principle information, the
 information               responsible entity should update investors on material changes to key information about
                           an unlisted property scheme as soon as practicable (e.g. by updating a website used for
                           this purpose) in its ongoing disclosure: see RG 46.140–RG 46.155.

 Updates on status of      It is good practice for responsible entities to update investors at least every six months
 information               on the status of the benchmark and disclosure principle information, including whether
                           the information has been updated for any material changes since the last investor
                           report: see RG 46.143–RG 46.145.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 31
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Disclosure in a PDS or supplementary PDS
              RG 46.121      The Corporations Act requires disclosure in the form of a PDS for an offer
                             of interests in an unlisted property scheme. The PDS must:
                             (a)   make specific disclosures, including about significant risks associated
                                   with holding the product (s1013D); and
                             (b)   include all other information that might reasonably be expected to have
                                   a material influence on the decision of a reasonable person, as a retail
                                   client, whether to invest in the scheme (s1013E).

              RG 46.122      The PDS for an unlisted property scheme should clearly explain:
                             (a)   the business model of the scheme and what it will do with the money
                                   raised by the PDS (e.g. what type of property the scheme will invest in);
                             (b)   the track record and experience of senior management; and
                             (c)   the key features and risks of the scheme.

              RG 46.123      The benchmarks and disclosure principles reflect information about the key
                             features and risks of an unlisted property scheme. It is information that might
                             reasonably be expected to have a material influence on the decision of a
                             reasonable person whether to invest (s1013D(1) and 1013E), but which they
                             would not be expected to know without explicit disclosure in a PDS:
                             s1013F(2). The benchmarks and disclosure principles therefore reflect the
                             information required under s1013D–1013E.

                                   Note: The benchmarks and disclosure principles do not attempt to specify all of the
                                   information that is required to be included in a PDS by the Corporations Act. Other
                                   information will also be required depending on the nature of the unlisted property
                                   scheme and the offer being made in the PDS.

              RG 46.124      A PDS for an offer of interests in an unlisted property scheme should include
                             the benchmark and disclosure principle information. The PDS should also
                             explain how the responsible entity intends to update investors on material
                             changes to key information about the scheme.

              RG 46.125      The information in a PDS must be up-to-date at the time it is given. We
                             consider that PDSs that do not contain the benchmark and disclosure
                             principle information by 1 November 2012 are unlikely to be up-to-date
                             given the key nature of the benchmark and disclosure principle information,
                             particularly in light of recent economic conditions affecting the property
                             sector and the fact that new PDSs will disclose this information.


                             Clear, concise and effective disclosure

              RG 46.126      PDSs must be worded and presented in a clear, concise and effective manner:
                             s1013C(3). A PDS should therefore contain clear and prominent disclosure of
                             the key features and risks of the investment. For unlisted property schemes, this
                             includes the benchmark and disclosure principle information.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 32
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.127      The requirement for ‘clear, concise and effective’ disclosure should be read
                             as a compound phrase so that each word qualifies the other. This means it is
                             inappropriate to focus on one word in the phrase at the expense of others.

              RG 46.128      We consider that a PDS will generally be clear, concise and effective if it:
                             (a)   highlights key information (e.g. through an investment overview as
                                   explained below);
                             (b)   uses plain language;
                             (c)   is as short as possible;
                             (d)   explains complex information, including any technical terms; and
                             (e)   is logically ordered and easy to navigate.

              RG 46.129      We encourage responsible entities to use consumer-friendly tools as much as
                             possible in disclosing key features and risks, including tables, diagrams and
                             other comparative features. Such effective disclosure will help retail
                             investors compare investments across the unlisted property scheme sector.

                                   Note: Responsible entities should refer to Regulatory Guide 168 Disclosure: Product
                                   Disclosure Statements (and other disclosure obligations) (RG 168) and Regulatory Guide
                                   228 Prospectuses: Effective disclosure for retail investors (RG 228) when considering
                                   ways to ensure that a PDS is worded in a clear, concise and effective manner.


                             Investment overview

              RG 46.130      We consider there is a greater risk that a PDS will not be worded and
                             presented in a clear, concise and effective manner if the PDS does not
                             include an investment overview within the first few pages that highlights
                             information that is key to a retail investor’s investment decision.

              RG 46.131      An investment overview is an introduction to the responsible entity and
                             offer. It is not intended to replace the PDS and investors should read the
                             whole document. The investment overview should:
                             (a)   be the first substantive section of the PDS;
                             (b)   highlight and provide a meaningful summary of information that is key
                                   to a retail investor’s investment decision, including at least a summary
                                   of the benchmark and disclosure principle information; and
                             (c)   provide balanced disclosure of the benefits and risks.

              RG 46.132      If the key information is too lengthy to be included in full, the first few
                             pages of the PDS should provide a summary of the information with a clear
                             reference to more detailed disclosure (e.g. a table that says ‘the scheme’s
                             gearing ratio is x; see page x for an explanation of what this gearing ratio
                             means’).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 33
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Supplementary PDSs
              RG 46.133      The benchmarks and disclosure principles relate to information required in a
                             PDS under the Corporations Act. A PDS must be given to prospective investors
                             in various circumstances: s1012A–1012C. If there are material changes to the
                             benchmark or disclosure principle information, a responsible entity with a
                             current offer open will need to provide a new or supplementary PDS if the new
                             information would be materially adverse to the reasonable investor.

              RG 46.134      We consider that it is good practice to also make the information in new or
                             supplementary PDSs available to any existing investors (e.g. in a regular
                             investor update or on the website).


Updating existing investors
              RG 46.135      By no later than 1 November 2012, if an existing PDS that does not contain
                             the benchmark and disclosure principle information remains in use, we
                             expect responsible entities to:
                             (a)   update the PDS by a new or a supplementary PDS so that it includes the
                                   benchmark and disclosure principle information; or
                             (b)   disclose the benchmark and disclosure principle information using a
                                   website or other means of communication if the responsible entity is
                                   able to rely on Class Order [CO 03/237] Updated information in
                                   Product Disclosure Statements.

              RG 46.136      We consider that a responsible entity of an unlisted property scheme may be
                             able to rely on [CO 03/237] to provide updated disclosure of this information
                             on a website, subject to various conditions, including:
                             (a)   the updated information is not materially adverse;
                             (b)   the PDS includes a statement that non-materially adverse information
                                   may be updated by a website and that a paper copy of any updated
                                   information will be given to a person without charge on request;
                             (c)   the updated information is easily accessible to investors; and
                             (d)   the PDS was up-to-date at the time it was prepared.

                                   Note: See [CO 03/237] for all of the applicable conditions that must be fulfilled.

              RG 46.137      Updates for existing investors could be in a regular report (e.g. in the
                             quarterly report) or in a periodic statement under s1017D. An alternative
                             would be to put the initial update on the scheme’s website (if this is already
                             used to communicate with investors).

              RG 46.138      The updated disclosure should also advise investors how the responsible
                             entity intends to update them on the status of the benchmark and disclosure
                             principle information and material changes. This is particularly important if
                             the responsible entity intends to use a website to communicate material
                             changes to key information.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                           Page 34
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.139      Updated disclosure for benchmark and disclosure principle information
                             provided to investors should clearly specify the date it was published to help
                             investors identify when the information was prepared and whether it is
                             current or out-of-date.



Ongoing disclosure
              RG 46.140      In a PDS, a responsible entity makes a number of statements about how the
                             funds being raised by the PDS will be used, and how the responsible entity
                             will operate the unlisted property scheme. These ‘promises’ are part of the
                             basis on which the investor invests their money, and the investor should be
                             given the opportunity to monitor the responsible entity’s performance
                             against these promises.

              RG 46.141      Good ongoing disclosure therefore plays an important role in helping
                             investors monitor their investment, evaluate its performance and decide if
                             and when to exit their investment (provided exit mechanisms exist), or
                             increase their investment in the scheme.

              RG 46.142      Responsible entities have a number of obligations to make ongoing
                             disclosure to investors under the Corporations Act: see RG 46.148–RG
                             46.155. Apart from these legal requirements, we encourage responsible
                             entities to use the most efficient and effective methods to regularly
                             communicate key information to investors: see RG 46.143–RG 46.147.

                                   Note: Responsible entities should refer to Regulatory Guide 198 Unlisted disclosing
                                   entities: Continuous disclosure obligations (RG 198) when considering ways to comply
                                   with the continuous disclosure requirements of the Corporations Act.


                             Good practice for ongoing disclosure

              RG 46.143      It is good practice for a responsible entity to maintain a document that covers
                             the benchmark and disclosure principle information and to update this
                             document for material changes that the responsible entity becomes aware of
                             in the ordinary course of managing the unlisted property scheme. This
                             updating allows the responsible entity to provide consolidated updated
                             disclosure to investors on request. It is also good practice for this
                             consolidated disclosure document to be clearly accessible on the scheme’s
                             website (if used for updating investors).

              RG 46.144      Many responsible entities have a practice of updating investors on key
                             information about the scheme with a quarterly report. We consider that it is
                             good practice for responsible entities to update investors in writing on the
                             status of key information, including the benchmark and disclosure principle
                             information, at least every six months.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 35
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 46.145      Although it is not necessary to repeat information if it has not changed in these
                             updates to investors, we consider it is good practice to provide investors with:
                             (a)   an overview of any material changes to the benchmark and disclosure
                                   principle information since the last update (as far as the responsible
                                   entity is aware);
                             (b)   if there have been no material changes, confirmation that this is the case;
                             (c)   details of how to access the scheme’s consolidated disclosure document
                                   on the website (if available there); and
                             (d)   confirmation that they are entitled to a paper copy of the benchmark and
                                   disclosure principle information on request.

                                   Note: An alternative would be for responsible entities to provide investors with details
                                   of material changes to the benchmark and disclosure principle information using a
                                   procedure similar to that applying to the provision of a financial report under s314.

              RG 46.146      In addition to the regular updates discussed in RG 46.144, material changes
                             to key information, including the benchmark or disclosure principle
                             information, should be notified to investors, or be made accessible to them,
                             as soon as practicable using the most efficient and effective method of
                             communication. For example, this could be through a website used for
                             updating investors. The regular investor update would then advise investors
                             directly that the benchmark or disclosure principle information had been
                             updated for a material change: see RG 46.145.

              RG 46.147      All ongoing disclosure containing benchmark and disclosure principle
                             information should clearly specify the date it was published to help investors
                             identify when the information was prepared and whether it is current or out-
                             of-date.


                             The legal framework for ongoing disclosure

              RG 46.148      Responsible entities of unlisted property schemes have obligations to provide
                             ongoing disclosure to investors under the Corporations Act, including:
                             (a)   disclosure of material changes and significant events (s675 or 1017B);
                                   and
                             (b)   periodic statements to members under s1017D.

              RG 46.149      The responsible entity should include the benchmark and disclosure
                             principle information in ongoing disclosure and explain any material
                             changes to this information.

                                   Note: The benchmarks and disclosure principles do not attempt to specify all of the
                                   information that the Corporations Act requires for ongoing disclosure.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 36
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Continuous disclosure

              RG 46.150      If the responsible entity of a scheme that is subject to continuous disclosure
                             becomes aware of information that is not generally available and that a
                             reasonable person would expect, if it were available, to have a material
                             effect on the price or value of the interests in the scheme, the responsible
                             entity must lodge a document with ASIC containing the information: s675.

                                   Note: It is good practice for responsible entities to provide investors with access to
                                   continuous disclosure documents lodged with ASIC, either by sending investors a paper
                                   copy or posting the information on a website used for updating investors.

              RG 46.151      The benchmarks and disclosure principles reflect information that would
                             reasonably be expected to have a material effect on the price or value of
                             interests in the scheme. Therefore material changes to benchmark or
                             disclosure principle information may trigger s675, unless the information is
                             already generally available.

                             Notifications of material changes and significant events

              RG 46.152      If an unlisted property scheme is not subject to continuous disclosure
                             obligations under Ch 6CA, the responsible entity must give investors notice
                             of any material change to a matter, or a significant event that affects a
                             matter, that would have been required to be specified in a PDS: s1017B.

              RG 46.153      In our view, material changes in the benchmark and disclosure principle
                             information are matters that should be covered in notifications to investors
                             under s1017B. If such changes or events are adverse to investors,
                             notifications generally need to be provided as soon as practicable and in any
                             event within three months.

                             Periodic statements

              RG 46.154      Responsible entities of property schemes must give members a periodic
                             statement at least annually: s1017D. Periodic statements must include details of:
                             (a)   the information that the responsible entity reasonably believes the
                                   investor needs to understand their investment in the unlisted property
                                   scheme; and
                             (b)   details of any change in circumstances affecting the investment that has
                                   not been notified since the previous periodic statement.

              RG 46.155      Periodic statements are designed to give investors regular updates about their
                             investment. If a responsible entity does not otherwise report to investors in
                             regular updates, in the periodic statement it should update investors on the
                             status of the benchmark and disclosure principle information.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 37
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Omitting disclosure principle information when misleading
              RG 46.156      If applying a disclosure principle to an unlisted property scheme’s particular
                             business model or circumstances would be likely to mislead investors or is
                             clearly inappropriate, then the information should be omitted.

                                   Note: For example, if a property scheme has no interest-bearing liabilities, ratios would
                                   not need to be provided for gearing and interest cover (Disclosure Principles 1 and 2).

              RG 46.157      If key information is omitted, the responsible entity should tell investors the
                             information has been omitted and explain why it would be misleading or
                             inappropriate to include the information.

              RG 46.158      If the responsible entity is unable to apply a disclosure principle, it should
                             consider whether it can disclose other information that would allow investors
                             to assess the relevant risk factor. For example, if a property scheme is a start-
                             up and cannot disclose a gearing ratio because it has no liabilities, it should
                             consider whether investors need to know its target gearing ratio.

              RG 46.159      If a disclosure principle that did not apply to an unlisted property scheme
                             subsequently becomes relevant, then the responsible entity should disclose
                             that information to investors through ongoing disclosure.



ASIC review of PDSs and ongoing disclosure
              RG 46.160      From 1 November 2012, we will review PDSs in use and ongoing disclosures
                             for unlisted property schemes to check that the benchmark and disclosure
                             principle information is adequately disclosed.

              RG 46.161      We will consider exercising our stop order powers under s1020E if we
                             consider there is material non-disclosure or misleading disclosure of these
                             matters. The benchmarks and disclosure principles relate to matters that must
                             be disclosed under the Corporations Act. Material non-disclosure or
                             misleading disclosure may also result in liability to investors.

              RG 46.162      We will also:
                             (a)   work with responsible entities to ensure that the benchmarks and
                                   disclosure principles, and our expectations, are understood;
                             (b)   discuss any concerns we have about a responsible entity’s disclosure
                                   with them and, where necessary, require additional disclosure;
                             (c)   discuss any concerns we have about the financial position and
                                   performance of a scheme with the responsible entity; and
                             (d)   conduct surveillance visits as needed to test and reinforce our
                                   expectations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 38
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




F          Advertising

                               Key points

                               Advertising for unlisted property schemes should be consistent with all
                               corresponding disclosures in the PDS: see RG 46.163–RG 46.164.
                               If investment ratings are used in advertising for unlisted property schemes,
                               they should be properly explained and not create a misleading impression
                               about the scheme: see RG 46.166.



Consistency with PDS
              RG 46.163      Statements in advertisements for unlisted property schemes should be consistent
                             with all corresponding disclosures on that subject matter in the PDS. In
                             particular, responsible entities should take into account the benchmark and
                             disclosure principle information in the PDS.
                                   Note: References to ‘advertisements’ in this guide should be read broadly. They include
                                   comment and promotion of unlisted property schemes in media programs or
                                   publications (generally known as ‘advertorials’) and statements about these schemes
                                   published by responsible entities on their websites that are intended to promote the
                                   schemes to retail investors. They do not, however, include statements in a PDS.

              RG 46.164      When considering consistency with the PDS, responsible entities should be
                             aware that an advertisement may be misleading if it quotes a statement from
                             the PDS out of context. Responsible entities of unlisted property schemes
                             who fail to ensure that advertisements are consistent with PDS disclosures
                             risk making false or misleading statements or engaging in misleading or
                             deceptive conduct in contravention of the Corporations Act or the Australian
                             Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act).
                                   Note: Responsible entities should also refer to Regulatory Guide 234 Advertising financial
                                   products and advice services: Good practice guide (RG 234) when considering advertising.



Use of investment ratings
              RG 46.165      If an investment rating is used in an unlisted property scheme advertisement,
                             it should be properly explained. This explanation should include the meaning
                             of the rating and where an investor can obtain further information about the
                             rating. The advertisement should also state that investment ratings are only
                             one factor to be taken into account when deciding whether to invest.

              RG 46.166      Responsible entities should ensure that:
                             (a)   the impression the investment rating creates about the unlisted property
                                   scheme being advertised is not misleading; and
                             (b)   investment ratings used in advertisements are only quoted from research
                                   houses that hold an AFS licence.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 39
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




G          Compliance plans

                               Key points

                               Compliance plans must set out measures for the responsible entity to
                               comply with the Corporations Act and scheme constitution. We expect
                               compliance plans for unlisted property schemes to set out adequate
                               measures to ensure compliance with the law relating to disclosure and
                               advertising: see RG 46.167–RG 46.171.
                               We expect compliance committees and compliance plan auditors to be
                               aware of the benchmarks and disclosure principles and advertising
                               obligations discussed in this guide, and to have regard to them in carrying
                               out their duties: see RG 46.172–RG 46.178.
                               Responsible entities, compliance committees and compliance plan auditors
                               should consider the benchmarks, disclosure principles and advertising
                               obligations when assessing whether a compliance plan is adequate.



The compliance plan
              RG 46.167      Compliance plans play a key role in protecting investors and promoting their
                             interests. The law requires an unlisted property scheme to have a compliance
                             plan: s601EA. The compliance plan must set out adequate measures for the
                             responsible entity to ensure compliance with the Corporations Act and the
                             scheme’s constitution: s601HA. The responsible entity has a duty to comply
                             with the compliance plan: s601FC(1)(h).

              RG 46.168      Compliance plans should contain adequate procedures to ensure that a
                             responsible entity discloses against the benchmarks and applies the
                             disclosure principles in its up-front and ongoing disclosure to retail
                             investors. Compliance plans should also contain adequate procedures to
                             ensure that responsible entities comply with their advertising obligations.

              RG 46.169      We do not expect that responsible entities will necessarily need to change
                             their compliance plans to deal expressly with the benchmarks, disclosure
                             principles and advertising obligations discussed in this guide. Good
                             compliance plans should already contain procedures that ensure that
                             responsible entities comply with all of their disclosure and advertising
                             obligations under the Corporations Act.

              RG 46.170      However, we expect responsible entities to critically examine existing
                             compliance plans and consider whether they are adequate to ensure
                             compliance with the obligations discussed in this guide.

              RG 46.171      Regardless of whether a scheme has a compliance committee, responsible
                             entities have a duty to ensure that compliance plans establish adequate
                             measures to ensure compliance (including with disclosure and advertising
                             obligations): s601FC(1)(g).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 40
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Compliance committees
              RG 46.172      Many unlisted property schemes have a compliance committee. A scheme is
                             required to have a compliance committee unless at least half of the
                             responsible entity’s directors are external directors: s601JA. If the scheme
                             does not have a compliance committee, the responsible entity’s directors
                             should be particularly vigilant about ensuring the responsible entity complies
                             with the compliance plan and that the compliance plan is adequate.

              RG 46.173      The functions of a compliance committee are to:
                             (a)   monitor the extent to which a responsible entity complies with the
                                   compliance plan and report its findings to the responsible entity;
                             (b)   report any breach of the law or the scheme’s constitution to the
                                   responsible entity;
                             (c)   report to ASIC if the compliance committee considers that the
                                   responsible entity is not taking adequate action to deal with a matter
                                   reported under RG 46.173(b); and
                             (d)   assess at regular intervals whether the compliance plan is adequate, to
                                   report to the responsible entity on the assessment and to make
                                   recommendations to the responsible entity about any changes that it
                                   considers should be made to the plan: s601JC(1).

              RG 46.174      We expect compliance committees for unlisted property schemes to be
                             aware of the benchmarks, disclosure principles and advertising obligations
                             discussed in this guide. Compliance committees need to regularly assess
                             whether the compliance plan contains adequate measures to ensure
                             compliance by responsible entities with:
                             (a)   their up-front and ongoing disclosure obligations to retail investors,
                                   including in relation to the benchmarks and disclosure principles, as
                                   discussed in Sections C, D and E; and
                             (b)   their obligation to ensure that any advertising for the scheme is not
                                   misleading or deceptive, as discussed in Section F.

              RG 46.175      If a compliance committee forms the view that a compliance plan is not
                             adequate, it needs to report this to the responsible entity, together with
                             recommendations about changes that should be made to the plan.

              RG 46.176      A compliance committee should also monitor compliance by the responsible
                             entity with the compliance plan. If a compliance committee identifies non-
                             compliance or a possible breach of the Corporations Act (including a breach
                             relating to the responsible entity’s disclosure or advertising obligations), the
                             compliance committee will need to make a report to the responsible entity
                             and, if necessary, report the matter to us.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 41
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Compliance plan auditors
              RG 46.177      Compliance plans are subject to an annual audit. The auditor of a compliance
                             plan must give the responsible entity a report that states the auditor’s opinion
                             on whether:
                             (a)   the responsible entity has complied with the compliance plan; and
                             (b)   the plan continues to meet the requirements of the Corporations Act.

              RG 46.178      We expect compliance plan auditors of unlisted property schemes to be
                             aware of the benchmarks, disclosure principles and advertising obligations in
                             this guide. In determining whether a plan continues to meet the requirements
                             of the Corporations Act, compliance plan auditors should consider whether
                             the compliance plan is adequate to ensure that the responsible entity
                             discloses against the benchmarks and applies the disclosure principles in its
                             PDSs and ongoing disclosures to retail investors, and meets its obligations to
                             avoid any misleading advertising.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 42
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Key terms


                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               advertisement              Includes comment and promotion of unlisted property
                                                          schemes in media programs or publications (generally
                                                          known as ‘advertorials’) and statements about a scheme
                                                          published by a responsible entity on its website that is
                                                          intended to promote the scheme to retail investors (but
                                                          does not include statements in a PDS)

                               AFS licence                An Australian financial services licence under s913B of the
                                                          Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries out a
                                                          financial services business to provide financial services
                                                                Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                                Corporations Act.

                               ASIC                       Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                   Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                          2001

                               ‘as if complete’           An estimate of the market value of a property, assuming
                               valuation                  certain specified improvements are made

                               ‘as is’ valuation          An estimate of the market value of a property in its current
                                                          state (i.e. without any further improvements)

                               Ch 2M (for example)        A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                          numbered 2M)

                               closed-end scheme          A scheme which issues all the interests it will issue at the
                                                          outset. These interests may be able to be transferred
                                                          between investors thereafter

                               [CO 03/237] (for           An ASIC class order (in this example, numbered 03/237)
                               example)

                               Corporations Act           Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                               CP 100 (for example)       An ASIC consultation paper (in this example, numbered
                                                          100)

                               disclosure principle       Information covered by the disclosure principles in
                               information                Section D of this guide

                               existing scheme            An unlisted property scheme that investors have invested
                                                          in before 1 November 2012

                               open-end scheme            A scheme which can issue and redeem units at any time.
                                                          An investor will generally purchase units in the scheme
                                                          directly from the scheme itself rather than from the existing
                                                          investors




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                          Page 43
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               Product Disclosure         A document that must be given to a retail client in relation
                               Statement (PDS)            to the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance
                                                          with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                                Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                               related party              Has the meaning given in s228, or as modified by Pt 5C.7
                                                          for registered schemes, as the case may be

                               RG 76 (for example)        An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example, numbered 76)

                               s710 (for example)         A section of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                          numbered 710)


                               unlisted property          An unlisted managed investment scheme that has or is
                               scheme                     likely to have at least 50% of its non-cash assets invested
                                                          in real property and/or in unlisted property schemes
                                                                Note: For the purposes of this definition, ‘real property’ does
                                                                not include infrastructure assets.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                         Page 44
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 46: Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             advertising, benchmark disclosure, compliance committees, compliance
                             plans, compliance plan auditors, deceptive, disclosure, disclosure principles,
                             listed, misleading, PDS, Product Disclosure Statement, property schemes,
                             responsible entities, retail investors, valuers, unlisted


                             Class order

                             [CO 03/237] Updated information in Product Disclosure Statements


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 76 Related party transactions

                             RG 120 Commentary on compliance plans: Property schemes

                             RG 132 Managed investments: Compliance plans

                             RG 168 Disclosure: Product Disclosure Statements (and other disclosure
                             obligations)

                             RG 170 Prospective financial information

                             RG 198 Unlisted disclosing entities: Continuous disclosure obligations

                             RG 228 Prospectuses: Effective disclosure for retail investors

                             RG 231 Infrastructure entities: Improving disclosure to retail investors

                             RG 234 Advertising financial products and services: Good practice
                             guidance


                             Legislation

                             ASIC Act

                             Corporations Act, Chs 2M and 6CA, Pts 5C.6, 5C.7, 7.9 and 7.10, s228, 314,
                             601EA, 601FC(1)(g), 601FC(1)(h), 601HA, 601JA, 601JC(1), 675, 769C,
                             912A(1)(aa), 1012A–1012C, 1013D–1013F, 1017B, 1017D and 1020E


                             Consultation papers and reports

                             CP 163 Unlisted property schemes: Update to RG 46

                             REP 280 Response to submissions on CP 163 Unlisted property schemes:
                             Update to RG 46



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2012                                                       Page 45
