REGULATORY GUIDE 45

Mortgage schemes:
Improving disclosure for
retail investors

May 2012




About this guide
This is a guide for responsible entities, compliance committees, compliance
plan auditors, valuers, publishers and others involved with the issue or
advertising of interests in mortgage schemes.

It sets out ASIC’s benchmarks and disclosure principles for improved
disclosure to retail investors to help them understand and assess unlisted
mortgage schemes, while maintaining the flexibility of the public fundraising
process.

It also sets out the standards we expect responsible entities and publishers
to meet when advertising unlisted and listed mortgage schemes that are
offered to retail investors.
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                               About ASIC regulatory documents

                               In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                               documents.
                               Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                               is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                               Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                   explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                    legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                   explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                   describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                   giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                    as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                    regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                               Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                               compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                               Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                               research project.


                             Document history
                             This version was issued in May 2012 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous version:

                                  Superseded Regulatory Guide 45, issued 2 September 2008


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                   Page 2
                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Improved disclosure for unlisted mortgage schemes ..............................4
                                    Who this guide applies to .........................................................................5
                                    Benchmarks and disclosure principles for unlisted mortgage
                                    schemes...................................................................................................6
                                    Advertising standards for all mortgage schemes.....................................8
                             B      The unlisted mortgage scheme sector ..............................................10
                                    Business models of mortgage schemes ................................................10
                                    Risks to investors ...................................................................................11
                             C      Benchmarks for unlisted mortgage schemes...................................14
                                    Benchmark 1: Liquidity ..........................................................................14
                                    Benchmark 2: Scheme borrowing .........................................................16
                                    Benchmark 3: Loan portfolio and diversification ....................................16
                                    Benchmark 4: Related party transactions ..............................................17
                                    Benchmark 5: Valuation policy ..............................................................17
                                    Benchmark 6: Lending principles—Loan-to-valuation ratios .................18
                                    Benchmark 7: Distribution practices ......................................................19
                                    Benchmark 8: Withdrawal arrangements ..............................................20
                             D      Disclosure principles for unlisted mortgage schemes ....................22
                                    Disclosure Principle 1: Liquidity .............................................................22
                                    Disclosure Principle 2: Scheme borrowing ............................................23
                                    Disclosure Principle 3: Loan portfolio and diversification ......................24
                                    Disclosure Principle 4: Related party transactions ................................26
                                    Disclosure Principle 5: Valuation policy .................................................27
                                    Disclosure Principle 6: Lending principles—Loan-to-valuation ratios ...27
                                    Disclosure Principle 7: Distribution practices .........................................28
                                    Disclosure Principle 8: Withdrawal arrangements .................................30
                             E      Form and method of disclosure .........................................................33
                                    Method of disclosure ..............................................................................33
                                    Timing for implementing improved disclosure .......................................37
                                    ASIC review of PDSs and ongoing disclosure.......................................38
                             F      Advertising standards for all mortgage schemes ............................40
                                    Standards for advertisements ................................................................40
                                    How ASIC deals with contraventions .....................................................44
                                    The role of publishers and the media ....................................................45
                             G      Compliance plans ................................................................................47
                                    The compliance plan ..............................................................................47
                                    Compliance committees ........................................................................48
                                    Compliance plan auditors ......................................................................49
                             Appendix: Example of disclosure against the benchmarks ...................50
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................53
                             Related information .....................................................................................56




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                                           Page 3
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               ASIC has developed eight benchmarks and eight disclosure principles for
                               unlisted mortgage schemes that can help retail investors understand the
                               risks, assess the rewards being offered and decide whether these
                               investments are suitable for them.

                               Responsible entities of unlisted mortgage schemes in which retail investors
                               invest should:
                                   disclose against the benchmarks on an ‘if not, why not’ basis (see
                                   Section C); and
                                   address the disclosure principles (see Section D).

                               We have also set standards for advertising of all mortgage schemes
                               (whether listed or unlisted) to retail investors: see Section F.

                               Those involved with mortgage schemes (e.g. compliance committees,
                               compliance plan auditors and valuers) should consider these disclosure
                               and advertising obligations when carrying out their responsibilities: see
                               Section G.




Improved disclosure for unlisted mortgage schemes
              RG 45.1        Since mid-2007, Australia has experienced debt market turbulence
                             flowing from the US sub-prime crisis, together with successive
                             interest rate increases and a cyclical softening in property markets.
                             Some mortgage schemes have experienced financial stress under these
                             economic conditions, evidenced by a decrease in fund inflows and
                             extensions of withdrawal periods or suspensions of withdrawals.

              RG 45.2        In this context, we consider that the requirement to provide retail
                             investors in unlisted mortgage schemes with the information they need
                             to make an informed investment decision requires, at a minimum,
                             disclosure against the benchmarks and the provision of the
                             information in the disclosure principles.

              RG 45.3        We have developed eight benchmarks and eight disclosure principles
                             that apply to all unlisted mortgage schemes in which retail investors
                             invest: see Table 1. We expect unlisted mortgage schemes to:
                             (a)   disclose whether the benchmarks (as applicable) are met and, if
                                   not met, provide an explanation on an ‘if not, why not’ basis (see
                                   Section C and RG 45.15–RG 45.17);
                             (b)   address the disclosure principles (see Section D and RG 45.18–
                                   RG 45.19); and


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                   Page 4
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (c)   ensure that any advertising supports the benchmarks and
                                   disclosure principles in the Product Disclosure Statement (PDS)
                                   (see Section F).

              RG 45.4        Failing to meet one or more of the benchmarks does not mean that a
                             particular mortgage scheme is necessarily a poor investment.
                             However, additional disclosure to investors will be needed to address
                             that benchmark on an ‘if not, why not’ basis so that investors can
                             assess the impact of failure to meet that benchmark on their
                             investment decision.

              RG 45.5        Disclosure is not designed to stop retail investors from taking
                             investment risks, but to help them understand the risks involved in any
                             particular investment or type of investment. This enables them to
                             make an informed decision about whether the potential reward (the
                             return on their investment) is balanced against the level of risk
                             involved, and whether they are prepared to take on that risk.

              RG 45.6        We believe that our approach balances:
                             (a)   the need to improve disclosure to allow investors to make better
                                   informed decisions; and
                             (b)   the desirability of not unduly interfering with this market as a
                                   market for raising capital.
                                   Note: The need to strike an appropriate balance between protecting investors’ interests
                                   and allowing markets to operate freely is part of ASIC’s mandate under the Australian
                                   Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act).

              RG 45.7        This approach should also lead to more comparable disclosure for
                             unlisted mortgage schemes, helping investors to compare investments
                             in this sector.



Who this guide applies to
              RG 45.8        For the purposes of this guide, a ‘mortgage scheme’ is a managed
                             investment scheme that has, or that is likely to have, at least 50% of its
                             non-cash assets invested in mortgage loans and/or unlisted mortgage
                             schemes. Mortgage loans are loans secured by a mortgage over real
                             property (including residential, commercial, industrial or retail
                             property, or vacant land).

              RG 45.9        We expect responsible entities of unlisted registered mortgage
                             schemes in which retail investors invest directly or indirectly (e.g.
                             through an investor directed portfolio service) to disclose against the
                             benchmarks and address the disclosure principles as discussed in
                             Sections C and D.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                         Page 5
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                RG 45.10     We also expect responsible entities of both listed and unlisted
                             registered mortgage schemes to follow the advertising standards in
                             Section F.

                RG 45.11     We expect other parties involved with issues of interests in unlisted
                             registered mortgage schemes or advertisements for registered
                             mortgage schemes generally to support the principles in this guide.
                             This includes compliance committees, compliance plan auditors,
                             valuers, publishers and media. For example, we expect compliance
                             plans for mortgage schemes to set out adequate measures to ensure
                             compliance with the disclosure and advertising standards in this guide:
                             see Section G.

                RG 45.12     We expect that a feeder fund would take into account information
                             about the underlying fund(s) it plans to invest in when making a
                             decision to invest in the fund(s). We consider it is important that
                             feeder funds provide disclosure for the fund because the risks
                             associated with investing in the feeder fund may differ from the
                             underlying fund(s).

                RG 45.13     Accordingly, the feeder fund should have information about the
                             underlying fund(s) in which it has a material investment (or make
                             reasonable endeavours to procure the information) and that is pertinent
                             to the benchmarks and disclosure principles. If the information is not
                             available, the responsible entity of the feeder fund should disclose this
                             and explain why. We recognise that disclosure relating to loan portfolio
                             and diversification, and valuation policies, may not be appropriate at the
                             feeder fund level, in which case the feeder fund should provide
                             disclosure on a ‘look through’ basis.



Benchmarks and disclosure principles for unlisted mortgage
schemes
                RG 45.14     Table 1 provides a summary of the eight benchmarks and eight
                             disclosure principles that apply to all unlisted mortgage schemes in
                             which retail investors invest.

Table 1:    Benchmarks and disclosure principles for unlisted mortgage schemes in which
            retail investors invest

 1. Liquidity                             Benchmark 1 and Disclosure Principle 1 apply only to pooled mortgage
                                          schemes and address the scheme’s ability to satisfy its expenses,
                                          liabilities and other cash flow needs, including the preparation of
                                          12-month cash flow estimates that are approved by the directors.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                   Page 6
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




 2. Scheme borrowing                      Benchmark 2 and Disclosure Principle 2 address the scheme’s policy
                                          on borrowing, including the scheme’s actual and intended borrowing, as
                                          well as the scheme’s policy on borrowing.

 3. Loan portfolio and                    Benchmark 3 and Disclosure Principle 3 apply only to pooled mortgage
 diversification                          schemes and address the scheme’s lending practices and portfolio risk,
                                          including concentration risk.

 4. Related party transactions            Benchmark 4 and Disclosure Principle 4 address the risks associated
                                          with related party lending, investments and transactions, including
                                          details of any related party transactions.

 5. Valuation policy                      Benchmark 5 and Disclosure Principle 5 address the scheme’s valuation
                                          practices, including when an independent valuation is required.

 6. Lending principles—                   Benchmark 6 and Disclosure Principle 6 address the scheme’s lending
 Loan-to-valuation ratios                 practices, including the loan-to-valuation ratios.

 7. Distribution practices                Benchmark 7 and Disclosure Principle 7 address the transparency of the
                                          scheme’s distribution practices, including whether current distributions are
                                          paid from scheme borrowings, and disclosure of the source of distributions.

 8. Withdrawal arrangements               Benchmark 8 and Disclosure Principle 8 address the transparency of
                                          the responsible entity’s approach to withdrawals of investments when
                                          the scheme is liquid and when the scheme is non-liquid.



                             Disclosure against the benchmarks: ‘If not, why not’

              RG 45.15       Responsible entities of unlisted mortgage schemes in which retail
                             investors invest should disclose against the benchmarks in Section C
                             on an ‘if not, why not’ basis. This means providing a clear statement
                             that the scheme either:
                             (a)   meets the benchmark; or
                             (b)   does not meet the benchmark and providing an explanation of
                                   how and why the responsible entity deals with the business
                                   factors or issues underlying the benchmark in another way.

              RG 45.16       ‘Why not’ means explaining how a responsible entity deals with the
                             business factor or issue underlying the benchmark, including the
                             alternative systems and controls the responsible entity has in place to
                             deal with the issue underlying the benchmark.

              RG 45.17       If a benchmark contains multiple requirements, all elements of the
                             benchmark and the required disclosure should be addressed (i.e. it is
                             not usually sufficient to explain in general terms why a benchmark has
                             not been met or to address only some aspects of a benchmark).
                             Additionally, disclosure should be made on the basis that a benchmark
                             is either ‘met’ or ‘not met’. If the benchmark is not fully met, the
                             benchmark is regarded as ‘not met’ (rather than partially met) and
                             there should be an explanation as to why it is not met.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                     Page 7
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Disclosure principles

              RG 45.18       The purpose of the disclosure principles is to improve the consistency
                             and quality of disclosure by responsible entities of unlisted mortgage
                             schemes and to enhance investor confidence. The disclosure principles
                             are explained further in Section D.

              RG 45.19       The disclosure principles apply to information that retail investors
                             reasonably need to know to make an informed investment decision
                             and monitor whether their expectations are being met.

                             Transitional arrangements

              RG 45.20       Until 1 January 2013, responsible entities should—at a minimum—
                             continue to disclose against the benchmarks that were in place under
                             superseded RG 45 issued in September 2008 to any PDS or ongoing
                             disclosure provided to investors in unlisted mortgage schemes.
                                   Note: We encourage responsible entities to disclose against the benchmarks and apply
                                   the disclosure principles to new PDSs and ongoing disclosure before 1 January 2013
                                   if possible.



Advertising standards for all mortgage schemes
              RG 45.21       Experience indicates that retail investors who are thinking about
                             investing place particular emphasis on the information and
                             impressions given in advertisements. Some of the advertisements we
                             have observed for mortgage schemes have not given a realistic
                             impression of the scheme, its features and risks.
                                   Note: References to ‘advertisements’ in this guide should be read broadly. They include
                                   comment and promotion of mortgage schemes in media programs or publications
                                   (generally known as ‘advertorials’) and statements about mortgage schemes published
                                   by responsible entities on their websites that are intended to promote the scheme to
                                   retail investors. They do not, however, include statements in the PDS.

              RG 45.22       To promote investor understanding of mortgage schemes and
                             minimise the risk of mis-selling, we have set standards for responsible
                             entities when advertising their mortgage schemes: see Table 2 and
                             Section F. These standards apply to all mortgage schemes (whether
                             listed or unlisted) that are offered to retail investors.

              RG 45.23       While the primary responsibility for advertising material rests with the
                             organisation placing the advertisement, under general law the
                             publisher or other media conduit may also have some responsibility
                             for its content. Therefore, we expect publishers and the media to
                             support these standards when accepting advertisements for mortgage
                             schemes.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                        Page 8
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 45.24       The standards we have set for responsible entities when advertising
                             mortgage schemes seek to reduce the risk that advertisements will
                             give retail investors messages about mortgage schemes that are
                             inconsistent with disclosure in a complying PDS.

Table 2:    Advertising standards for mortgage schemes (whether listed or unlisted) offered to
            retail investors

 Area                        Summary of standard

 Repayment of principal      To avoid common misconceptions about the risk profile of mortgage schemes,
 investment                  advertisements should include a prominent statement to the effect that investors risk
                             losing some or all of their money.

 Returns on investment       Advertisements should only quote returns if the return is accompanied by prominent
 and investment ratings      disclosure that there is a risk that the investment may achieve lower than expected returns.

                             Advertisements should only quote investment ratings if the rating is properly explained
                             and does not create a misleading impression about the scheme. The advertisement
                             should state that investment ratings are only one factor that investors should consider
                             when deciding whether to invest.

 Comparisons with bank       Advertisements should state that a mortgage scheme is not a bank deposit. They
 deposits and ‘risk-free’    should not suggest that:
 suggestions                  a mortgage scheme is, or compares favourably to, a bank deposit; or
                              there is little or no risk of the investor losing their principal or not being repaid.

 Withdrawal periods,         Advertisements that refer to withdrawal periods, withdrawal rights or investment periods
 withdrawal rights and       should include details of any restrictions on withdrawals that might apply.
 investment periods

 Fees                        Advertisements that state the amount of a fee (or that a type of fee is not payable)
                             should include details of any circumstances in which a higher fee applies (or in which
                             the fee is payable).

 Suitability statements      Advertisements should not state or imply that the scheme is suitable for a particular
                             class of investor.

 Consistency with PDS        Statements in advertisements should be consistent with the corresponding disclosures
 disclosure                  on that subject matter in the PDS.

 Telephone inquiries         Statements made in response to inquiries are subject to the same regulation about
                             misleading and deceptive conduct as the advertisements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                         Page 9
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




B          The unlisted mortgage scheme sector

                               Key points

                               Some features of unlisted mortgage schemes can create risks for investors.

                               Clear benchmarks and disclosure principles can help investors to make
                               informed decisions about these products.




Business models of mortgage schemes
              RG 45.25       A mortgage scheme operates on the basis that:
                             (a)   the scheme raises funds by issuing interests to investors. These
                                   funds are either pooled and lent by the scheme to various
                                   borrowers (pooled schemes) or lent in relation to a specific
                                   property (contributory schemes). In both pooled and contributory
                                   schemes, loans are secured by mortgages over real property and
                                   security may be a first or subsequent mortgage. For pooled
                                   schemes, investors do not have an interest in a particular mortgage
                                   loan, but have an interest in scheme property as a whole;
                             (b)   the return to investors is generally generated by interest payments
                                   made by the borrowers to the scheme;
                             (c)   investments are either for a fixed term or can be withdrawn
                                   following a withdrawal request; and
                             (d)   the value of an investor’s investment may be subject to change
                                   depending on the asset position of the scheme.

              RG 45.26       Some mortgage schemes may lend funds for construction or property
                             development. For these schemes, the skills and experience of the
                             responsible entity in assessing these activities and selecting
                             appropriate loans are particularly important to the performance of the
                             scheme.

              RG 45.27       Some mortgage schemes promote that they can provide investors with a
                             level of capital security by committing to pay investors back their
                             initial investment at the end of their investment term. Other schemes
                             promote fixed rates of return.

              RG 45.28       Some mortgage schemes may lend funds to borrowers and ‘capitalise’
                             the expected interest payments. This means that the scheme may not
                             be receiving actual cash payments from the borrower over the course
                             of the loan and instead receive the capital and accumulated interest
                             payments at the end of the loan term.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 10
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 45.29       Many mortgage schemes promote that withdrawal requests will
                             generally be satisfied within a relatively short period.



Risks to investors
              RG 45.30       Past experience and our analysis of the mortgage scheme market
                             suggest that features of the operations of some mortgage schemes can
                             hold particular risks for investors.

              RG 45.31       The key features and risks are identified in Table 3. These features are
                             not present in every unlisted mortgage scheme that is offered to retail
                             investors. The investment risks described will vary from scheme to
                             scheme and from business model to business model. However,
                             disclosure about these features and risks, including to what extent they
                             are present in a given offering, is relevant for a broad range of
                             schemes.

              RG 45.32       The benchmarks in Section C and the disclosure principles in Section
                             D address these features and risks to help investors make informed
                             decisions about whether an unlisted mortgage scheme is a suitable
                             investment for them.

              RG 45.33       We have excluded listed mortgage schemes for the purposes of the
                             benchmarks and disclosure principles because:
                             (a)   being listed means that there is a secondary market on which an
                                   investor can sell their investment;
                             (b)   the market supervisor will assess and, if appropriate, admit the
                                   interests in the scheme to trading; and
                             (c)   the market supervisor will supervise the scheme’s ongoing
                                   compliance with any listing rules in particular, a continuous
                                   disclosure regime.
                                   Note: The advertising standards in Section F apply to all mortgage schemes, whether
                                   listed or unlisted.

Table 3:     Risk features of unlisted mortgage schemes

 Risk feature        Description                         What this means

 Liquidity           The liquidity of the scheme is      Liquidity may be at risk because of a mismatch between when
                     key to its ability to meet its      the responsible entity represents that it can meet withdrawal
                     representations about whether       requests and cash flows from the underlying businesses or
                     investors can withdraw from         assets to which funds have been lent.
                     the scheme and whether it can       Liquidity is frequently heavily dependent on continuing inflows
                     meet its other ongoing              from new investors, borrowings or ‘rollovers’ by existing
                     commitments.                        investors because the underlying assets of the scheme may
                                                         not be easily realised within a short period of time.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                      Page 11
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




 Risk feature        Description                         What this means

 Scheme              Some schemes borrow against         If a scheme borrows against the assets of the scheme,
 borrowing           the assets of the scheme to         investors’ interests in the scheme’s assets will generally rank
                     fund distributions, redemption      behind the lender.
                     requests or scheme operations       Investors in schemes with high borrowings face the risk that
                     generally.                          distributions will not be made or withdrawals will be suspended
                                                         so that loan payments can be met.
                                                         Investors also face the risk that they may lose part or all of
                                                         their investment if the scheme defaults on these loans.

 Portfolio           The criteria that responsible       Lack of diversification in the scheme’s loan book may mean
 diversification     entities use to decide what         that an adverse event affecting one borrower or one type of
                     loans to make are variable and      loan will simultaneously affect the majority of borrowers, and
                     prone to risk, especially where:    therefore put the overall portfolio at greater risk.
                      loan-to-valuation ratios are
                       often much higher than for
                       traditional lending; and
                      the loans made may be
                       highly concentrated to
                       particular types of
                       commercial activities,
                       locations or borrowers.

 Related party       Some schemes lend to, invest        There is an increased risk that these transactions are less
 transactions        scheme funds in, and transact       likely to be made on arm’s length commercial terms and that
                     with, associated companies or       the responsible entity will not monitor them as robustly as
                     businesses.                         those involving unrelated parties.

 Inconsistency       The valuations that schemes         If valuations are not prepared properly or by appropriately
 in valuations       rely on are carried out on a        qualified and experienced valuers, it is difficult to assess the
                     variety of bases, with differing    risk exposure associated with a loan. It is also difficult to
                     assumptions and instructions.       monitor loan-to-valuation ratios on a continuing basis.

                     These valuations are
                     fundamental to determining how
                     much the scheme may lend.

 Lending             Some schemes may take a             Schemes that lend at a higher loan-to-valuation ratio are more
 principles          more conservative approach          vulnerable to the risk of an adverse change in market
                     than others when determining        conditions where the security obtained from borrowers
                     how much to lend to a borrower      becomes insufficient to cover the loan.
                     relative to the value of the
                     underlying security property.

 Distribution        Some schemes fund                   Where distributions are not sourced solely from scheme
 practices           distributions out of sources        income, there is a risk that these distribution practices may not
                     other than income, such as          be sustainable over the long term. This risk may be heightened
                     borrowings.                         where a scheme promotes a fixed return on investments.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                     Page 12
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




 Risk feature        Description                         What this means

 Withdrawal          Some schemes promote a              This practice creates the risk that investors do not fully
 arrangements        short withdrawal period to          appreciate that their right of withdrawal may be refused until a
                     attract investors, although the     longer period of time has elapsed than the one represented.
                     maximum period allowed in
                     the scheme’s constitution is
                     much longer.

 Misleading          Advertising used to promote         Even if the PDS highlights risk in an appropriate way,
 advertising         some schemes helps create           advertising that conveys messages not in line with the
                     unrealistic expectations about      regulated disclosure document can undermine the effect of
                     investors’ ability to withdraw      that disclosure.
                     their investment and the
                     scheme’s relative safety.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                   Page 13
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




C          Benchmarks for unlisted mortgage schemes

                               Key points

                               All responsible entities of unlisted mortgage schemes should address
                               general benchmarks on:
                                   liquidity—pooled mortgage schemes only (see RG 45.34–RG 45.41);
                                   scheme borrowing (see RG 45.42–RG 45.43);
                                   loan portfolio and diversification—pooled mortgage schemes only (see
                                   RG 45.44–RG 45.46);
                                   related party transactions (see RG 45.47–RG 45.49);
                                   valuation policy (see RG 45.50–RG 45.55);
                                   lending principles—loan-to-valuation ratios (see RG 45.56–RG 45.60);
                                   distribution practices (see RG 45.61–RG 45.63); and
                                   withdrawal arrangements (see RG 45.64–RG 45.71).

                               This information should be disclosed clearly and prominently in the
                               responsible entity’s PDS and ongoing disclosure: see Section E.



Benchmark 1: Liquidity
              RG 45.34       For a pooled mortgage scheme, the responsible entity has cash flow
                             estimates for the scheme that:
                             (a)   demonstrate the scheme’s capacity to meet its expenses, liabilities
                                   and other cash flow needs for the next 12 months;
                             (b)   are updated at least every three months and reflect any material
                                   changes; and
                             (c)   are approved by the directors of the responsible entity at least every
                                   three months.
                                   Note 1: The cash flow estimates should be prepared on the basis of an estimate of zero
                                   inflows from new subscriptions for the relevant period. Withdrawals should be
                                   determined with reference to the period within which investors would reasonably expect
                                   withdrawal requests to be processed, rather than the maximum period within which the
                                   responsible entity is able to process withdrawal requests.

                                   Note 2: ‘Cash’ and ‘cash equivalents’ have the same meaning as in Australian
                                   Accounting Standard AASB 107 Statement of cash flows (AASB 107). Paragraph 6 of
                                   AASB 107 defines ‘cash’ as ‘cash on hand and demand deposits’ and ‘cash equivalents’
                                   as short-term, highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts
                                   of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value. However, for
                                   the purposes of the benchmark, a responsible entity cannot take into account undrawn
                                   amounts under bank overdraft or lending facilities.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                        Page 14
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Explanation
              RG 45.35       For the purposes of this benchmark, ‘liquidity’ is the proportion of
                             cash or cash equivalents in a scheme’s assets. It is a powerful
                             indicator of the ability of the scheme to meet its short-term
                             commitments. For unlisted mortgage schemes, we are particularly
                             concerned with relative liquidity (i.e. short-term assets relative to
                             short-term liabilities).
                                   Note: ‘Liquidity’ for the purposes of this benchmark is not the same as ‘liquidity’ for
                                   the purposes of Pt 5C.6 (which relates to satisfying a statutory test). It is important that
                                   any disclosure to investors does not confuse these two concepts.

              RG 45.36       The global financial crisis has highlighted the significant challenges
                             that can be faced by mortgage schemes in managing their liquidity.
                             Liquidity management is important so that schemes can meet:
                             (a)   investor expectations about the payment of distributions;
                             (b)   loan commitments drawn in stages by borrowers;
                             (c)   changes in the scheme’s operational needs;
                             (d)   unexpected expenses of the scheme; and
                             (e)   interest on scheme borrowing.
              RG 45.37       A cash flow estimate is a key tool to measure the ability of a
                             responsible entity of a scheme to meet its short-term commitments.
                             For unlisted mortgage schemes, we are particularly concerned with the
                             alignment of investor expectations about liquidity and the capacity of
                             the scheme’s assets to be realised to meet those expectations.
              RG 45.38       We expect responsible entities to take into account their historical
                             experience on inflows and outflows in estimating their cash flows and
                             to disclose material assumptions underlying their cash flows (e.g.
                             historical inflow and outflow rate) when disclosing against this
                             benchmark.
              RG 45.39       The cash flow estimates are not required to be disclosed to investors,
                             but we envisage that responsible entities would need to review their
                             estimated cash flows on an ongoing basis, update the estimates and
                             reflect any material changes at least every three months to determine
                             whether they continue to satisfy this benchmark.
              RG 45.40       We expect responsible entities to periodically ‘stress test’ their
                             liquidity assumptions. For example, we expect responsible entities to
                             consider:
                             (a) their current PDS and the possibility of an ASIC stop order
                                  disrupting their cash flows; and
                             (b)   the possibility of a significant increase in the rate of investor
                                   withdrawal requests.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                             Page 15
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 45.41       We expect responsible entities to take into account the results of this
                             stress testing in their liquidity planning. In some cases, this may mean
                             they need to increase their cash position: see RG 45.34.


Benchmark 2: Scheme borrowing
              RG 45.42       The responsible entity does not have current borrowings and does not
                             intend to borrow on behalf of the scheme.

                             Explanation

              RG 45.43       Some schemes borrow to finance distributions or the operation of the
                             scheme. It is preferable that borrowings are not used as a source to
                             fund distributions and to satisfy withdrawal requests. It is important
                             that investors are made aware if this is the case and are provided with
                             details of the borrowings and credit facilities entered into by the
                             scheme. Borrowings that are due to mature within a relatively short
                             timeframe can be a significant risk factor, especially in periods where
                             credit is more difficult and expensive to obtain. It is important that
                             investors understand that they will rank behind creditors of a scheme.


Benchmark 3: Loan portfolio and diversification
              RG 45.44       For a pooled mortgage scheme:
                             (a)   the scheme holds a portfolio of assets diversified by size,
                                   borrower, class of borrower activity and geographic region;
                             (b)   the scheme has no single asset in the scheme portfolio that
                                   exceeds 5% of the total scheme assets;
                             (c)   the scheme has no single borrower who exceeds 5% of the
                                   scheme assets; and
                             (d)   all loans made by the scheme are secured by first mortgages over
                                   real property (including registered leasehold title).

                             Explanation

              RG 45.45       The primary assets of a mortgage scheme are the loans it makes to
                             others. The quality of these loans and its other investments, and the
                             nature of security taken to support these loans and investments, is a
                             key element in the financial position and performance of the scheme.

              RG 45.46       The more diversified a loan portfolio is, the lower the risk generally
                             that an adverse event affecting one borrower or one type of loan will
                             simultaneously affect the majority of borrowers, and therefore put the
                             overall portfolio at risk.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 16
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Benchmark 4: Related party transactions
              RG 45.47       The responsible entity does not lend to related parties of the
                             responsible entity or to the scheme’s investment manager.

                             Explanation

              RG 45.48       Related party transactions (including loans to, and investments in,
                             related parties) are less likely to be monitored as robustly as those
                             involving unrelated parties. This can affect valuations, loan-to-
                             valuation ratios, due diligence and credit assessment processes.

              RG 45.49       The benchmark focuses on lending transactions (as well as the
                             responsible entity’s policy and practices for lending to related parties)
                             because these appear to be the most common type of related party
                             transaction that affects unlisted mortgage schemes.



Benchmark 5: Valuation policy
              RG 45.50       In relation to valuations for the scheme’s mortgage assets and their
                             security property, the board of the responsible entity requires:
                             (a)   a valuer to be a member of an appropriate professional body in
                                   the jurisdiction in which the relevant property is located;
                             (b)   a valuer to be independent;
                             (c)   procedures to be followed for dealing with any conflict of
                                   interest;
                             (d)   the rotation and diversity of valuers;
                             (e)   in relation to security property for a loan, an independent
                                   valuation to be obtained:
                                   (i)      before the issue of a loan and on renewal:
                                            (A)   for development property, on both an ‘as is’ and ‘as if
                                                  complete’ basis; and
                                            (B)   for all other property, on an ‘as is’ basis; and
                                   (ii)     within two months after the directors form a view that there
                                            is a likelihood that a decrease in the value of security
                                            property may have caused a material breach of a loan
                                            covenant.

                             Explanation

              RG 45.51       Robust and objective valuations are needed to ensure that a scheme’s
                             financial position is correctly stated in the PDS and ongoing



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                      Page 17
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             disclosure. This depends on responsible entities adopting rigorous
                             policies as to when, how and by whom valuations are conducted.

              RG 45.52       It is important for investor confidence that suitably qualified
                             independent experts perform the valuations, and that the process is
                             transparent.

              RG 45.53       It is also in the interests of a responsible entity that the valuations it
                             obtains and uses are robust and accurate. Responsible entities are
                             responsible for the accuracy of the financial statements and other
                             documents that rely on these valuations.

              RG 45.54       We expect that, where possible, responsible entities will only use
                             professional valuers who are registered or licensed in the relevant state
                             or territory or overseas jurisdiction, and who subscribe to a relevant
                             industry code of conduct. We also expect that responsible entities will
                             be careful to ensure that their instructions to valuers are
                             comprehensive and contain reasonable assumptions.

              RG 45.55       It is also important that up-to-date valuations are obtained for
                             properties over which responsible entities are to take security. Existing
                             properties and the scheme’s mortgage assets should also be
                             subsequently valued at relevant times to ensure that the mortgages
                             held in the scheme continue to be appropriately valued.


Benchmark 6: Lending principles—Loan-to-valuation ratios
              RG 45.56       If the scheme directly holds mortgage assets:
                             (a)   where the loan relates to property development—funds are
                                   provided to the borrower in stages based on independent evidence
                                   of the progress of the development;
                             (b)   where the loan relates to property development—the scheme does
                                   not lend more than 70% on the basis of the latest ‘as if complete’
                                   valuation of property over which security is provided; and
                             (c)   in all other cases—the scheme does not lend more than 80% on
                                   the basis of the latest market valuation of property over which
                                   security is provided.

                             Explanation

              RG 45.57       A scheme’s approach to loan-to-valuation ratios is one indicator of
                             how conservative or aggressive its lending practices are. Some
                             schemes are willing to lend funds equal to a higher proportion of a
                             property’s value (sometimes up to or exceeding 100% of its value).
                             Such ratios make a scheme more vulnerable to risk in that a change in



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 18
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             market conditions (e.g. a downturn in the property market) may mean
                             it is unable to fully recover the money it has lent to borrowers. It also
                             increases the risk that the security obtained from borrowers will be
                             insufficient to cover the loan.

              RG 45.58       We have separated loans relating to property development from other
                             property-related loans (e.g. residential mortgages). By property
                             development, we mean loans whose main or primary purpose is for
                             real estate developments or construction (e.g. home units, retail,
                             commercial, subdivisions and industrial development). The
                             benchmark loan-to-valuation ratio for property development loans is
                             lower than for other loans because it is calculated on an ‘as if
                             complete’ basis.

              RG 45.59       If funds are lent for property development activities, a loan-to-
                             valuation ratio may be agreed upfront, but it is generally not
                             appropriate to advance all of the funds to the developer upfront.
                             Rather, we expect responsible entities to put systems and controls in
                             place to ensure funds are only provided to the developer where there is
                             satisfactory progress of the development (based on reliable external
                             evidence of that progress).

              RG 45.60       We expect that, during the term of the loan, the loan-to-valuation
                             ratios will change. The loan-to-valuation ratios in the benchmark refer
                             to the most recent valuation obtained for the relevant property. For
                             second-ranking mortgages, the valuation would be on the basis of the
                             unencumbered value of the property.



Benchmark 7: Distribution practices
              RG 45.61       The responsible entity will not pay current distributions from scheme
                             borrowings.

                             Explanation

              RG 45.62       Investors need to know how distributions are funded because this is an
                             important indicator of the performance of a scheme. In some
                             situations, distributions that are funded wholly, or in part, from
                             sources other than net scheme income (e.g. from borrowings) for the
                             relevant distribution period may indicate that the distribution practices
                             are unsustainable over the long term or may be insufficient to meet
                             advertised returns. Accordingly, it is important that responsible
                             entities disclose where distributions are sourced from and, where these
                             are not sourced from scheme income, explain why.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 19
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 45.63       We understand that, where scheme income is insufficient to meet
                             advertised returns, schemes may fund distributions in a number of
                             different ways (e.g. by reducing their fees, from scheme borrowings or
                             from scheme capital) rather than paying a reduced return. Such
                             practices have developed because competition in the mortgage scheme
                             sector means that many schemes may prefer to meet advertised returns
                             even if that means funding out of capital.



Benchmark 8: Withdrawal arrangements

                             Liquid schemes

              RG 45.64       For liquid schemes:
                             (a)   the maximum period allowed for in the constitution for the
                                   payment of withdrawal requests is 90 days or less;
                             (b)   the responsible entity will pay withdrawal requests within the
                                   period allowed for in the constitution; and
                             (c)   the responsible entity only permits members to withdraw at any
                                   time on request if at least 80% (by value) of the scheme property
                                   is:
                                   (i)      money in an account or on deposit with a bank and is
                                            available for withdrawal immediately, or otherwise on expiry
                                            of a fixed term not exceeding 90 days, during the normal
                                            business hours of the bank; or
                                   (ii)     assets that the responsible entity can reasonably expect to
                                            realise for market value within 10 business days.

                             Non-liquid schemes

              RG 45.65       For non-liquid schemes, the responsible entity intends to make
                             withdrawal offers to investors at least quarterly.
                                   Note: If the scheme is a ‘liquid scheme’ responsible entities should indicate that the
                                   ‘non-liquid scheme’ section of this benchmark is not applicable (or vice versa) (see
                                   appendix).


                             Explanation

              RG 45.66       Assets such as mortgage loans that are held by a mortgage scheme can
                             be difficult to realise in poor market conditions. Despite this, under
                             the statutory definition of ‘liquid assets’ in the Corporations Act 2001
                             (Corporations Act), these assets could technically be ‘liquid’ if the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                          Page 20
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             responsible entity reasonably expects to be able to realise those assets
                             for market value within the period specified in the constitution.

              RG 45.67       Investors may have expectations that a scheme has sufficient assets to
                             readily support withdrawal requests. The freezing of redemptions by
                             most pooled mortgage schemes following a substantial increase in the
                             number of redemption requests is an example where investor
                             expectations of liquidity could not be supported by a scheme, even
                             where the scheme is technically ‘liquid’.

              RG 45.68       The benchmark distinguishes between liquid and non-liquid schemes,
                             and reflects the differences in withdrawal arrangements that would
                             apply in each case.

              RG 45.69       For liquid schemes, the benchmark includes a period within which the
                             constitution allows the payment of withdrawal requests to be made
                             and addresses the nature of the assets held in the scheme where the
                             scheme permits investors to withdraw from the scheme on request.
                             The purpose of the benchmark is to align the withdrawal arrangements
                             of a scheme that is operating as a ‘liquid scheme’ in a statutory sense
                             with investors’ common understanding that a liquid scheme is one that
                             has sufficient realisable assets to meet withdrawal requests on
                             demand. We consider these elements of the benchmark allow
                             investors to better assess the liquidity of a scheme (as promoted to
                             investors) against the actual liquidity of the scheme’s underlying asset
                             base. Accordingly, a scheme that is ‘liquid’ under the Corporations
                             Act will not necessarily meet the benchmark.

              RG 45.70       For non-liquid schemes, the benchmark addresses the requirement for
                             all investors to have the ability to withdraw from the scheme on a
                             periodic basis. Once the scheme becomes non-liquid, there is no
                             statutory limit on the period for which it may remain non-liquid. It is
                             preferable that mortgage schemes provide investors with the ability to
                             withdraw on a periodic basis and, if this is not possible, investors
                             should be clearly informed of this.

              RG 45.71       For contributory mortgage schemes, the benchmark would generally
                             be inapplicable if operators have disclosed that investors have no
                             ability to withdraw from the scheme until the loan to which the
                             mortgage relates has been repaid.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 21
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




D          Disclosure principles for unlisted mortgage
           schemes

                               Key points

                               Responsible entities of unlisted mortgage schemes should apply the
                               disclosure principles as part of their disclosure obligations under Pt 7.9 of
                               the Corporations Act. The disclosure principles also reflect the information
                               required for ongoing disclosure to investors: see RG 45.129–RG 45.130.




Disclosure Principle 1: Liquidity
              RG 45.72       For pooled mortgage schemes, the responsible entity should disclose
                             information about:
                             (a)   the current and future prospects of liquidity of the scheme;
                             (b)   any significant risk factors that may affect the liquidity of the
                                   scheme; and
                             (c)   the policy of the scheme on balancing the maturity of its assets
                                   with the maturity of its liabilities.
                                   Note: If the responsible entity has no reasonable grounds for commenting on the
                                   prospects of liquidity, then it should state this and explain why to investors: see s769C
                                   and Regulatory Guide 170 Prospective financial information (RG 170) at RG 170.20.


                             Explanation
              RG 45.73       The responsible entity’s policy on liquidity management is important.
                             Adequate liquidity is a key feature in the ability of the responsible
                             entities of some mortgage schemes to meet expenses, liabilities and
                             other cash flow needs, including investors’ expectations about their
                             ability to withdraw from those schemes.
              RG 45.74       The responsible entity should disclose whether it reasonably expects
                             there to be any changes to the scheme’s expenses, liabilities and other
                             cash flow needs that will affect the current and future liquidity of the
                             scheme. For example, we expect responsible entities to explain the
                             impact of an expected large number of quarterly investor withdrawal
                             requests, draw-down of loan commitments or other significant
                             changes to the scheme’s operational needs.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                          Page 22
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Disclosure Principle 2: Scheme borrowing
              RG 45.75       If the scheme has borrowings, the responsible entity should disclose:
                             (a)   for borrowings due in less than two years—the total debts due and
                                   their maturity profile, undrawn credit facility and whether
                                   refinancing or sale of assets is likely during this period;
                                   Note: The responsible entity should make appropriate disclosure about the prospects of
                                   refinancing or possible alternative actions (e.g. sale of assets or equity fundraising). If
                                   the responsible entity has no reasonable grounds for commenting on the prospect of
                                   refinancing or possible alternative actions, then it should state this and explain why to
                                   investors: see RG 170.20.

                             (b)   for borrowings due in between two and five years—the total debts
                                   due and their maturity profile for each 12-month period and
                                   undrawn credit facility;
                             (c)   for borrowings due after five years—the total debts due;
                             (d)   why the responsible entity has borrowed the money, including
                                   whether the borrowed funds will be used to fund distributions or
                                   withdrawal requests;
                             (e)   any material loan covenant breaches;
                                   Note: A responsible entity should disclose any information about breaches of loan
                                   covenants that is reasonably required by investors and update investors about the status
                                   of any breaches through ongoing disclosure. Responsible entities should be aware that,
                                   in certain cases, investors would reasonably require information on likely breaches of
                                   loan covenants (e.g. if the responsible entity has approached the lender about a likely
                                   breach and been informed that the loan is likely to be terminated if the breach occurs).

                             (f)   the fact that amounts owing to lenders and other creditors of the
                                   scheme rank before an investor’s interests in the scheme; and
                             (g)   the risks associated with the scheme’s borrowing and credit
                                   facility maturity profile.
                                   Note: A responsible entity should explain any risks associated with its borrowing and
                                   credit facility maturity profile, including whether borrowings have been hedged and, if
                                   so, to what extent.

              RG 45.76       A responsible entity should also disclose:
                             (a)   the existence and details of any current interest rate and foreign
                                   exchange hedging policies of the responsible entity; and
                             (b)   whether the scheme’s variable interest rate and/or foreign
                                   exchange exposure conforms with these policies.

                             Explanation
              RG 45.77       It is important that investors understand the borrowing structure of a
                             scheme and the risks associated with the structure, and be able to
                             distinguish between schemes that borrow and those that do not.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                           Page 23
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 45.78       Responsible entities should also disclose whether borrowed funds will
                             be used to fund distributions or withdrawal requests since this may
                             indicate that the responsible entity’s policy on distributions and
                             withdrawals is not sustainable over the long term. Information about
                             breaches of loan covenants reasonably required by investors is key
                             risk information in upfront and ongoing disclosure.
              RG 45.79       The returns of a scheme may be substantially affected by changes in the
                             interest rate and/or foreign exchange rates. It is important for investors
                             to understand the foreign exchange and hedging policies and any
                             material variances between the actual position of the scheme and those
                             policies.



Disclosure Principle 3: Loan portfolio and diversification
              RG 45.80       For pooled mortgage schemes, the responsible entity should disclose
                             the nature of the scheme’s investment portfolio, including:
                             (a)   by number and value:
                                   (i)   loans by class of activity (e.g. development or construction
                                         projects, industrial, commercial, retail, residential, specialised
                                         property, reverse mortgages);
                                   (ii) loans by geographic region;

                                   (iii) the proportion of loans that are in default or arrears for more
                                         than 30 days;
                                            Note: A responsible entity should disclose, by number and value, the proportion
                                            of loans that are in both default and arrears if these terms have different meanings
                                            in the scheme’s lending policy.
                                   (iv)   the nature of the security for loans made by the scheme (e.g.
                                          first or second ranking);
                                   (v) loans that have been approved but have funds that have yet to
                                          be advanced and the funding arrangements in place for any of
                                          these undrawn loan commitments;
                                   (vi) the maturity profile of all loans in increments of not more
                                          than 12 months;
                                   (vii) loan-to-valuation ratios for loans, in percentage ranges;

                                   (viii) interest rates on loans, in percentage ranges; and
                                            Note: A responsible entity should also include disclosure about the scheme’s
                                            hedging policy in relation to interest rates.
                                   (ix)     loans where interest has been capitalised;
                             (b)   the proportion of the total loan money that has been lent to the
                                   largest borrower and the 10 largest borrowers;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                             Page 24
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                                   Note: We acknowledge that, for reasons of privacy or commercial confidence, it may
                                   not be appropriate to name the largest borrowers. The total loan money lent to the
                                   10 largest borrowers can be disclosed as an aggregate amount.

                             (c)   the percentage of loans (by value) that are secured by second-
                                   ranking mortgages;
                             (d)   the use of derivatives (if any);
                             (e)   a clear description of the non-mortgage assets of the scheme,
                                   including the value of such assets; and
                             (f)   the scheme’s diversification policy and how the assets correlate
                                   with that policy.
              RG 45.81       The responsible entity should disclose its policy on the above matters
                             and on how the scheme will lend funds generally. For example, such
                             disclosure should cover:
                             (a) the maximum loan amount for any one borrower;

                             (b) the method of assessing borrowers’ capacity to service loans;

                             (c) the responsible entity’s policy on revaluing security properties
                                  when a loan is rolled over or renewed; and
                             (d) the responsible entity’s approach to taking security on lending by
                                  the scheme (e.g. the types of security it takes and in what
                                  circumstances, and whether the security must be income
                                  producing).
              RG 45.82       If an unlisted pooled mortgage scheme invests in, or may invest in,
                             other unlisted mortgage schemes (whether registered or unregistered),
                             the responsible entity must disclose its policy on investing in those
                             schemes, including the extent to which the responsible entity requires
                             those schemes to meet the benchmarks and apply the disclosure
                             principles in Sections C and D.

                             Explanation
              RG 45.83       It is important that responsible entities disclose in their PDSs their
                             approach to loan portfolio diversification and the degree of
                             concentration of risk. Most responsible entities will have a firm policy
                             on how and when the scheme will lend funds. This should be
                             disclosed as clearly and prominently as possible to help investors
                             monitor the financial position and performance of the scheme over
                             time.
              RG 45.84       Responsible entities should also disclose the nature of the security for
                             loans made by the scheme (e.g. its ranking, the value of the assets
                             supporting the security and the financial position of any guarantor).
                                   Note: If any security rights (e.g. mortgages) held by the scheme have been assigned or
                                   transferred to third parties, this needs to be disclosed as well.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                       Page 25
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 45.85       Investors should know the proportion of loans that are in default or
                             arrears and the scheme’s approach to such loans. The responsible
                             entity is or may be relying heavily on payment of interest and
                             repayment of capital on the loans it has made to pay distributions and
                             withdrawal proceeds to investors, and to maintain the financial
                             position of the scheme. Therefore, investors have a strong interest in
                             the proportion of loans in default or arrears and what the responsible
                             entity is doing to address this.
              RG 45.86       If a scheme lends to a number of related companies within a group of
                             companies with common directors or ownership, the loans to those
                             companies may be disclosed at an aggregate level on the basis that the
                             borrower group is the borrower.
              RG 45.87       Investors can also benefit from having useful additional information
                             about the diversity and strength of the scheme’s loan book. It will help
                             investors to know details of ranges for:
                             (a) the maturity profiles of loans;

                             (b) loan-to-valuation ratios; and

                             (c) interest rates on loans.




Disclosure Principle 4: Related party transactions
              RG 45.88       If the responsible entity enters into related party transactions, the
                             responsible entity should disclose details of these transactions,
                             including:
                             (a)   the value of the financial benefit;
                             (b)   the nature of the relationship (i.e. the identity of the related party,
                                   and the nature of the arrangements between the parties, in
                                   addition to how the parties are related for the purposes of the
                                   Corporations Act for group structures, the nature of these
                                   relationships should be disclosed for all group entities);
                             (c)   whether the arrangement is on arm’s length terms, is reasonable
                                   remuneration, some other Ch 2E exception applies or ASIC has
                                   granted relief;
                             (d)   whether member approval for the transaction has been sought
                                   and, if so, when;
                             (e)   the risks associated with the related party arrangements; and
                             (f)   the policies and procedures that the responsible entity has in place
                                   for entering into related party transactions, including how
                                   compliance with these policies and procedures is monitored.
                                   Note: The term ‘related party’ is defined in s228 (as applied to the scheme by Pt 5C.7)
                                   and includes the responsible entity.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                        Page 26
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Explanation
              RG 45.89       The additional disclosure is relevant to all types of related party
                             transactions. Examples of services provided by related parties include
                             investment management, mortgage and legal services.
              RG 45.90       It is important that responsible entities disclose in the PDS their
                             approach to related party lending, investments and other transactions,
                             and how such transactions are assessed and monitored to consider
                             whether the transaction is made with the same rigour and
                             independence as transactions made on an arm’s length commercial
                             basis.
                                   Note: Responsible entities are Australian financial services (AFS) licensees and have
                                   duties to adequately manage conflicts of interest: s912A(1)(aa). If appropriate, responsible
                                   entities may also need to obtain investor approval for related party transactions under Pt 5C.7.




Disclosure Principle 5: Valuation policy
              RG 45.91       The responsible entity should disclose:
                             (a)   where investors may access the scheme’s valuation policy—for
                                   example, by disclosing that the policy is available on a relevant
                                   website;
                             (b)   the processes that the directors employ to form a view on the
                                   value of the security property;
                             (c)   the frequency of valuations of security property; and
                             (d)   any material inconsistencies between any current valuation over
                                   security property and the scheme’s valuation policy.
              RG 45.92       For a contributory mortgage scheme, the responsible entity only needs
                             to provide an investor with information about the valuation of the
                             property securing a loan in which the investor has, or is being offered,
                             an interest.

                             Explanation
              RG 45.93       The valuation policy adopted by responsible entities should be
                             available so that investors may better assess the reliability of the
                             valuations of a scheme’s assets and any property over which security
                             has been taken.


Disclosure Principle 6: Lending principles—Loan-to-valuation ratios
              RG 45.94       If the scheme directly holds mortgage assets, the responsible entity
                             should disclose:



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                              Page 27
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (a)   the maximum and weighted average loan-to-valuation ratios for
                                   the scheme as at the date of reporting; and
                             (b)   where funds are lent for property development:
                                   (i)   the criteria against which the funds are drawn down;
                                   (ii) the percentage (by value) of the completion of any property
                                         that is under development as at the date of reporting; and
                                   (iii) the loan-to-cost ratio of each property development loan as at
                                         the date of reporting.
              RG 45.95       The responsible entity should also disclose the percentage of the
                             scheme’s assets that are property development loans. If property
                             development loans exceed 20% of the scheme’s assets, the responsible
                             entity should identify the scheme as one that invests a significant
                             component of funds in property development loans. If the loan-to-cost
                             ratio of any property development loan exceeds 75%, this should also
                             be highlighted.

                             Explanation
              RG 45.96       We consider it relevant that responsible entities disclose the scheme’s
                             overall loan-to-valuation ratios in order to understand the scheme’s
                             risk exposure to changes in market conditions (e.g. a change in the
                             property market). The overall ratios should be based on the most
                             recent valuations of the scheme’s mortgage assets.
              RG 45.97       The loan-to-cost ratio is the ratio of the loan amount to the total cost
                             of the construction or development project (including the cost of
                             the land). This ratio and the responsible entity’s policy on how and
                             when funds are provided to developers should also be disclosed.
              RG 45.98       It is good practice that, if the scheme invests a significant
                             percentage 20% or more (by value) of funds in property
                             development loans, the scheme has a name that investors can identify
                             as one that significantly lends for property development (e.g. ‘ABC
                             Mortgage Developments Scheme’).


Disclosure Principle 7: Distribution practices
              RG 45.99       If a responsible entity is making, or forecasting, distributions to
                             members, it should disclose:
                             (a)   the source of the current and forecast distributions (e.g. from
                                   income earned in the relevant distribution period, operating cash
                                   flow, financing facility, capital, application money);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                      Page 28
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (b)   if the distribution is not solely sourced from income received in
                                   the relevant distribution period, the reasons for making those
                                   distributions and the risks associated with such distributions;
                             (c)   if the distribution is sourced other than from income, whether this
                                   is sustainable over the next 12 months; and
                             (d)   when the responsible entity will pay distributions and the
                                   frequency of payment of distributions.
                                   Note: Any forward-looking statements should comply with s769C and RG 170. If a
                                   responsible entity does not have reasonable grounds for disclosing whether current or
                                   forecast distributions (from sources other than realised income) are sustainable, it
                                   should explain this to investors: see RG 170.20

              RG 45.100      If the scheme promotes a particular return on investments, the
                             responsible entity must clearly disclose details of the circumstances in
                             which a lower return may be payable, together with details of how that
                             lower return will be determined. For a contributory mortgage scheme,
                             the responsible entity should, for a particular investor, disclose the
                             above information to the investor for distributions or returns made, or
                             forecasts to be made, to that investor.
              RG 45.101      The responsible entity should include a table identifying up to five
                             main factors that would have the most material impact on forecast
                             distributions, the risks of changes to those factors on distributions and
                             a sensitivity analysis based on changes to those factors. It must also
                             explain how any excess returns actually earned by the scheme will be
                             applied.

                             Explanation
              RG 45.102      Some mortgage schemes seek to give investors an assurance about
                             income stability by disclosing that a fixed return is generally payable.
                             We consider that such disclosures will be misleading unless the
                             responsible entity also makes prominent disclosure of:
                             (a)   the mechanism by which it will seek to achieve a fixed return,
                                   together with any limitations of relying on that mechanism; and
                             (b)   the circumstances in which investors may be paid a lower return
                                   and how that lower return will be determined.

              RG 45.103      If distributions are funded (wholly or in part) from borrowings for the
                             relevant distribution period, this may indicate that distribution
                             practices are unsustainable over the long term or may be insufficient
                             to meet advertised returns. Accordingly, detailed disclosure on the
                             scheme’s distribution practices and policies is important so that
                             investors may assess whether the scheme’s distribution policy is
                             sustainable.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                       Page 29
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Disclosure Principle 8: Withdrawal arrangements
              RG 45.104      The responsible entity should disclose:
                             (a)   the scheme’s withdrawal policy and any rights that the
                                   responsible entity has to change the policy;
                             (b)   the ability of investors to withdraw from the scheme when it is
                                   liquid;
                             (c)   the ability of investors to withdraw from the scheme when it is
                                   non-liquid;
                             (d)   any significant risk factors or limitations that may affect the
                                   ability of investors to withdraw from the scheme;
                             (e)   how investors can exercise their withdrawal rights, including any
                                   conditions on exercising these rights;
                             (f)   the approach to rollovers and renewals, including whether the
                                   ‘default’ is that investments in the scheme are automatically rolled
                                   over or renewed;
                             (g)   if the withdrawals from the scheme are to be funded from an
                                   external liquidity facility, the material terms of this facility,
                                   including any rights the provider has to suspend or cancel the
                                   facility;
                             (h)   the maximum withdrawal period that applies to the payment of
                                   withdrawal requests when the scheme is liquid;
                             (i)   any rights the responsible entity has to refuse or suspend
                                   withdrawal requests; and
                             (j)   the policy of the scheme on balancing the maturity of its assets
                                   with the maturity of its liabilities and the ability of its members to
                                   withdraw (e.g. if a scheme has a policy of ensuring that sufficient
                                   assets are held in readily realisable investments to meet future
                                   withdrawal requests, the responsible entity should state this in its
                                   PDS, provide details of the source of the realisable investment
                                   and report against this in its ongoing disclosure).

              RG 45.105      If the responsible entity makes representations to investors that they
                             can withdraw from the scheme, there should be disclosure on:
                             (a)   the grounds (which must be verifiable) for the statement;
                             (b)   the supporting assumptions (which must not be hypothetical only)
                                   for the statement;
                             (c)   the basis for the statement (which must not be based only on an
                                   opinion of the directors of the responsible entity if there are no
                                   objective grounds to support that opinion); and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 30
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (d)   any significant risk factors that mean that withdrawal requests
                                   might not be satisfied within the expected period.

              RG 45.106      If the PDS contains a statement to the effect that, historically,
                             withdrawal requests have been satisfied within a particular period, this
                             may suggest a link between historical withdrawal periods and
                             withdrawal periods that are likely to apply in the future. The
                             responsible entity should ensure the statement clarifies that investors
                             should not conclude that there is such a link between the historical
                             availability of withdrawals and their future availability.

              RG 45.107      If the scheme promotes a fixed redemption unit price for investments
                             (e.g. $1 per unit), the responsible entity must clearly disclose details of
                             the circumstances in which a lower amount may be payable, details of
                             how that amount will be determined and the impact of a default under
                             the scheme’s mortgage assets on investors (e.g. on investor
                             distributions and the unit price).

              RG 45.108      A responsible entity of a contributory mortgage scheme should, for a
                             particular investor, disclose the above information to the investor as it
                             relates to the investor’s ability to withdraw.

                             Explanation

              RG 45.109      It is important for responsible entities to make investors aware of
                             withdrawal arrangements so that investors form realistic expectations
                             about their ability to withdraw from a scheme. If a scheme
                             constitution provides for a long withdrawal period but the scheme is
                             promoted on the basis that withdrawal requests are satisfied within a
                             much shorter period, it is important for responsible entities to clearly
                             disclose that:
                             (a)   the responsible entity does not have an obligation to satisfy
                                   withdrawal requests within the shorter period;
                             (b)   the constitution provides a longer withdrawal period for satisfying
                                   withdrawal requests (including details of the longer withdrawal
                                   period); and
                             (c)   if the scheme does not satisfy the statutory liquidity requirements,
                                   members will only have a limited ability to withdraw (if any).
                                   Note 1: Members will only have a limited ability to withdraw if a scheme is not ‘liquid’
                                   for the purposes of Pt 5C.6.

                                   Note 2: If a responsible entity makes representations about likely future withdrawal
                                   periods, it must have reasonable grounds for those representations: s769C.

              RG 45.110      Some mortgage schemes rely on investors keeping their funds
                             invested beyond the end of the initial investment period. In some



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                        Page 31
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             cases, the terms of issue allow this to occur automatically unless the
                             investor makes a positive decision to withdraw their funds. In other
                             cases, it is the investor who makes a positive decision to have their
                             funds reinvested.

              RG 45.111      It is important that investors fully understand the responsible entity’s
                             approach to rollovers and renewals through clear disclosure in the
                             PDS, including details of:
                             (a)   the default position on maturity;
                             (b)   what investors need to do to withdraw or reinvest their funds
                                   (including details of the relevant timeframes); and
                             (c)   any restrictions on the ability of members to withdraw at the end
                                   of the initial period.

              RG 45.112      We consider that it is potentially misleading not to provide investors
                             with updated information about their investment when they are
                             considering whether to roll over their investment. Depending on the
                             circumstances, the responsible entity may also need to provide
                             investors with an updated PDS.

              RG 45.113      Some mortgage schemes seek to give investors an assurance about
                             capital stability by disclosing that investments are generally
                             redeemable at a fixed unit price. We consider that such disclosure will
                             be misleading unless the responsible entity also makes prominent
                             disclosure of:
                             (a)   the mechanism by which it will seek to achieve a fixed
                                   withdrawal price (e.g. by relying on a third party guarantee),
                                   together with any limitations of relying on that mechanism;
                             (b)   any restrictions on the ability of investors to withdraw from the
                                   scheme;
                             (c)   what will occur if the portion of the net assets of the scheme
                                   attributable to an interest in the scheme has a value that is less
                                   than the fixed withdrawal price; and
                             (d)   the circumstances in which investors may be paid a lower
                                   withdrawal price and how that lower price will be determined.

              RG 45.114      It is also typical for the constitution of a mortgage scheme to confer
                             discretion on the responsible entity to suspend withdrawals.
                             Responsible entities should explain the discretion and the
                             consequences of the exercise of that discretion.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 32
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




E          Form and method of disclosure

                               Key points

                               Disclosure against the benchmarks and information addressing the
                               disclosure principles should be included in any Product Disclosure
                               Statements (PDSs) and ongoing disclosure for these schemes issued on or
                               after 1 January 2013.

                               This information should also be included in the most effective way possible
                               (e.g. on a website or in regular updates).

                               It is best practice for a PDS to contain a table within the first 15 pages
                               summarising the entity’s disclosure against the benchmarks, including
                               explanations if it does not meet the benchmarks.



Method of disclosure
              RG 45.115      Disclosure against the benchmarks and information addressing the
                             disclosure principles should be:
                             (a)   included in the PDS (see RG 45.118 RG 45.121); and
                             (b)   updated in ongoing disclosure as material changes occur (see
                                   RG 45.129 RG 45.130). We also expect disclosure updates to be
                                   provided at least half-yearly (if not already provided under ongoing
                                   disclosure obligations).

              RG 45.116      In some circumstances, disclosure may be made on a website (e.g. by
                             relying on Class Order [CO 03/237] Updated information in product
                             disclosure statements): see RG 45.129 and RG 45.131–RG 45.135.

              RG 45.117      Provisions in the Corporations Act and the ASIC Act apply to
                             disclosure made in advertising material. Advertising by responsible
                             entities should support investor understanding of disclosure against
                             the benchmarks and information addressing the disclosure principles,
                             and be consistent with all corresponding disclosures on that subject
                             matter in the PDS.

                             Disclosure in a PDS

              RG 45.118      We prefer that, within the first 15 pages of a PDS, the responsible
                             entity should address in a table whether or not the benchmarks are
                             met: see the appendix for an example of the form of disclosure. We
                             consider it useful if the table also identifies where further information
                             (if any) on the benchmarks can be found, and that this further
                             information is disclosed as early on as practicable in the PDS.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 33
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Information addressing the disclosure principles should also be
                             disclosed as soon as practicable after the benchmark table.

              RG 45.119      Our benchmarks and disclosure principles relate to matters that, in any
                             event, must be disclosed under s1013D–1013E because issues relating
                             to these matters might reasonably be expected to have a material
                             influence on the decision of a reasonable person, as a retail client,
                             whether to invest in the scheme.
                                   Note: The benchmarks and disclosure principles do not attempt to specify all the
                                   information that is required to be included in a PDS by the Corporations Act.

              RG 45.120      We expect a PDS for an unlisted mortgage scheme to explain in a
                             clear, concise and effective way:
                             (a)   the business model of the mortgage scheme and what it will
                                   actually do with the money;
                             (b)   the track record and experience of senior management; and
                             (c)   the nature of the investor’s interest in the mortgage scheme (e.g.
                                   what withdrawal rights apply, if any).

              RG 45.121      We believe that disclosure against the benchmarks and applying the
                             disclosure principles in a PDS promote compliance with the
                             requirement that PDSs should be worded in a clear, concise and
                             effective manner by encouraging comparability and uniformity of
                             financial measures, and highlighting issues that ASIC and industry
                             experts consider crucial to making an investment decision.

                             Clear, concise and effective disclosure

              RG 45.122      PDSs must be worded and presented in a clear, concise and effective
                             manner: s1013C(3). A PDS should therefore contain clear and
                             prominent disclosure of the key features and risks of the investment.
                             For unlisted mortgage schemes, this includes the benchmark and
                             disclosure principle information.

              RG 45.123      The requirement for ‘clear, concise and effective’ disclosure should be
                             read as a compound phrase so that each word qualifies the other. This
                             means it is inappropriate to focus on one word in the phrase at the
                             expense of others.

              RG 45.124      We consider that a PDS will generally be clear, concise and effective
                             if it:
                             (a)   highlights key information (e.g. through an investment overview
                                   as explained below);
                             (b)   uses plain language;
                             (c)   is as short as possible;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                       Page 34
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (d)   explains complex information, including any technical terms; and
                             (e)   is logically ordered and easy to navigate.

              RG 45.125      We encourage responsible entities to use consumer-friendly tools as
                             much as possible in disclosing key features and risks, including tables,
                             diagrams and other comparative features. Such effective disclosure
                             will help retail investors compare investments across the unlisted
                             mortgage scheme sector.
                                   Note: Responsible entities should refer to Regulatory Guide 168 Disclosure: Product
                                   Disclosure Statements (and other disclosure obligations) (RG 168) and Regulatory
                                   Guide 228 Prospectuses: Effective disclosure for retail investors (RG 228) when
                                   considering ways to ensure that a PDS is worded in a clear, concise and effective
                                   manner.


                             Investment overview

              RG 45.126      We consider there is a greater risk that a PDS will not be worded and
                             presented in a clear, concise and effective manner if the PDS does not
                             include an investment overview within the first few pages that
                             highlights information that is key to a retail investor’s investment
                             decision.

              RG 45.127      An investment overview is an introduction to the issuer and offer. It is
                             not intended to replace the PDS and investors should read the whole
                             document. The investment overview should:
                             (a)   be the first substantive section of the PDS;
                             (b)   highlight and provide a meaningful summary of information that
                                   is key to a retail investor’s investment decision, including at least
                                   a summary of the benchmark and disclosure principle
                                   information; and
                             (c)   provide balanced disclosure of the benefits and risks.

              RG 45.128      If the key information is too lengthy to be included in full, the first
                             few pages of the PDS should provide a summary of the information
                             with a clear reference to more detailed disclosure.

                             Ongoing disclosure

              RG 45.129      Responsible entities may have obligations under the Corporations Act
                             (e.g. under Chs 2M and 6CA and Pt 7.9) to provide ongoing
                             disclosure to investors, including:
                             (a)   issuing a supplementary PDS when there are certain material
                                   changes to information in a current PDS;
                                   Note: PDSs commonly allow information to be updated on a website if the information
                                   is not materially adverse: see [CO 03/237]. We consider that if the omission of disclosure




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                           Page 35
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                                   against the benchmarks and information addressing the disclosure principles is not
                                   materially adverse, the responsible entity will generally be able to rely on [CO 03/237] to
                                   update the PDS for this information without the need for a supplementary or new PDS: see
                                   RG 45.131–RG 45.135.

                             (b)   providing periodic statements to investors in registered schemes
                                   under s1017D;
                             (c)   for disclosing entities and registered schemes, disclosing material
                                   changes and significant events (e.g. under s675 and 1017B); and
                             (d)   complying with annual reporting obligations (e.g. under Ch 2M).

              RG 45.130      We expect responsible entities to provide disclosure updates at least
                             half-yearly in addition to providing ongoing updates whenever there
                             have been material changes to previously disclosed information. If
                             there have been any material changes to a scheme’s performance
                             against the benchmarks, including against the scheme’s alternative
                             approach to meeting the benchmarks, or to the information provided
                             under the disclosure principles, the responsible entity must explain
                             these in ongoing disclosure. Responsible entities should also provide
                             updates on the status of performance against the benchmarks and
                             information provided under the disclosure principles, and any changes
                             not covered under the ongoing disclosure.

                             Website disclosure

              RG 45.131      We acknowledge that website disclosure allows an entity to provide
                             material information to investors in a timely and efficient way. A
                             responsible entity that makes website disclosure should have regard to
                             Regulatory Guide 198 Unlisted disclosing entities: Continuous
                             disclosure obligations (RG 198) in terms of how to disclose on its
                             website.

              RG 45.132      Disclosure against the benchmarks should be located in a single place
                             on the website. The home page should contain a prominent link to this
                             location so that investors can easily access it. If investors have to look
                             for information in a number of places, there is a greater likelihood that
                             they will not find all the information necessary to make an informed
                             investment decision.

              RG 45.133      However, we would discourage a responsible entity from publishing
                             lengthy documents on its website in which the material information is
                             ‘buried’ among information that is not material. If a responsible entity
                             considers that an investor may have difficulty readily identifying
                             material information, it should consider separately highlighting that
                             information to investors.

              RG 45.134      In addition to making material information available on its website, a
                             responsible entity should consider whether direct disclosure of the


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                          Page 36
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             information to investors is appropriate. This may occur, for example,
                             where the entity is aware that a significant number of investors might
                             not have ready access to the internet.

              RG 45.135      A responsible entity that discloses material information on its website
                             should consider giving investors the option of receiving an email alert
                             when material information is updated. We strongly encourage this
                             type of facility because it helps investors to become aware of relevant
                             information as soon as possible after it is published.



Timing for implementing improved disclosure
              RG 45.136      For all listed and unlisted mortgage schemes, responsible entities should
                             comply with the advertising standards (which applied from 2
                             September 2008).

              RG 45.137      Disclosing against the benchmarks and addressing the disclosure
                             principles applies to both existing and new offers of interests in
                             unlisted mortgage schemes.

              RG 45.138      By 1 January 2013, the responsible entity of an existing unlisted
                             mortgage scheme should address the benchmarks on an ‘if not, why
                             not’ basis and apply the disclosure principles in updated disclosure
                             that is brought to the attention of existing investors. This could be
                             done by using the responsible entity’s normal investor communication
                             channels (e.g. in a regular investor update, in a periodic statement
                             under s1017D or by including the information on a website that is
                             used to communicate with investors).

              RG 45.139      The updated disclosure should also advise investors how the
                             responsible entity intends to update them on the status of the
                             benchmark and disclosure principle information and about material
                             changes. This is particularly important if the responsible entity intends
                             to use a website to communicate material changes to key information.

              RG 45.140      By 1 January 2013, if an existing PDS is still in use, responsible
                             entities should either:
                             (a)   include the benchmark and additional disclosure principle
                                   information on a website referred to in the PDS (if the omission
                                   of information from the PDS is not materially adverse); or
                             (b)   update the PDS by a new or supplementary PDS so that it
                                   includes the benchmark and additional disclosure principle
                                   information.
                                   Note: We consider that, if the omission of the benchmark and additional disclosure
                                   principle information from an existing PDS is not materially adverse, the responsible




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                        Page 37
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                                   entity will generally be able to rely on [CO 03/237] to update the PDS for this
                                   information without the need for a supplementary or new PDS.

              RG 45.141      PDSs dated on or after 1 January 2013 should clearly and prominently
                             disclose against the benchmarks on an ‘if not, why not’ basis and
                             apply the disclosure principles. The PDS should also explain how the
                             responsible entity intends to update investors for ongoing disclosure.
                                   Note: Responsible entities of contributory mortgage schemes that provide an investor
                                   with a supplementary PDS for the investor’s mortgage loan may deal with the
                                   benchmarks in the supplementary PDS.

              RG 45.142      If there are any material changes to the scheme’s performance against
                             the benchmarks or to the disclosure principle information, the
                             responsible entity should deal with this in ongoing disclosure. It is
                             good practice to update investors on material changes to key
                             information about an unlisted mortgage scheme as soon as practicable
                             (e.g. by updating a website used for this purpose).

              RG 45.143      It is good practice for responsible entities to update investors at least
                             half-yearly on the status of their performance against the benchmarks
                             and the disclosure principles, including whether the information has
                             been updated for any material changes since the last investor report.



ASIC review of PDSs and ongoing disclosure
              RG 45.144      From 1 January 2013, we will review PDSs in use and ongoing
                             disclosure for unlisted mortgage schemes to check that the benchmark
                             and disclosure principle information is adequately disclosed.

              RG 45.145      We will consider exercising our stop order powers under s1020E if we
                             consider there is material non-disclosure or misleading disclosure of
                             these matters. The benchmarks and disclosure principles relate to
                             matters that must be disclosed under the Corporations Act. Material
                             non-disclosure or misleading disclosure may also result in liability to
                             investors.

              RG 45.146      We will also:
                             (a)   work with responsible entities to ensure that the benchmarks and
                                   disclosure principles, and our expectations, are understood;
                             (b)   discuss any concerns we have about a responsible entity’s
                                   disclosure with them and, where necessary, require additional
                                   disclosure;
                             (c)   discuss any concerns we have about the financial position and
                                   performance of a scheme with the responsible entity; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                          Page 38
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (d)   conduct surveillance visits, as needed, to test and reinforce our
                                   expectations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 39
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




F          Advertising standards for all mortgage schemes

                               Key points

                               Responsible entities of all mortgage schemes (whether listed or unlisted)
                               can promote investor understanding and minimise the risk of mis-selling
                               by ensuring that advertising for their products meets certain standards:
                               see RG 45.147–RG 45.169.

                               Responsible entities that fail to comply with these standards risk making
                               false or misleading statements or engaging in misleading or deceptive
                               conduct: see RG 45.170–RG 45.171.

                               Under general law, a publisher or other media conduit may have some
                               responsibility for an advertisement’s content: see RG 45.172–RG 45.177.




Standards for advertisements

                             Repayment of principal investment

              RG 45.147      Retail investors may confuse products where returns, interest rates or
                             fixed-term investment periods are advertised with bank or other
                             deposits. Many mortgage schemes advertise one or more of these
                             features. Retail investors may fail to realise that a mortgage scheme
                             investment is an equity investment in a managed investment scheme,
                             and there is a higher risk of losing some or all of their money than is
                             the case with a bank deposit.

              RG 45.148      For this reason, any advertisements for mortgage scheme investments
                             that are offered to retail investors should contain prominent disclosure
                             that investors risk losing some or all of their money.

                             Returns on investment and investment ratings

              RG 45.149      Advertisements for mortgage schemes that are offered to retail
                             investors should only quote returns on the investment if they are
                             accompanied by prominent disclosure that there is a risk that the
                             investment may achieve lower than expected returns.
                                   Note: This includes advertisements with generic references to the return (e.g. to a ‘very
                                   high’, ‘highly competitive’, ‘regular’ or ‘consistent’ return), as well as to a specific return.

              RG 45.150      References to returns in advertising can be very influential to retail
                             investors. These references can be misleading if at the same time the
                             investor is not given information about the likelihood of being paid
                             that return.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                               Page 40
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 45.151      If an investment rating is used in a mortgage scheme advertisement, it
                             should be properly explained. This explanation should include the
                             meaning of the rating and where an investor can obtain further
                             information about the rating. The advertisement should also state that
                             investment ratings are only one factor to be taken into account when
                             deciding whether to invest.

              RG 45.152      Responsible entities should ensure that:
                             (a)   the impression the investment rating creates about the mortgage
                                   scheme being advertised is not misleading; and
                             (b)   investment ratings used in advertisements for mortgage schemes
                                   are only quoted from research houses that hold an AFS licence.

                             Comparisons with bank deposits and ‘risk-free’ suggestions

              RG 45.153      Advertisements for mortgage schemes should state that the mortgage
                             scheme is not a bank deposit. Advertisements should also not suggest
                             that:
                             (a)   the mortgage scheme is, or compares favourably to, a bank
                                   deposit or other deposit product; or
                             (b)   there is little or no risk of the investor losing their principal or not
                                   being paid a return.

              RG 45.154      This means that the following terms should be avoided in
                             advertisements for mortgage schemes: ‘secure’, ‘secured’,
                             ‘guaranteed’, ‘warranted’, ‘safe’, ‘deposit’, ‘first ranking’ and ‘fixed
                             income’.

              RG 45.155      We consider that the use of these (or similar) terms creates a
                             misleading impression about the mortgage scheme and the risks
                             involved with investing in it. They contribute to the misconception
                             that investors can achieve higher returns than a bank deposit without
                             the risk of losing their money.

              RG 45.156      Terms such as ‘secure’, ‘secured’, ‘guaranteed’ and ‘warranted’
                             convey an impression of a safe investment and, in our experience,
                             they have a disproportionate effect on retail investors. We consider
                             that investors will be left with a misleading impression about the risk
                             profile of the mortgage scheme without a detailed explanation of:
                             (a)   the nature of the security, guarantee or warranty;
                             (b)   the fact that investors in the scheme are unsecured equity
                                   investors; and
                             (c)   the fact that lenders to the scheme have priority over the assets of
                                   the scheme.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 41
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 45.157      We consider the use of terms such as ‘fixed income’ may also create a
                             misleading impression that the returns an investor receives are not
                             subject to change and that the returns are in the form of interest rather
                             than a return from the revenue generated by the scheme.

                             Withdrawal periods, withdrawal rights and investment
                             periods
              RG 45.158      Many mortgage schemes operate on the basis that withdrawal requests
                             will be satisfied within a relatively short period even though the
                             constitution of the scheme allows for a much longer maximum period
                             to satisfy withdrawal requests.

              RG 45.159      We consider that an advertisement that promotes a withdrawal period
                             or withdrawal rights will be misleading unless there is prominent
                             disclosure:
                             (a)   of any longer period within which the responsible entity may
                                   satisfy withdrawal requests;
                             (b)   that there are circumstances in which the responsible entity may
                                   suspend withdrawals (if this is the case); and
                             (c)   that members will only have limited rights to withdraw if the
                                   scheme does not satisfy the statutory liquidity test in the
                                   Corporations Act.
              RG 45.160      Some mortgage schemes advertise fixed-term investments (e.g. six
                             months or 12 months). If the investor can only withdraw at the end of
                             the fixed term by making a withdrawal request, the reference to the
                             fixed-term investment is likely to be misleading unless it is
                             accompanied by prominent disclosure of the risk that the investor will
                             not be paid their withdrawal proceeds within a reasonable period after
                             the end of the fixed term.

                             Fees
              RG 45.161      Some mortgage schemes advertise that a particular type of fee is not
                             payable or is payable at a low rate. If this arrangement is dependent on
                             conditions being satisfied (e.g. it is a requirement that the member not
                             withdraw from the scheme for a specified period of time), we consider
                             the advertisement will be misleading unless there is prominent
                             disclosure of:
                             (a)   if it is advertised that no fee is payable, the circumstances in
                                   which a fee is payable, together with the amount of the fee; and
                             (b)   if it is advertised that a fee is payable at a particular rate, the
                                   circumstances in which a higher fee is payable, together with the
                                   amount of the higher fee.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 42
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Suitability statements
              RG 45.162      Advertisements for mortgage schemes should not state or imply that
                             the investment is suitable for a particular class of investor (e.g. ‘this
                             product is suitable for a conservative investor’ or ‘this product is
                             suitable for a self-managed super fund’). Such a statement may be
                             misleading because it may convey the impression that the responsible
                             entity has actually assessed the suitability of the mortgage scheme for
                             particular investors targeted by the advertisement.

                             Consistency with PDS disclosure
              RG 45.163      Statements in advertisements for mortgage schemes should be
                             consistent with all corresponding disclosures on that subject matter in
                             the PDS. In particular, responsible entities should take into account the
                             disclosures in the PDS about the benchmarks in Section C and the
                             disclosure principles in Section D.
              RG 45.164      In ensuring consistency with disclosure in the PDS, responsible
                             entities should be aware that an advertisement may be misleading if it
                             quotes a statement from the PDS out of context. For example, while it
                             may not be misleading to describe a return on a mortgage scheme
                             product as ‘guaranteed’ in the PDS, where sufficient information is
                             given about the guarantee and its likely efficacy, using the term
                             ‘guaranteed’ in an advertisement is likely to be misleading.

                             Telephone inquiries
              RG 45.165      Statements made over the telephone or in any correspondence in
                             response to inquiries about mortgage schemes are subject to the same
                             regulation for misleading and deceptive conduct as the
                             advertisements. Therefore, the same restrictions apply (e.g. about
                             using words such as ‘secure’, ‘secured’ and ‘guaranteed’).
              RG 45.166      Responsible entities of mortgage schemes should ensure that all
                             statements made by call centre staff (or other staff or contractors
                             engaged by them) to prospective investors who respond to
                             advertisements for mortgage schemes are consistent with disclosures
                             on that subject in the PDS. In the case of returns, withdrawal periods,
                             withdrawal rights, investment periods and fees, no statements should
                             be made that would have been prohibited in the advertisement to
                             which the inquiry related.
              RG 45.167      To ensure compliance with this standard, responsible entities could
                             develop a script and a list of questions and answers that call centre
                             staff and any other staff fielding these inquiries should adhere to.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 43
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Warning statements generally
              RG 45.168      The warning statements referred to in RG 45.148–RG 45.153 and
                             RG 45.159–RG 45.161 should be prominent. For example, investors
                             who notice a statement about returns (if any) should also be
                             reasonably likely to notice the corresponding warning statement and
                             be able to easily understand it. This will help ensure investors have a
                             balanced impression of the mortgage scheme offering.
              RG 45.169      We are not prescribing ‘boilerplate’ or standardised warning
                             statements. It is the responsibility of the responsible entity to ensure
                             that its advertisement is not misleading or deceptive and that the
                             warning statements referred to in RG 45.148–RG 45.153 and
                             RG 45.159–RG 45.161 are effective.



How ASIC deals with contraventions
              RG 45.170      Responsible entities of mortgage schemes who fail to comply with the
                             advertising standards risk making false or misleading statements or
                             engaging in misleading or deceptive conduct in contravention of the
                             Corporations Act or ASIC Act.

              RG 45.171      The law provides ASIC with various options for dealing with false or
                             misleading advertisements for mortgage schemes, or mortgage scheme
                             advertising that constitutes misleading or deceptive conduct. These
                             include:
                             (a)   issuing a stop order on any false or misleading statements in an
                                   advertisement for a mortgage scheme;
                             (b)   seeking an injunction against a responsible entity for mortgage
                                   scheme advertising that constitutes misleading or deceptive
                                   conduct;
                             (c)   investigating potential criminal action for contraventions of
                                   s1041E of the Corporations Act or s12DF of the ASIC Act; and
                             (d)   taking other regulatory action against a responsible entity where
                                   mortgage scheme advertising contravenes its obligations as an
                                   AFS licensee.
                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 156 Advertising of debentures and notes to retail investors
                                   (RG 156) at RG 156.29–RG 156.30 for further guidance about when advertising may be
                                   misleading or deceptive.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                      Page 44
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




The role of publishers and the media
              RG 45.172      While the primary responsibility for advertising material rests with the
                             organisation placing the advertisement, under general law the
                             publisher may also have some responsibility for its content. This
                             depends on whether the publisher received the ‘advertisement for
                             publication in the ordinary course of that business and did not know,
                             and had no reason to believe, that its publication would amount to an
                             offence against that provision’: s1044A, Corporations Act; s12GI(4),
                             ASIC Act.

              RG 45.173      We believe that the advertising standards in this guide give publishers
                             knowledge of the type of conduct that would contravene the law. This
                             means that publishers should ensure that they are in a position to
                             decline advertisements for mortgage schemes that:
                             (a)   fail to contain the statements referred to in RG 45.148–RG 45.153
                                   and RG 45.159–RG 45.161;
                             (b)   have any references to returns that fail to comply with the
                                   standards in RG 45.149–RG 45.150;
                             (c)   have any references to withdrawal periods, withdrawal rights or
                                   investment periods that fail to comply with the standards in
                                   RG 45.158–RG 45.160;
                             (d)   use the terms ‘secure’, ‘secured’, ‘guaranteed’ or ‘warranted’ (or
                                   similar terms) (see RG 45.156); or
                             (e)   contain suitability statements (see RG 45.162).

              RG 45.174      Generally, responsible entities will use the terms ‘mortgage’, ‘mortgage
                             scheme’, ‘mortgage trust’ or ‘mortgage fund’ to describe products
                             subject to this regulatory guide. But we encourage publishers to
                             specifically ask their advertising clients if the product they are
                             advertising is regulated by this guide.

              RG 45.175      To help publishers identify potentially problematic advertisements, we
                             will make available details of responsible entities of mortgage
                             schemes that have previously had a stop order made against either
                             their PDS or any of their advertisements. We expect publishers to
                             scrutinise advertisements by these responsible entities with particular
                             care.

              RG 45.176      We also expect publishers to cease publishing an advertisement if we
                             inform them that it is currently subject to a stop order. We will assist
                             publishers by making this information available.

              RG 45.177      If a publisher contributes to the content of the advertisement (e.g. in
                             writing advertorials) or otherwise has an active involvement in the
                             promotion of the financial product (e.g. through co-branding or where


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 45
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             a media personality uses their influence to promote a product), we
                             regard the publisher as being in the same position as the responsible
                             entity in terms of its responsibility to comply with the advertising
                             standards in this guide. We consider that this level of active
                             involvement may mean that the general defence that publishers might
                             claim against liability for content of an advertisement under s1044A is
                             unlikely to apply.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 46
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




G          Compliance plans

                               Key points

                               Compliance plans must set out measures for the responsible entity to
                               comply with the Corporations Act and scheme constitution.

                               We expect compliance plans for mortgage schemes to set out adequate
                               measures to ensure compliance with the disclosure and advertising
                               obligations discussed in this guide.
                               We expect compliance committees and compliance plan auditors to be
                               aware of these disclosure and advertising obligations and to have regard to
                               them in carrying out their duties.
                               Responsible entities, compliance committees and compliance plan auditors
                               should consider these disclosure and advertising obligations when
                               assessing whether a compliance plan is adequate.




The compliance plan
              RG 45.178      Compliance plans play a key role in protecting investors and
                             promoting their interests. The law requires managed investment
                             schemes to have a compliance plan: s601EA. The compliance plan
                             must set out adequate measures for the responsible entity to ensure
                             compliance with the Corporations Act and the scheme’s constitution:
                             s601HA. The responsible entity has a duty to comply with the
                             compliance plan: s601FC(1)(h).

              RG 45.179      Compliance plans should contain adequate procedures to ensure that
                             responsible entities comply with their upfront and ongoing disclosure
                             obligations, including their disclosure obligations in this guide.
                             Compliance plans should also contain adequate procedures to ensure
                             that responsible entities comply with their advertising obligations.

              RG 45.180      We do not expect that responsible entities will necessarily need to
                             change their compliance plans to deal expressly with the disclosure
                             and advertising obligations discussed in this guide. Good compliance
                             plans should already contain procedures to ensure that responsible
                             entities comply with all of their disclosure and advertising obligations
                             under the law.

              RG 45.181      However, we do expect responsible entities to critically examine
                             existing compliance plans and consider whether they are adequate to
                             ensure compliance with the obligations discussed in this guide.
                             Regardless of whether a scheme has a compliance committee,
                             responsible entities have a duty to ensure that compliance plans



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 47
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             establish adequate measures to ensure compliance (including with
                             disclosure and advertising obligations): s601FC(1)(g).



Compliance committees
              RG 45.182      Many mortgage schemes have a compliance committee. A scheme is
                             required to have a compliance committee unless at least half of the
                             responsible entity’s directors are external directors: s601JA. If the
                             scheme does not have a compliance committee, the responsible
                             entity’s directors should be particularly vigilant about ensuring the
                             responsible entity complies with the compliance plan and the
                             compliance plan is adequate.

              RG 45.183      The functions of a compliance committee are to:
                             (a)   monitor the extent to which a responsible entity complies with the
                                   compliance plan and report its findings to the responsible entity;
                             (b)   report any breach of the law or the scheme’s constitution to the
                                   responsible entity;
                             (c)   report to ASIC if the compliance committee considers that the
                                   responsible entity is not taking adequate action to deal with a
                                   matter reported under paragraph (b); and
                             (d)   assess at regular intervals whether the compliance plan is
                                   adequate, report to the responsible entity on the assessment and
                                   make recommendations to the responsible entity about any
                                   changes that it considers should be made to the plan: s601JC(1).

              RG 45.184      We expect compliance committees for mortgage schemes to be aware
                             of the disclosure and advertising obligations discussed in this guide.
                             Compliance committees need to regularly assess whether the
                             compliance plan contains adequate measures to ensure compliance by
                             responsible entities with their:
                             (a)   upfront and ongoing disclosure obligations, including the
                                   benchmark information in Section C and the disclosure principle
                                   information in Section D; and
                             (b)   advertising obligations as discussed in Section F.

              RG 45.185      If a compliance committee forms the view that a compliance plan is
                             not adequate, it needs to report this to the responsible entity, together
                             with recommendations about changes that should be made to the plan.

              RG 45.186      A compliance committee should also monitor compliance by the
                             responsible entity with the compliance plan. Where a compliance
                             committee identifies non-compliance or a possible breach of the law
                             (including a breach relating to the responsible entity’s disclosure and


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 48
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             advertising obligations), the compliance committee will need to make
                             a report to the responsible entity and, if necessary, report the matter to
                             us.



Compliance plan auditors
              RG 45.187      Compliance plans are subject to an annual audit. The auditor of a
                             compliance plan must give the responsible entity a report that states
                             the auditor’s opinion on whether:
                             (a)   the responsible entity has complied with the compliance plan; and
                             (b)   the plan continues to meet the requirements of the Corporations
                                   Act.

              RG 45.188      We expect compliance plan auditors to be aware of the disclosure and
                             advertising obligations in this guide. In determining whether a plan
                             continues to meet the requirements of the Corporations Act,
                             compliance plan auditors should consider whether the compliance
                             plan is adequate to ensure compliance with these disclosure and
                             advertising obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 49
                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Appendix: Example of disclosure against the
benchmarks

Benchmark                                          Statement            Explanation                   Reference

Benchmark 1: Liquidity

For a pooled mortgage scheme, the                  The benchmark        The scheme will not be        For additional
responsible entity has cash flow estimates for     is not met.          able to meet its expected     disclosure on this
the scheme that:                                                        liabilities after 6 months    benchmark, see
(a) demonstrate the scheme’s capacity to                                because [insert details of    [section X] of this
   meet its expenses, liabilities and other                             how the liabilities will be   [relevant disclosure
   cash flow needs for the next 12 months;                              funded].                      document].

(b) are updated at least every three months
   and reflect any material changes; and
(c) are approved by the directors of the
   responsible entity at least every three
   months.

Benchmark 2: Scheme borrowing

The responsible entity does not have current       The benchmark        N/A                           For additional
borrowings and does not intend to borrow on        is met.                                            disclosure on this
behalf of the scheme.                                                                                 benchmark, see
                                                                                                      [section X] of this
                                                                                                      [relevant disclosure
                                                                                                      document].

Benchmark 3: Loan portfolio and diversification

For a pooled mortgage scheme:                      The benchmark        The scheme lends to           For additional
                                                   is not met.          [insert borrower’s            disclosure on this
(a) the scheme holds a portfolio of assets
                                                                        details], who accounts        benchmark, see
   diversified by size, borrower, class of
                                                                        for more than 5% of the       [section X] of this
   borrower activity and geographic region;
                                                                        scheme’s total assets,        [relevant disclosure
(b) the scheme has no single asset in the                               because [insert               document].
   scheme portfolio that exceeds 5% of the                              explanation]. The
   total scheme assets;                                                 increased concentration
(c) the scheme has no single borrower who                               risk is addressed by
   exceeds 5% of the scheme assets; and                                 [insert details].

(d) all loans made by the scheme are secured
   by first mortgages over real property
   (including registered leasehold title).

Benchmark 4: Related party transactions

The responsible entity does not lend to related    The benchmark        The responsible entity        For additional
parties of the responsible entity or to the        is not met.          lends to companies with       disclosure on this
scheme’s investment manager.                                            common directors on the       benchmark, see
                                                                        same commercial basis         [section X] of this
                                                                        as loans to unrelated         [relevant disclosure
                                                                        parties because [insert       document].
                                                                        explanation], which
                                                                        requires [insert details of
                                                                        procedures].




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                    Page 50
                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Benchmark                                            Statement           Explanation                  Reference

Benchmark 5: Valuation policy
In relation to valuations for the scheme’s           The benchmark       N/A                          For additional
mortgage assets and their security property,         is met.                                          disclosure on this
the board of the responsible entity requires:                                                         benchmark, see
(a) a valuer to be a member of an appropriate                                                         [section X] of this
   professional body in the jurisdiction in                                                           [relevant disclosure
   which the relevant property is located;                                                            document].

(b) a valuer to be independent;
(c) procedures to be followed for dealing with
   any conflict of interest;
(d) the rotation and diversity of valuers;
(e) in relation to security property for a loan,
   an independent valuation to be obtained:
   (i) before the issue of a loan and on
       renewal:
       (A) for development property, on both an
           ‘as is’ and ‘as if complete’ basis; and
       (B) for all other property, on an ‘as is’
           basis; and
   (ii) within two months after the directors
       form a view that there is a likelihood
       that a decrease in the value of security
       property may have caused a material
       breach of a loan covenant.

Benchmark 6: Lending principles—Loan-to-valuation ratios
If the scheme directly holds mortgage assets:        The benchmark       N/A                          For additional
(a) where the loan relates to property               is met.                                          disclosure on this
   development—funds are provided to the                                                              benchmark, see
   borrower in stages based on independent                                                            [section X] of this
   evidence of the progress of the                                                                    [relevant disclosure
   development;                                                                                       document].

(b) where the loan relates to property
   development—the scheme does not lend
   more than 70% on the basis of the latest
   ‘as if complete’ valuation of property over
   which security is provided; and
(c) in all other cases—the scheme does not
   lend more than 80% on the basis of the
   latest market valuation of property over
   which security is provided.

Benchmark 7: Distribution practices
The responsible entity will not pay current          The benchmark       N/A                          For additional
distributions from scheme borrowings.                is met.                                          disclosure on this
                                                                                                      benchmark, see
                                                                                                      [section X] of this
                                                                                                      [relevant disclosure
                                                                                                      document].




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                    Page 51
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Benchmark                                           Statement          Explanation                  Reference

Benchmark 8: Withdrawal arrangements

Liquid schemes

For liquid schemes:                                 The benchmark      The scheme constitution      For additional
(a) the maximum period allowed for in the           is not met.        provides a period of         disclosure on this
   constitution for the payment of withdrawal                          3 years for the              benchmark, see
   requests is 90 days or less;                                        responsible entity to        [section X] of this
                                                                       meet withdrawal              [relevant disclosure
(b) the responsible entity will pay withdrawal
                                                                       requests, which means        document].
   requests within the period allowed for in
                                                                       such requests may be
   the constitution; and
                                                                       delayed for at least
(c) the responsible entity only permits                                3 years because [insert
   members to withdraw at any time on                                  explanation] and [insert
   request if at least 80% (by value) of the                           details of how
   scheme property is:                                                 withdrawals will be
   (i) money in an account or on deposit with                          satisfied].
        a bank and is available for withdrawal
        immediately, or otherwise on expiry of a
        fixed term not exceeding 90 days, during
        the normal business hours of the bank; or
   (ii) assets that the responsible entity can
        reasonably expect to realise for market
        value within 10 business days.

Non-liquid schemes

For non-liquid schemes, the responsible entity      Not applicable
intends to make withdrawal offers to investors
at least quarterly.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 52
                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Key terms

                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AASB 107 (for             An Australian accounting standard made for the purposes of the
                               example)                  Corporations Act (in this example, numbered 107)

                               advertisements            Includes comment and promotion of mortgage schemes in
                                                         media programs or publications (generally known as
                                                         ‘advertorials’) and statements about mortgage schemes
                                                         published by responsible entities on their websites that are
                                                         intended to promote the scheme to retail investors (but does
                                                         not include statements in the PDS)

                               AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of the
                                                         Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries on a
                                                         financial services business to provide financial services
                                                              Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                              Corporations Act.

                               AFS licensee              A person who holds an Australian financial services licence
                                                         under s913B of the Corporations Act
                                                              Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                              Corporations Act.

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001

                               ‘as if complete’          An estimate of the market value of a property, assuming
                               valuation                 certain specified improvements are made

                               ‘as is’ valuation         An estimate of the market value of a property in its current
                                                         state (i.e. without any further improvements)

                               Australian accounting     Standards made for the purposes of s296(1) of the
                               standards                 Corporations Act

                               benchmark                 A statement in relation to each benchmark that the
                               information               scheme either:
                                                          meets the benchmark; or
                                                          does not meet the benchmark and explains how and why
                                                           the responsible entity deals with the business factors or
                                                           issues underlying the benchmark in another way

                               cash or cash              Has the same meaning as in AASB 107: see Note 2 to
                               equivalents               RG 45.34

                               Ch 2E (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example, numbered 2E)

                               [CO 03/237] (for          An ASIC class order (in this example, numbered 03/237)
                               example)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                          Page 53
                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               contributory mortgage      A mortgage scheme under which an investor invests in
                               scheme                     a single mortgage loan through:
                                                           a general authority, where the investor receives a
                                                            summary after the application is approved followed by
                                                            a cooling-off period; or
                                                           a specific authority, where the investor receives
                                                            a supplementary PDS before investing

                               Corporations Act           Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                               Corporations               Corporations Regulations 2001
                               Regulations

                               CP 99                      An ASIC consultation paper (in this example, numbered 99)

                               disclosure principle       Information covered by the disclosure principles in Section D
                               information                of this guide

                               feeder fund                A scheme that invests all or most of its assets in other
                                                          unlisted mortgage schemes

                               liquidity                  For the purposes of Benchmark 1 and Disclosure Principle 1,
                                                          the proportion of cash or cash equivalents in a scheme’s
                                                          assets
                                                               Note: ‘Liquidity’ for the purposes of this benchmark and
                                                               disclosure principle is not the same as ‘liquidity’ for the
                                                               purposes of Pt 5C.6 (which relates to satisfying a statutory
                                                               test).

                               market value               An estimate of the amount for which the property or asset
                                                          could exchange on the valuation date between a willing
                                                          buyer and a willing seller in an arm’s length transaction

                               mortgage loan              A loan secured by a mortgage over real property (including
                                                          residential, commercial, industrial or retail property, or vacant
                                                          land)

                               mortgage scheme            A managed investment scheme that has, or that is likely
                                                          to have, at least 50% of its non-cash assets invested in
                                                          mortgage loans and/or unlisted mortgage schemes
                                                               Note: This definition includes contributory mortgage schemes.

                               Product Disclosure         A document that must be given to a retail client in relation to
                               Statement (PDS)            the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance with
                                                          Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                               Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                               Pt 5C.7 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example, numbered
                                                          5C.7)

                               registered managed         A managed investment scheme registered under s601EB of
                               investment scheme          the Corporations Act

                               registered scheme          A registered managed investment scheme




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                         Page 54
                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               related party             Has the meaning given to that term in s228, or as modified
                                                         by Pt 5C.7 for registered schemes, as the case may be

                               responsible entity        The public company named in ASIC’s record of the scheme’s
                                                         registration as the responsible entity or temporary
                                                         responsible entity of a registered scheme

                               retail client             A client as defined in s761G of the Corporations Act and
                                                         associated Corporations Regulations

                               retail investor           For the purposes of this guide, a retail client who invests in a
                                                         mortgage scheme

                               RG 69                     An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example, numbered 69)

                               rollovers                 Where an existing investor keeps their money in the existing
                                                         mortgage scheme for an additional term (whether on the
                                                         same or slightly different terms)

                               s1017B (for example)      A section of the Corporations Act (in this example, numbered
                                                         1017B), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                    Page 55
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Related information
                             Headnotes
                             advertising, benchmarks, compliance committees, compliance plan
                             auditors, compliance plans, contributory mortgage schemes,
                             deceptive, disclosure, disclosure principles, listed, misleading,
                             mortgage schemes, pooled mortgage schemes, PDSs, Product
                             Disclosure Statements, responsible entities, unlisted, valuers

                             Class order
                             [CO 03/237] Updated information in product disclosure statements

                             Regulatory guides
                             RG 69 Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail
                             investors
                             RG 76 Related party transactions
                             RG 118 Commentary on compliance plans: Contributory mortgage
                             schemes
                             RG 119 Commentary on compliance plans: Pooled mortgage schemes
                             RG 132 Managed investments: Compliance plans
                             RG 144 Mortgage investment schemes
                             RG 156 Advertising of debentures and notes to retail investors
                             RG 168 Disclosure: Product Disclosure Statements (and other
                             disclosure obligations)
                             RG 170 Prospective financial information
                             RG 198 Unlisted disclosing entities: Continuous disclosure
                             obligations
                             RG 228 Prospectuses: Effective disclosure for retail investors

                             Legislation
                             ASIC Act, s12DF and 12GI(4)
                             Corporations Act, Chs 2E, 2M and 6CA, Pts 5C.6, 5C.7 and 7.9, s228,
                             601EA, 601FC, 601HA, 601JA, 601JC, 675, 769C, 912A, 1013C,
                             1013D, 1013E, 1017B, 1017D and 1020E




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 56
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 45: Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Consultation papers
                             CP 99 Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail clients
                             CP 141 Mortgage schemes: Strengthening the disclosure benchmarks




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2012                                                  Page 57
