REGULATORY GUIDE 71

Downstream acquisitions

August 2016




About this guide
This guide is for companies, listed managed investment schemes, investors
and their advisers who are involved in, or affected by, downstream
acquisitions.

In some circumstances, a downstream acquisition may breach s606 of the
Corporations Act.

This guide explains:
   the downstream acquisition exemption in item 14 of s611 (item 14);
   when we may grant relief;
   the conditions that may apply to our relief; and
   how to apply for relief.
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in August 2016 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. On 27 July 2020, we updated the process
                             for submitting an application for relief in RG 71.89.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 71, issued May 2012
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 71, issued 15 November 1993, reissued
                                     1 July 1996, rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                           Page 2
                                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




Contents



                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    What is a downstream acquisition? ................................................... 4
                                    Purposes of Ch 6 ............................................................................... 5
                                    The exemption in item 14 .................................................................. 6
                                    When ASIC may grant relief .............................................................. 6
                                    Conditions of relief that may apply .................................................... 6
                                    Applying for relief ............................................................................... 6
                             B      The exemption in item 14 ................................................................ 7
                                    The exemption in item 14 .................................................................. 7
                                    Our approach to the exemption ......................................................... 8
                                    Scope of the exemption ..................................................................... 8
                             C      When ASIC may grant relief.......................................................... 11
                                    Our approach to relief applications .................................................. 11
                                    When we may grant relief ................................................................ 12
                                    Key concepts relevant to our decision about relief and conditions.. 13
                                    When we will not grant relief ............................................................ 15
                             D      Conditions of relief ........................................................................ 16
                                    What conditions may apply? ............................................................ 16
                                    Downstream bid condition ............................................................... 17
                                    Standstill and voting conditions ....................................................... 22
                                    Other conditions that may apply ...................................................... 24
                             E      Applying for relief .......................................................................... 25
                                    How to apply for relief ...................................................................... 25
                                    Information applicants should provide ............................................. 25
                                    Procedural fairness .......................................................................... 26
                                    Approving a foreign exchange ......................................................... 27
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 28
                             Related information ............................................................................... 30




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                                        Page 3
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               A person may acquire a relevant interest in the shares of a downstream
                               company as a result of an acquisition of a relevant interest in an upstream
                               entity.

                               This guide explains:
                               • downstream acquisitions and when a person may breach s606 as a
                                 result of an upstream acquisition (see RG 71.1–RG 71.4);
                               • the exemption for downstream acquisitions in item 14 of s611 (item 14),
                                 our approach to the exemption, the scope of the exemption, and when
                                 we may apply to the Takeovers Panel for a declaration of unacceptable
                                 circumstances even though the exemption in item 14 is satisfied (see
                                 Section B);
                               • when we may grant relief to allow downstream acquisitions that would
                                 breach s606 because they do not satisfy the exemption in item 14 (see
                                 Section C);
                               • the conditions that may apply to our relief (see Section D); and
                               • how to apply for relief (see Section E).




What is a downstream acquisition?
              RG 71.1        A downstream acquisition occurs when a person acquires a relevant interest
                             in the shares of a downstream company as a result of an acquisition in an
                             upstream entity (downstream acquisition).

              RG 71.2        This is because a person is deemed under s608(3) of the Corporations Act
                             2001 (Corporations Act) to have the same relevant interests in securities that
                             an upstream entity has if they have voting power above 20% in, or control,
                             the entity.

                                   Note: For ease of reference, we have generally used the term ‘company’ and ‘shares’
                                   when referring to the downstream company because this is consistent with the language
                                   adopted in Ch 6 of the Corporations Act. However, Ch 6 and this guide also apply to the
                                   acquisition of relevant interests in voting securities of listed bodies and voting interests
                                   of listed managed investment schemes: s603 and 604. In relation to the upstream
                                   company, body or scheme, Ch 6 uses the terms ‘listed company’ and ‘body corporate’.
                                   For ease of reference, we have used the term ‘upstream entity’ throughout this guide.

              RG 71.3        The downstream acquisition will breach s606 in circumstances where the
                             relevant interest in the downstream company exceeds the thresholds in s606,
                             unless an exemption in s611 applies. Item 14 of s611 (item 14) provides an
                             exemption for certain downstream acquisitions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                         Page 4
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




              RG 71.4        Two examples of downstream acquisitions that may breach the thresholds in
                             s606 are set out below.

                               Example 1: Acquiring a relevant interest in an upstream entity

                               Company A acquires a relevant interest in 40% of the securities in Entity B
                               where Entity B has a relevant interest in 25% of the shares in Company C.
                               This will result in Company A acquiring a relevant interest in 25% of the
                               shares in Company C (by the application of s608(3)(a)).


                               Example 2: Acquiring control of an upstream managed investment
                               scheme

                               Company A acquires control of Scheme 1 where Scheme 1 has a relevant
                               interest in 25% of the interests in Scheme 2 (a listed managed investment
                               scheme). This will result in Company A acquiring a relevant interest in 25%
                               of the interests in Scheme 2 (by application of s608(3)(b)).

                                   Note: It is assumed in each example that Company A did not have an existing relevant
                                   interest in the shares in Company C or in the interests in Scheme 2.




Purposes of Ch 6
              RG 71.5        The purposes of Ch 6 as set out in s602 are relevant to downstream
                             acquisitions. This is because a downstream acquisition may result in:
                             (a)   an upstream acquirer obtaining control over a substantial interest in
                                   the downstream company without downstream shareholders being
                                   given an opportunity to consider the proposal, contrary to the principle
                                   in s602(b); or
                             (b)   the downstream holders not being given an equal opportunity to share
                                   in any premium for control of the downstream shares that is reflected
                                   in the price paid for the upstream acquisition, contrary to the principle
                                   in s602(c).

              RG 71.6        A downstream acquisition that satisfies the exemption in item 14 may
                             nonetheless give rise to unacceptable circumstances if the acquisition
                             offends the principles in s602. We will also consider the purposes of Ch 6
                             when considering whether to give relief to a downstream acquisition that
                             does not satisfy the exemption in item 14 and the conditions that should
                             apply to our relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                    Page 5
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




The exemption in item 14
              RG 71.7        The exemption in item 14 applies where the upstream entity is included in
                             the official list of a prescribed financial market or a foreign body conducting
                             a financial market approved by us. ASIC’s list of approved foreign financial
                             markets is set out in ASIC Corporations (Approved Foreign Financial
                             Markets) Instrument 2015/1071.

              RG 71.8        When considering whether a downstream acquisition is exempt from the
                             prohibition in s606, persons acquiring a relevant interest in an upstream entity
                             should be aware that there are limits to the scope of the exemption in item 14,
                             and a downstream acquisition may risk an application to the Takeovers Panel
                             for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances even though the exemption
                             applies. For a discussion of the downstream acquisition exemption in item 14
                             and the circumstances in which it should apply, see Section B.



When ASIC may grant relief
              RG 71.9        ASIC has discretionary powers under s655A to grant relief from the
                             requirements of Ch 6. The circumstances where we may grant case-by-case
                             relief to permit a downstream acquisition that does not satisfy the exemption
                             in item 14 are discussed in Section C. We will continue to monitor
                             downstream acquisition transactions and consider new developments in this
                             area, as appropriate.



Conditions of relief that may apply
              RG 71.10       The types of conditions that we may impose on any relief we grant will
                             depend on the circumstances of the downstream acquisition: see Section D.
                             Table 1 in Section D summarises when certain conditions will apply and
                             where to find more information on the conditions.



Applying for relief
              RG 71.11       Applications for relief should be made before the upstream acquisition is
                             made. For details on how to apply for relief, see Section E.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                          Page 6
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




B          The exemption in item 14

                               Key points

                               Item 14 provides an exemption from s606 for downstream acquisitions
                               where the upstream entity is listed on a prescribed financial market or on
                               an approved foreign financial market.

                               This section explains:
                               • the exemption in item 14 (see RG 71.12–RG 71.15);
                               • our approach to the exemption (see RG 71.16–RG 71.18); and
                               • the scope of the exemption, including when we may apply to the
                                 Takeovers Panel for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances
                                 (see RG 71.19–RG 71.24 and RG 71.26–RG 71.28).



The exemption in item 14
              RG 71.12       Item 14 exempts a downstream acquisition from breaching s606 where the
                             acquisition results from an upstream acquisition of a relevant interest in
                             voting shares of a body corporate that is included in the official list of:
                             (a)   a prescribed financial market; or
                             (b)   a foreign body conducting a financial market that is a body approved in
                                   writing by us.

              RG 71.13       The exemption in item 14 was introduced following a period of uncertainty
                             in the law and recommendations by the Legal Committee of the Companies
                             and Securities Advisory Committee (CASAC) in its paper Anomalies in the
                             takeovers provisions of the Corporations Law (March 1994).

              RG 71.14       We have approved a list of foreign financial markets for the purposes of
                             item 14: see ASIC Corporations (Approved Foreign Financial Markets)
                             Instrument 2015/1071. All of the foreign bodies conducting a financial
                             market included in this list are also included in the list of approved foreign
                             markets in Regulatory Guide 72 Foreign securities: Disclosure relief
                             (RG 72).
                                   Note: Unless otherwise stated, our relief only extends to the main board of these markets.

              RG 71.15       In approving the list of foreign financial markets, we took into account the
                             criteria set out at RG 72.58 because we consider that the extension of the
                             item 14 exemption to foreign exchanges that meet these criteria satisfies the
                             policy behind the exemption in item 14: see RG 71.17. For a discussion of
                             when we may approve a new foreign market for the purposes of item 14, see
                             RG 71.96–RG 71.98.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                       Page 7
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




Our approach to the exemption
              RG 71.16       Our approach to the exemption for downstream acquisitions in item 14 is to
                             uphold the policy behind the exemption while also taking into account the
                             investor protections afforded to downstream shareholders in s602.

              RG 71.17       The policy behind the exemption in item 14 is designed to:
                             (a)   preserve the free flow of shares in widely held entities listed on
                                   appropriate exchanges;
                             (b)   prevent companies constructing a takeover defence through the
                                   acquisition of strategic parcels in downstream companies; and
                             (c)   enhance international comity through the removal of obstacles to
                                   primarily foreign business transactions.

                                   Note: See the Legal Committee of CASAC, Anomalies in the takeovers provisions of
                                   the Corporations Law (March 1994) at pp. 30–2 and the Explanatory Memorandum,
                                   Corporations Bill 1988, cl 1966.

              RG 71.18       International comity considerations underpin the extension of the exemption
                             in item 14 to downstream acquisitions occurring as a result of an acquisition
                             in a foreign entity listed on an approved foreign financial market. This is
                             because Australian securities regulation should not impose excessive costs or
                             regulatory obstacles on primarily foreign corporate transactions.



Scope of the exemption
              RG 71.19       When considering whether a downstream acquisition is exempt from the
                             prohibition in s606, persons acquiring a relevant interest in an upstream
                             entity should be aware that:
                             (a)   the upstream entity must have a primary listing (and not only a
                                   secondary listing) on a prescribed financial market or an approved
                                   foreign financial market;
                             (b)   we will not consider that a downstream acquisition should be exempt
                                   from s606 merely because another exemption in s611 may apply to the
                                   upstream acquisition; and
                             (c)   a downstream acquisition may risk an application to the Takeovers
                                   Panel for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances even if it satisfies
                                   the exemption in item 14.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                 Page 8
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             Secondary listings

              RG 71.20       Class Order [CO 13/520] Relevant interests, voting power and exceptions to
                             the general prohibition modifies item 14 to exclude secondary listings from
                             the scope of the exemption. This is because the place of incorporation and
                             the listing rules of the exchange on which the upstream entity has its primary
                             listing may not satisfy the policy behind the exemption in item 14. This
                             means that the item 14 exemption will not apply if the upstream entity only
                             has a secondary listing on a prescribed financial market or on an approved
                             foreign exchange: see [CO 13/520].

              RG 71.21       Where a person makes an upstream acquisition and the upstream entity has
                             only a secondary listing on a prescribed financial market or an approved
                             foreign financial market, the acquirer may apply to us for individual
                             downstream acquisition relief: see Section C.


                             Upstream acquisitions where another exemption in s611
                             applies

              RG 71.22       We may not consider that a downstream acquisition should be exempt from
                             s606 merely because another exemption in s611 applies to the upstream
                             acquisition.

              RG 71.23       Downstream acquisitions will most often arise when a person makes a
                             takeover offer for an upstream entity. There is an exemption from s606 for
                             acquisitions that result from the acceptance of a takeover offer made under
                             Ch 6: see item 1 of s611.

              RG 71.24       We do not consider that a downstream acquisition will be exempt from the
                             prohibition in s606 merely because an exemption in s611 other than item 14
                             applies to the upstream acquisition. This is because there is a separate
                             express exemption for downstream acquisitions in item 14. However, we
                             acknowledge that there are different views on this issue.

              RG 71.25       An acquirer who cannot rely on item 14 but seeks to rely on another
                             exemption in s611 in relation to a downstream acquisition may risk regulatory
                             action by us, including an application to the Takeovers Panel for a declaration
                             of unacceptable circumstances.


                             Unacceptable circumstances

              RG 71.26       A downstream acquisition may give rise to unacceptable circumstances even
                             if it satisfies the exemption in item 14. An application to the Takeovers
                             Panel for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances and orders (which
                             include remedial orders) in relation to the affairs of a company can be made
                             by ASIC or any other interested person: see Pt 6.10, Div 2, Subdiv B.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                         Page 9
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




              RG 71.27       Whether the circumstances of a downstream acquisition are unacceptable
                             will depend on the particulars of each case. However, the Takeovers Panel
                             will have regard to the purposes of Ch 6 set out in s602 when considering an
                             application for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances. The Takeovers
                             Panel stated in Australian Pipeline Trust 01R [2006] ATP 29 at [106] that:
                                   … there is clear indication in the explanatory memoranda and the relevant
                                   extrinsic material (for the Corporations Act and its preceding legislation)
                                   that the legislature was concerned that the exemption set out in Item 14 not
                                   be abused and the intent of Chapter 6 not be avoided.

              RG 71.28       The types of circumstances in which we may consider applying to the
                             Takeovers Panel for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances despite the
                             exemption in item 14 applying include where:
                             (a)   control of the downstream company is a significant purpose of the
                                   upstream acquisition (see, for example, the discussion in Leighton
                                   Holdings Limited 02R [2010] ATP 14 at 67 and 70–86, and Leighton
                                   Holdings 01, 02, 03 [2010] ATP 13 at 55); and/or
                                   Note: If the downstream shares comprise over 50% of the assets of the upstream entity, the
                                   Takeovers Panel will consider if (among other factors) reliance on item 14 is unacceptable
                                   in the circumstances: see the discussion in Leighton Holdings Limited 02R [2010] ATP 14.

                             (b)   the downstream acquisition technically satisfies the exemption in item 14
                                   but subverts or otherwise does not meet the policy basis for reliance on
                                   the exemption in item 14, such as where the upstream entity is listed in
                                   name only and is closely held (see Cape Lambert Minsec Pty Ltd [2009]
                                   ATP 12 at 40).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                      Page 10
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




C          When ASIC may grant relief

                               Key points

                               Relief will be required where a downstream acquisition does not satisfy the
                               exemption in item 14.
                               This section explains:
                               • our approach to relief (see RG 71.29–RG 71.33);
                               • when we may grant relief (see RG 71.34–RG 71.36);
                               • key concepts relevant to our decision whether to grant relief (see
                                 RG 71.37–RG 71.47); and
                               • when we will not grant relief (see RG 71.48).



Our approach to relief applications
              RG 71.29       A person may apply for relief to make a downstream acquisition that would
                             otherwise result in the person breaching s606. This will be required if the
                             upstream entity is unlisted or does not have a primary listing on a prescribed
                             financial market or on an approved foreign financial market.

              RG 71.30       In deciding whether to grant relief for a downstream acquisition that does
                             not satisfy the exemption in item 14, we will consider:
                             (a)   the policy objectives of the exemption in item 14 (see RG 71.16–
                                   RG 71.18); and
                             (b)   the purposes of Ch 6, as set out in s602 (see RG 71.5–RG 71.6).

              RG 71.31       A prerequisite to relief will be compliance by the party applying for relief
                             with the disclosure obligations discussed below.


                             Disclosure obligations
              RG 71.32       Before we grant relief for a downstream acquisition that does not satisfy
                             item 14, the applicant must satisfy us that the market for the shares in the
                             downstream company is adequately informed about the upstream acquisition.

              RG 71.33       We will not grant relief unless the acquirer of the upstream entity discloses
                             to the downstream company details about the timing and terms of the
                             upstream acquisition at the time the upstream acquisition is announced. If
                             the downstream company is listed, this will enable the downstream company
                             to make an announcement to the relevant financial market about the
                             upstream acquisition and the implications for the downstream shareholders.
                             If the downstream company is not listed, the provision of this information
                             will enable the downstream company to communicate directly with its




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                        Page 11
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             members about the upstream acquisition and the potential implications of the
                             upstream acquisition on the downstream company.



When we may grant relief
              RG 71.34       We may grant relief subject to conditions appropriate to the circumstances if
                             we are satisfied that the policy and investor protections identified in this
                             guide will be upheld.

              RG 71.35       We will consider the following factors when deciding whether to grant relief:
                             (a)   whether the upstream entity is listed or unlisted. We will be more likely
                                   to grant relief if the upstream entity is listed;
                             (b)   international comity considerations;
                             (c)   whether control of the downstream company appears to be a significant
                                   purpose of the upstream acquisition or whether the downstream shares
                                   are a substantial part of the upstream entity’s assets;
                                   Note: If we grant relief despite these factors being present, we would be likely to
                                   impose a downstream bid condition to ensure that the principles in s602 will be upheld.

                             (d)   the alternatives that are available to the acquirer. There may be other
                                   ways to structure a transaction so that relief is not required, such as
                                   where the downstream shares can be simply and efficiently separated
                                   from the other assets of the upstream entity. In these circumstances, we
                                   may refuse relief as unnecessary. However, we understand that
                                   negotiations to separate the downstream shares from the assets of an
                                   upstream entity may be impracticable in the circumstances;
                             (e)   whether the regulation that applies to the upstream acquisition achieves
                                   similar regulatory outcomes to Australian takeovers regulation;
                             (f)   whether the upstream entity is widely or closely held—for example:
                                   (i)    we will be unlikely to grant relief where the upstream entity is
                                          unlisted and closely held or listed in name only and closely held; and
                                   (ii)   where the upstream entity is closely held, it may also be easier for
                                          the acquirer to negotiate to separate the shares in the downstream
                                          company from the other assets of the upstream entity and relief
                                          would be unnecessary; and
                             (g)   any other circumstances that we consider relevant to the particular case.

              RG 71.36       We may grant relief without conditions in rare and exceptional
                             circumstances. The circumstances where we may grant relief without
                             conditions are where:
                             (a)   we are in the process of approving the relevant financial market for the
                                   purposes of item 14; or




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                    Page 12
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             (b)   the upstream entity has a secondary listing on a prescribed financial
                                   market or approved foreign financial market, which in the
                                   circumstances is effectively the primary regulation that applies to the
                                   upstream entity.



Key concepts relevant to our decision about relief and conditions
              RG 71.37       When deciding whether to grant relief and the conditions that may apply, the
                             following concepts are relevant:
                             (a)   whether control of the downstream company may be regarded as a
                                   significant purpose of the upstream acquisition (this is relevant to both
                                   whether we will grant relief and the conditions that may apply);
                             (b)   whether the downstream shares are a substantial part of the upstream
                                   entity’s assets (this is relevant to both whether we will grant relief and
                                   the conditions that may apply); and
                             (c)   whether the acquirer will obtain effective control of the downstream
                                   company as a result of the upstream acquisition (this is relevant to the
                                   conditions that may apply).

              RG 71.38       For a discussion of the conditions that may apply to our relief, see Section D.
                             For guidance on the information that should be provided to us when
                             applying for relief, see Section E.


                             Control purpose

              RG 71.39       If there is a control purpose in relation to the downstream company, we may
                             refuse to grant relief, or grant relief subject to conditions that ensure that the
                             principles in s602 will be upheld (such as requiring that the acquirer make a
                             downstream bid).

              RG 71.40       When assessing whether control of the downstream company may be
                             regarded as a significant purpose of the upstream acquisition, we will take
                             into account all the relevant circumstances. These will include whether the
                             circumstances suggest that the upstream acquisition has been structured or
                             designed to avoid complying with Ch 6 in relation to the downstream company.

              RG 71.41       The following factors may suggest to us that control of the downstream
                             company is a significant purpose of the upstream acquisition:
                             (a)   the percentage of shares in the downstream company held by the
                                   upstream entity, including whether the shares comprise a substantial
                                   part of the assets of the upstream entity;
                             (b)   the voting power of the acquirer in the downstream company at the time
                                   of the application, as well as the voting power of the acquirer following
                                   the upstream acquisition;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                          Page 13
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             (c)   the nature of the assets of the upstream entity, other than the shares in
                                   the downstream company (i.e. whether they are highly liquid, or are
                                   readily procurable or saleable commodities otherwise than through the
                                   upstream acquisition);
                             (d)   any association or aggregation of relevant interests or voting power
                                   caused by the downstream acquisition; and
                             (e)   cross-shareholdings, common board memberships and any other
                                   common significant management or other relevant relationships
                                   between any of the following:
                                   (i)     the acquirer;
                                   (ii)    the upstream entity;
                                   (iii)   the downstream company; or
                                   (iv)    their associates.


                             Substantial assets

              RG 71.42       If the downstream shares comprise a substantial part of the assets of the
                             upstream entity, we may refuse relief or grant relief subject to conditions that
                             ensure that the principles in s602 will be upheld (such as requiring that the
                             acquirer make a downstream bid).

              RG 71.43       We will normally regard 50% of the upstream entity’s assets as the threshold
                             for determining whether the downstream shares constitute ‘a substantial part
                             of the assets of the upstream entity’. If the market value of the downstream
                             shares constitutes more than 50% of the value of the assets of the upstream
                             entity, we will be more likely to determine that control of the downstream
                             company is a significant purpose of the upstream acquisition.

              RG 71.44       While 50% or more of the assets of the upstream entity is the threshold for
                             determining whether the downstream shares constitute a substantial part of
                             the assets of the upstream entity, we may choose to lower this figure taking
                             into account the practical circumstances of the proposed acquisitions (e.g. if
                             the upstream entity has significant cash assets).


                             Effective control

              RG 71.45       If the acquirer will obtain effective control of the downstream company as a
                             result of an upstream acquisition, any relief granted would generally be
                             subject to a condition that the acquirer make a downstream bid for the
                             downstream company.

              RG 71.46       When determining whether the acquirer will obtain effective control of the
                             downstream company, we will generally regard voting power of 50% or
                             above as constituting effective control. This is because the acquirer will have




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                        Page 14
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             absolute or effective control over the downstream company with control
                             over 50% or more of the voting shares.

              RG 71.47       We may choose a figure lower than 50% if it appears to us that effective
                             control over the downstream company, such as is envisaged under s50AA or
                             the accounting standards dealing with controlling entities, may be exercised
                             with less than 50% of the voting shares in the downstream company. We
                             will also consider the circumstances of the downstream company, including
                             the share register and whether there are any other substantial shareholdings
                             in the downstream company.



When we will not grant relief
              RG 71.48       We will not grant relief to facilitate a downstream acquisition where:
                             (a)   relief would be inconsistent with the policy behind the exemption in
                                   item 14 and the principles in s602; or
                             (b)   after considering all the relevant circumstances, we are not satisfied that
                                   the regulatory detriment is minimal or clearly outweighed by the
                                   resulting commercial benefit (see Regulatory Guide 51 Applications for
                                   relief (RG 51), in particular RG 51.57–RG 51.62); or
                             (c)   the upstream acquisition is not legal in the jurisdiction where it is to
                                   take place; or
                             (d)   it appears to us that the downstream acquisition may give rise to
                                   unacceptable circumstances.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                          Page 15
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




D          Conditions of relief

                               Key points

                               This section explains the factors we will consider when determining the
                               types of conditions that may apply to our relief: see RG 71.49–RG 71.52.

                               The conditions that may apply to our relief are:
                               • a downstream bid condition (see RG 71.53–RG 71.72); or
                               • standstill and voting conditions (see RG 71.73–RG 71.81); and/or
                               • other conditions instead of, or in addition to, these conditions, including
                                 a sell-down condition (see RG 71.82–RG 71.85).



What conditions may apply?
              RG 71.49       Before we grant relief to allow a downstream acquisition that does not
                             satisfy item 14, the applicant must satisfy us that the market for the shares in
                             the downstream company will be adequately informed about the upstream
                             acquisition. This will generally require the applicant to comply with certain
                             disclosure obligations: see RG 71.32–RG 71.33.

              RG 71.50       Where we grant relief to allow a downstream acquisition that does not
                             satisfy the exemption in item 14, our relief will be subject to:
                             (a)   a downstream bid condition; or
                             (b)   standstill and voting conditions; and/or
                             (c)   other types of conditions (including a sell-down condition) instead of,
                                   or in addition to, the above conditions on a case-by-case basis.

              RG 71.51       When determining the conditions that should apply, we will consider:
                             (a)   whether control of the downstream company may be regarded as a
                                   significant purpose of the upstream acquisition (see RG 71.39–RG 71.41);
                             (b)   whether the downstream shares represent a substantial part of the assets
                                   of the upstream entity (see RG 71.42–RG 71.44);
                             (c)   whether the downstream shares to be acquired through the upstream
                                   acquisition will give the acquirer effective control of the downstream
                                   company (see RG 71.45–RG 71.47);
                             (d)   the effect of the acquisition on the other downstream shareholders;
                             (e)   whether the conditions are practical in the circumstances; and
                             (f)   any other circumstances that we consider relevant to the particular case.

                                   Note: When calculating the downstream shares to which the upstream acquirer is
                                   entitled to, or becomes entitled to following the downstream acquisition, we will
                                   include the shares and interests in the downstream company referred to in RG 71.41.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                   Page 16
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




              RG 71.52       Table 1 summarises the different types of conditions that may apply to
                             our relief.

Table 1:     Conditions that may apply

 Conditions                                 When they may apply

 Downstream bid condition                   This condition will generally apply when:
 (see RG 71.53–RG 71.72)                     control of the downstream company appears to be a significant
                                              purpose; or
                                             downstream shares are a substantial part of the upstream entity’s
                                              assets; or
                                             effective control of the downstream company will be obtained.

 Standstill and voting conditions           These types of conditions will generally apply when:
 (see RG 71.73–RG 71.81)                     control of the downstream company does not appear to be a
                                              significant purpose;
                                             downstream shares are not a substantial part of the upstream
                                              entity’s assets; and
                                             effective control of the downstream company will not be obtained.

 Other types of conditions                  We will apply other types of conditions on a case-by-case basis, as
 (including a sell-down condition)          appropriate. These conditions may be instead of, or in addition to, the
 (see RG 71.82–RG 71.85)                    above conditions.




Downstream bid condition
              RG 71.53       A downstream bid condition will require the acquirer to make a takeover bid
                             for the downstream company on terms consistent with the policy set out
                             below. The purpose of the downstream bid condition is to ensure that, as far
                             as is practicable, the downstream shareholders share equally in the benefits
                             being offered to the upstream holders under the upstream acquisition. Our
                             guidance on the terms of the downstream bid is based on the Federal Court
                             decision in BTR Plc v Westinghouse Brake and Signal Co (Australia) Ltd
                             (1992) 106 ALR 35.

              RG 71.54       Where our relief is subject to a downstream bid condition, we may also
                             impose a voting condition that would generally prevent the acquirer from
                             being able to exercise, or procure the exercise of, the votes attached to the
                             downstream shares in excess of 20% until the close of the downstream bid.
                             This condition is to ensure fairness between the acquirer and the other
                             downstream shareholders during the downstream bid period.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                Page 17
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             Type of bid
              RG 71.55       A downstream bid must be an offer to acquire all (and not a specified
                             proportion) of the bid class securities that the acquirer does not otherwise
                             have a relevant interest in and that exist or will exist at the date specified in
                             the bidder’s statement lodged with ASIC.

                             Pricing of downstream bid
              RG 71.56       We will normally require a downstream bid to be cash or include a cash
                             alternative that is not less than the fair value ascribed to the downstream
                             shares by an independent expert approved by us, or the ‘effective’ price.


                             ‘Effective’ price

              RG 71.57       If the price effectively being offered to the upstream shareholders for the
                             shares in the downstream company held by the upstream entity can be
                             clearly and accurately determined from the upstream acquisition price, we
                             will allow the downstream bid to be made at the ‘effective’ price (i.e. where
                             the upstream entity is a listed investment entity and the upstream acquisition
                             price does not indicate that the market price for each of the investments is
                             unreliable).

              RG 71.58       We reserve the discretion in such cases to alter the pricing mechanism for
                             the downstream bid if later information indicates that the ‘effective’ price
                             paid for the downstream shares is not as transparent as represented to us in
                             the application. Any uncertainty about the price will be reduced if we have
                             the opportunity to obtain submissions from third parties who may be affected
                             by our decision before we alter the pricing mechanism for the downstream
                             bid. These submissions would be on the mechanism for determining the
                             price of the downstream bid.

              RG 71.59       If the upstream acquisition price is ‘see-through’ and is increased during the
                             course of the upstream acquisition, the increase must be reflected in an
                             increase in the downstream bid price.


                             Independent expert’s valuation to determine fair value

              RG 71.60       It will often not be possible to clearly and accurately determine the
                             ‘effective’ price being offered for the downstream shares from the upstream
                             acquisition price. Where this is the case, we will generally require that the
                             consideration for the downstream bid must not be less than the fair value
                             ascribed to the shares in the downstream company as determined by an
                             independent expert approved by us.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                          Page 18
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




              RG 71.61       In determining the fair value of shares in the downstream company:
                             (a)   the independent expert should follow the guidance in Regulatory
                                   Guide 111 Content of expert reports (RG 111);
                             (b)   the independent expert must determine the value per share, inclusive of
                                   a premium for control, regardless of percentage ownership of the
                                   downstream company (because this valuation method, by definition,
                                   distributes any control premium equally between all shareholders);
                             (c)   the independent expert must determine the value per share on the basis of
                                   information that was available to the acquirer at the time the acquirer was
                                   fixing the price of the upstream acquisition (the independent expert is not
                                   limited to information that was used by the acquirer);
                             (d)   the acquirer must ensure that the independent expert is provided with all
                                   information about the downstream company that was available to the
                                   acquirer when the acquirer was fixing the price of the upstream acquisition;
                             (e)   the independent expert report must include a prominent statement that:
                                   (i)    the purpose of the report is to set the price of the downstream bid
                                          and has not been prepared for the purpose of providing an opinion
                                          as to whether the downstream bid is fair and reasonable within the
                                          meaning of s640; and
                                   (ii)   that the report has been prepared on the basis of information
                                          available to the acquirer at the time the upstream acquisition price
                                          was fixed and therefore will not take into account any new
                                          circumstances that occur in relation to the downstream company,
                                          which may affect the fair value of the downstream shares;
                             (f)   the acquirer of the upstream entity must pay the independent expert’s
                                   fees; and
                             (g)   the independent expert report must be included in the acquirer’s
                                   bidder’s statement for the downstream company.

              RG 71.62       If the independent expert gives a range of values, calculated by one valuation
                             methodology, generally the price shall be the midpoint of the range. This is
                             because, where it is not possible to determine an ‘effective’ price, the independent
                             expert report serves the function of determining a fair value for the downstream
                             shares. If the independent expert gives different values or different midpoints
                             calculated by different methodologies, we consider that the highest value or
                             highest midpoint should be used. We may consider requests to vary the terms of
                             the relief for the selection of the downstream bid price and will consider the
                             independent expert’s advice in determining these applications.

              RG 71.63       The independent expert must determine the fair value of the downstream
                             shares as at the time when the acquirer was fixing the price of the upstream
                             acquisition. If the price of the upstream acquisition is subsequently increased,
                             the expert must determine the fair value of the downstream shares at the time



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                          Page 19
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             of the increase and prepare a revised independent expert report. If necessary,
                             the price of the downstream bid must be increased so that it is at least equal
                             to this new value.

              RG 71.64       In this situation, we will generally require the preparation of a revised
                             independent expert report (which may be done by way of a supplementary
                             report), and the value of the downstream bid must not be less than the updated
                             fair value of the downstream shares as at the time when the acquirer was
                             fixing the increased price of the upstream acquisition.

              RG 71.65       New circumstances may arise during the downstream bid period that could
                             have a material impact on the independent expert’s assessment of the fair
                             value of the downstream company’s shares. Where the price of the upstream
                             acquisition is not increased as a result of the new circumstances, we will not
                             require the downstream bid price to be increased because there is no increase
                             in the benefit being offered to the upstream shareholders. We consider that it
                             may be appropriate for the independent expert to make a statement as to the
                             status of the independent expert report in light of the new circumstances.

              RG 71.66       The new circumstances may be information that downstream shareholders
                             and their professional advisers might reasonably require to make an
                             informed assessment whether to accept the downstream bid. Accordingly,
                             the directors of the downstream company will need to:
                             (a)   consider whether to revise their recommendation in relation to the
                                   downstream bid; and
                             (b)   provide shareholders with a supplementary target’s statement
                                   explaining the effect of the new circumstances and consider whether
                                   valuation information should be provided where the new circumstances
                                   affect whether the downstream bid price is fair or reasonable.


                             Other terms of downstream bid

              RG 71.67       We will normally require a downstream bid to meet the following other
                             conditions:
                             (a)   Duration: The legislature has determined that one month is the
                                   minimum period to satisfy s602(b): see s624(1)(b). However, if an
                                   acquirer makes its downstream bid before the upstream acquisition
                                   becomes unconditional, the acquirer must ensure that its downstream bid
                                   remains open long enough for shareholders to consider that bid in light of
                                   significant events in the upstream acquisition. The downstream bid
                                   should remain open for at least two weeks after the acquirer becomes
                                   unconditionally entitled to more than 20% of the voting shares in the
                                   upstream entity or the upstream acquisition becomes unconditional
                                   (whichever is the later).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                        Page 20
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             (b)   Dispatch: Offers must be dispatched no later than four weeks after the
                                   acquirer becomes entitled to more than 20% of the voting shares in the
                                   upstream entity or the upstream acquisition is declared unconditional
                                   (whichever is the earlier).

                                   Note: If an upstream offer is made in a foreign jurisdiction where the takeover threshold
                                   is greater than 20%, we may increase the relevant references in this guide to 20% of the
                                   voting shares in the upstream entity.


                             Permissible defeating conditions of downstream bid

              RG 71.68       Our relief will normally limit the defeating conditions that the acquirer may
                             place on the downstream bid. However, provided that it undertakes in its
                             offer to use its best endeavours to satisfy them, our relief will generally
                             allow an acquirer to impose the following defeating conditions on its
                             downstream bid:
                             (a)   the upstream acquisition is successful (providing that success is defined
                                   as being unconditionally entitled to more than 20% of the voting shares
                                   in the upstream entity);
                             (b)   no prescribed occurrence occurs. The condition may relate to events
                                   that occur from the date of the announcement of the upstream
                                   acquisition, but must be worded to lapse once the acquirer has achieved
                                   control of the downstream company via the upstream acquisition; and
                             (c)   requisite regulatory approval is gained (e.g. from the Foreign
                                   Investment Review Board or the Australian Competition and Consumer
                                   Commission).

              RG 71.69       We will not allow a downstream bid to be subject to a defeating condition
                             for minimum acceptances or that the acquirer achieve the thresholds for
                             compulsory acquisition set out in s661A(1).

                                   Note: In BTR Plc v Westinghouse Brake and Signal Co (Australia) Ltd (1992) 106 ALR
                                   35, the Federal Court held that the predecessor of ASIC, the Australian Securities
                                   Commission, was entitled to refuse to permit an acquirer to make a downstream bid
                                   subject to a compulsory acquisition condition.


                             Related relief for downstream company: Expert report
                             under s640

              RG 71.70       To satisfy s640, the downstream target may be required to provide an expert
                             report that states whether in the expert’s opinion, the takeover offers are fair
                             and reasonable and gives the reasons for forming that opinion. We may
                             exempt the downstream target from the provisions of s640 if the expert
                             report is required only because the acquirer became a major shareholder of
                             the downstream company as a result of the upstream acquisition. In these
                             cases, the protection of an expert report under s640 is not required. Also, the
                             pricing of the downstream bid would have been determined in accordance
                             with our policy.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                      Page 21
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




              RG 71.71       This relief may be inappropriate if material changes to the target company
                             occur between the date of the expert report and the date for dispatch of the
                             target’s statement.

              RG 71.72       We will not grant this relief where s640 would require an expert report for
                             any reason other than that the acquirer became a major shareholder of the
                             downstream company as a result of the upstream acquisition. In these cases,
                             the acquirer may be assumed to have had access to confidential information
                             about the downstream company and to have been in a position to control or
                             influence the actions and responses of both the target boards for the duration
                             of the offer.



Standstill and voting conditions
              RG 71.73       Where our relief is subject to standstill and voting conditions, we will
                             consider whether the acquirer will obtain absolute or effective control of the
                             ‘upstream entity’ before deciding what types of standstill and voting
                             conditions will apply.

              RG 71.74       Where the acquirer will obtain absolute or effective control of the upstream
                             entity (e.g. the acquirer will acquire a relevant interest in 80% of the
                             upstream entity, which holds a relevant interest in 20% of the shares in the
                             downstream company), our relief will be subject to:
                             (a)   a ‘standstill condition’ that, for a specified period (see RG 71.76), the
                                   acquirer will not acquire, or procure the upstream entity to acquire, a
                                   relevant interest in any more shares in the downstream company; and
                             (b)   a ‘voting condition’ that, for the specified period, the acquirer will not
                                   exercise, control the exercise, or procure the exercise, of any votes
                                   attached to the shares in the downstream company in which it acquired
                                   a relevant interest in as a result of the upstream acquisition.

              RG 71.75       Where the acquirer will not obtain absolute or effective control of the
                             upstream entity (e.g. the acquirer will acquire a relevant interest in 30% of
                             the upstream entity, which holds a relevant interest in 20% of the shares in
                             the downstream company), our relief will be subject to:
                             (a)   a standstill condition that, for a specified period (see RG 71.76), the
                                   acquirer will not acquire a relevant interest in any more shares in the
                                   downstream company, other than an increase in the relevant interest
                                   arising because the upstream entity increases its relevant interest in the
                                   downstream company under an exemption in s611, such as item 7 or
                                   item 9; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                         Page 22
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             (b)   either:
                                   (i)    a voting condition that applies to the upstream entity for the
                                          specified period, where the upstream entity supports the
                                          application and agrees to such a condition being imposed; or
                                   (ii)   some other type of condition, such as a condition that the acquirer
                                          must not procure the exercise of any votes attached to the
                                          downstream shares it acquired a relevant interest in as a result of
                                          the upstream acquisition during the specified period.

              RG 71.76       The specified period will be equivalent to the minimum period of time
                             within which the applicant could have acquired the same number of voting
                             shares using the 3% creep exemption in item 9 of s611.

              RG 71.77       The purpose of standstill and voting conditions is to protect the interests of
                             downstream company shareholders in circumstances where the upstream
                             acquirer has obtained a relevant interest in more than 20% of the
                             downstream company. The interests of downstream shareholders are
                             protected because standstill and voting conditions reduce the control effect
                             of the downstream acquisition.

              RG 71.78       We consider that different types of standstill and voting conditions should
                             apply depending on whether the acquirer obtains absolute or effective control
                             of the upstream entity. This is because, where the acquirer obtains absolute or
                             effective control of the upstream entity, the acquirer is in a position to control
                             the affairs of the upstream entity, including decisions about acquiring a further
                             relevant interest in the shares of the downstream company and exercising,
                             controlling, or procuring the exercise by the upstream entity of, the votes
                             attached to the shares in the downstream company.

              RG 71.79       In contrast, we consider that less restrictive standstill and voting conditions
                             are appropriate where the acquirer does not obtain absolute or effective
                             control of the upstream entity. In these cases, we consider that a less
                             restrictive standstill condition is appropriate because of the impact such a
                             condition may have on the upstream entity (i.e. in these cases, our relief
                             should not prevent the upstream entity from relying on exemptions in s611
                             that would otherwise be available). In addition, we consider that a voting
                             condition may be of limited benefit because it will be the upstream entity not
                             the acquirer that will control the power to exercise the votes attached to the
                             downstream shares.

              RG 71.80       In relation to applying a voting condition on the upstream entity, we
                             acknowledge that this may cause the potential for conflicts of interest to
                             arise for the directors of the upstream entity. However, we consider that this
                             condition or an appropriate alternative condition (such as the one discussed
                             at RG 71.75(b)(ii)) will ensure that the interests of downstream shareholders
                             are adequately protected.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                             Page 23
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




              RG 71.81       When considering whether to impose standstill and voting conditions on our
                             relief, we will consider all the relevant circumstances, including submissions
                             from the upstream entity. We will also consider the impact of the conditions
                             on the downstream company, including their impact on the distribution of
                             voting power in the downstream company. We will take into account the aim
                             of protecting the interests of downstream holders by reducing the effect of
                             the upstream acquisition on control of the downstream company and the
                             effect of our relief on the upstream entity. When granting relief, we aim to
                             reduce the risk that our relief is abused by seeking to ensure that an acquirer
                             is not permitted to act in a manner contrary to the basis on which our relief
                             was granted.


Other conditions that may apply
              RG 71.82       We may consider that the conditions discussed above are not appropriate in
                             the circumstances of a particular application. We may also consider that,
                             given the particular circumstances of a proposed downstream acquisition,
                             other conditions should apply to our relief in addition to standstill, voting or
                             downstream bid conditions. We may apply other conditions to our relief on a
                             case-by-case basis.

                             Sell-down condition

              RG 71.83       One type of condition we may consider applying as an alternative to a
                             downstream bid condition is a sell-down condition. We expect that we will
                             grant relief subject to a sell-down condition in limited circumstances.
                                   Note: When considering whether to impose a sell-down condition, we may consult with
                                   affected third parties such as the downstream company and substantial shareholders of
                                   the downstream company.

              RG 71.84       Where our relief is subject to a sell-down condition, the condition will require
                             the acquirer to sell down its interest in the downstream company within a
                             specified time (and if this is not achieved, the acquirer or a subsidiary will be
                             required to make a downstream bid consistent with the policy in this guide).

              RG 71.85       If the acquirer is required to sell down its interest in the downstream
                             company, our condition will normally state that the acquirer must:
                             (a)   appoint a broker to reduce the acquirer’s voting power in the
                                   downstream company to 20% or less within 14 days of acquiring
                                   control of the upstream entity (or otherwise acquiring the power to
                                   control the disposal of the downstream shares);
                             (b)   not exercise, or procure the exercise of, any voting rights attached to the
                                   downstream shares in excess of 20% without our consent; and
                             (c)   in selling any downstream shares acquired under the relief, ensure that
                                   the broker appointed uses its best endeavours to obtain as wide a
                                   placement as practicable, for the highest practicable price.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                  Page 24
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




E          Applying for relief

                               Key points

                               This section sets out the process for applying for relief from s606 in relation
                               to a downstream acquisition that does not satisfy the exemption in item 14.



How to apply for relief
              RG 71.86       We have discretionary power to grant relief from the requirements of Ch 6 in
                             the form of an exemption from specified provisions, or a declaration that
                             varies or modifies specified provisions as they apply to a person: see s655A.

              RG 71.87       Downstream acquisitions generally involve complex transactions and issues.
                             Applicants should ensure that there will be sufficient time for us to consider
                             an application for individual downstream acquisition relief. Applications
                             should normally be lodged no later than 28 days before the relevant upstream
                             acquisition is to be made. Additional time should be allowed for applications
                             that are outside the scope of our existing policy.

              RG 71.88       Applicants seeking relief should approach us before the upstream acquisition
                             takes place. We do not generally have power to grant retrospective relief.
                             This means that we are unlikely to grant relief to allow a downstream
                             acquisition if a breach of s606 has already occurred. Applicants should also
                             refer to RG 51 before deciding on a course of action or timetable for any
                             acquisition.

              RG 71.89       Applicants should submit their applications for relief through the ASIC
                             Regulatory Portal. They will need to pay fees for an application. We have
                             provided details about payment options in the portal. For more information,
                             see how you apply for relief.



Information applicants should provide
              RG 71.90       When applying for relief, applicants should refer to Section C and Section D
                             of this guide and provide full particulars of the proposed upstream and
                             downstream acquisitions (including the timing, extent and price of the
                             proposed acquisitions) and drafts of the relevant upstream acquisition
                             transaction documents.

              RG 71.91       An applicant should also provide particulars of:
                             (a)   its voting power in the downstream company at the date of its
                                   application; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                         Page 25
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                             (b)   all acquisitions and disposals, by the applicant and any associate, of
                                   securities in the downstream company and in the upstream entity in the
                                   four months before the date of its application.

              RG 71.92       To assist us in determining whether control over the downstream shares is
                             a significant purpose of the upstream acquisition, applicants must provide
                             us with:
                             (a)   a clear breakdown of the assets of the upstream target with absolute and
                                   percentage values for the major items and for the downstream shares;
                             (b)   information as to the intrinsic value of the assets of the upstream target
                                   to the acquirer other than the downstream shares; and
                             (c)   a list of the top 20 shareholders of the downstream company, and any
                                   associations between them and the applicant.

              RG 71.93       An application should clearly explain the regulatory regime under which
                             the upstream acquisition will take place. The application should especially
                             explain:
                             (a)   the disclosure regime; and
                             (b)   the nature of any provisions equivalent to the principles in s602 and
                                   provisions equivalent to s621 and 623.



Procedural fairness
              RG 71.94       In some circumstances, we will consider that we are required to consult with
                             the downstream company, the shareholders of the downstream company or
                             other potentially adversely affected third parties: see Regulatory Guide 92
                             Procedural fairness to third parties (RG 92).

              RG 71.95       The directors of the target company will normally be assumed to be suitable
                             representatives of the interests of the downstream shareholders. However,
                             this may not be the case where:
                             (a)   the acquirer of the upstream entity has been a substantial shareholder of
                                   the upstream target and the upstream target has been in a position to
                                   control or influence the composition of the board of the downstream
                                   company;
                             (b)   the acquirer has been in a position to control the downstream board in
                                   any other way; or
                             (c)   there is evidence or we have been made aware of a dispute between
                                   shareholders and the board of the company about the management and
                                   corporate governance of the company.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                         Page 26
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




Approving a foreign exchange
              RG 71.96       We have approved a list of foreign markets for the purposes of item 14: see
                             ASIC Corporations (Approved Foreign Financial Markets) Instrument
                             2015/1071. Unless otherwise stated, our relief applies to the main board of
                             these markets (e.g. our relief will not extend to debt listings).

              RG 71.97       In approving the list of foreign markets included in the instrument we took
                             into account the criteria set out at RG 72.58, because the extension of the
                             item 14 exemption to foreign financial markets that meet these criteria
                             satisfies the policy behind the exemption in item 14: see RG 71.17.

              RG 71.98       A foreign body conducting a financial market may apply to us for approval
                             for the purposes of item 14. A foreign body corporate may also apply, but
                             the assistance of the foreign body conducting the financial market is highly
                             desirable. An application to approve a new foreign financial market will be a
                             new policy application: see RG 51 for guidance on making new policy
                             applications.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                       Page 27
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               CASAC                     Companies and Securities Advisory Committee

                               Ch 6 (for example)        A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 6)

                               [CO 13/520] (for          An ASIC class order (in this example numbered 13/520)
                               example)                    Note: Legislative instruments made from 2015 are referred to
                                                           as ASIC instruments.

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               downstream                An acquisition of a relevant interest in the shares of a
                               acquisition               downstream company as a result of an acquisition in an
                                                         upstream entity

                               downstream company        An Australian company, listed body or listed managed
                                                         investment scheme with some of its shares or voting
                                                         interests owned by an upstream entity

                               effective price           A price for the downstream shares that is able to be
                                                         clearly and accurately determined from the upstream
                                                         acquisition price

                               item 14                   Item 14 of s611 of the Corporations Act

                               prescribed financial      An Australian financial market prescribed by the
                               market                    Corporations Regulations 2001

                               Pt 5.1 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                         5.1)

                               relevant interest         Has the meaning given by s608 and 609 of the
                                                         Corporations Act

                               RG 51 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 51)

                               s611 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 611), unless otherwise specified

                               sell down                 An acquirer reduces its voting power in a downstream
                                                         company

                               standstill condition      A condition that we may impose on our relief preventing
                                                         the acquirer from acquiring a relevant interest in any
                                                         more shares in the downstream company




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                   Page 28
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               Takeovers Panel           The panel established under s171 of the Australian
                                                         Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 and
                                                         given various powers under Pt 6.10 of the Corporations
                                                         Act

                               upstream acquisition      An acquisition of a relevant interest or control in an
                                                         Australian or foreign upstream entity

                               upstream entity           An Australian or foreign company or body corporate or
                                                         managed investment scheme that holds shares in a
                                                         downstream company or voting interests in a downstream
                                                         Australian listed managed investment scheme

                               voting condition          A condition that we may impose on our relief preventing
                                                         the acquirer (and in some circumstances, the upstream
                                                         entity) from exercising or procuring the exercise of any
                                                         votes attached to the shares in the downstream company

                               voting power              Has the meaning given in s610 of the Corporations Act

                               voting share              Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                    Page 29
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Downstream acquisitions




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             conditions of relief, disclosure to market, downstream acquisition,
                             downstream company, foreign body, international comity, listed companies,
                             policy for granting relief, prohibition on breach of ‘20% threshold’,
                             takeovers, unacceptable circumstances, unlisted companies, upstream
                             acquisition, upstream entity

                             Legislative instruments

                             [CO 13/520] Relevant interests, voting power and exceptions to the general
                             prohibition

                             ASIC Corporations (Approved Foreign Financial Markets) 2015/1071

                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 72 Foreign securities: Disclosure relief

                             RG 92 Procedural fairness to third parties

                             RG 111 Content of expert reports


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Ch 6; Pt 6.10, Div 2, SubdivB; s50AA, 602(b), 602(c),
                             603, 604, 606, 608, 608(3)(a), 608(3)(b), 611 (items 1, 7, 9 and 14), 621,
                             623, 624(1)(b), 640, 655A, 657A, 661A(1)

                             Cases
                             Australian Pipeline Trust 01R [2006] ATP 29

                             BTR Plc v Westinghouse Brake and Signal Co (Australia) Ltd (1992) 106 ALR

                             Cape Lambert Minsec Pty Ltd [2009] ATP 12

                             Leighton Holdings Limited 01, 02 and 03 [2010] ATP 13

                             Leighton Holdings Limited 02R [2010] ATP 14

                             Reports

                             CASAC, Anomalies in the takeovers provisions of the Corporations Law,
                             March 1994



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                       Page 30
