REGULATORY GUIDE 30

Paperless issues and
transfers under a global
debenture

June 2009




About this guide
This guide is for companies who make use of global debentures to facilitate
‘paperless’ issues or transfers of debentures.

It sets out our policy on granting relief from the obligation under s1071H
of the Corporations Act for an issuer to provide certificates or other title
documents for a paperless issue or transfer under a global debenture.
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 30: Paperless issues and transfers under a global debenture




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in June 2009 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. On 27 July 2020, we updated the process
                             for submitting an application for relief in RG 30.7. We also updated the
                             reference to the relief instrument in RG 30.10.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 30, issued 17 August 1992, rebadged as
                                     a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2009                                                  Page 2
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 30: Paperless issues and transfers under a global debenture




Relief for paperless issues and transfers under a
global debenture


                               Key points

                               Some issuers use global debentures to facilitate paperless issues and
                               transfers of debentures.

                               We may provide case-by-case relief from the requirement for an issuer
                               to provide certificates or other title documents for issues and transfers
                               of global debentures, subject to certain conditions.

                               A global debenture should comply with requirements for the appropriate
                               description of debentures under the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations
                               Act).


How are global debentures used?
              RG 30.1        A global debenture is an undertaking by a corporation (e.g. in a deed poll or
                             trust deed) to repay money deposited with or lent to the corporation as a debt
                             to each person named for the amounts noted in the register. Interests created
                             under a global debenture and recorded in the register are debentures, whether
                             or not there is a separate document acknowledging indebtedness for each
                             debenture holder’s interest.
                                   Note: Under the Corporations Act, a company that issues debentures must maintain a
                                   register of debentures: see s171.

              RG 30.2        By using a global debenture in this way, debentures may be issued and
                             transferred without relying on a document that represents title to, or
                             ownership of, the relevant debenture. Such an issue or transfer is generally
                             referred to as a ‘paperless’ issue or transfer of debentures.

              RG 30.3        A special system of ‘marked’ transfers that are normally valid only for a
                             fixed period may also be provided to facilitate settlement of sales and to
                             provide security under financing arrangements.


What relief is available?
              RG 30.4        We may grant debenture issuers case-by-case relief from the following
                             requirements under s1071H:
                             (a)   within two months after issuing a debenture, to provide the holder with
                                   all the appropriate certificates or other title documents; and
                             (b)   where a valid transfer is lodged with the issuer, to deliver the appropriate
                                   transfer and title documents to the transferee within one month.
                                   Note: See s1071H(1) and (3).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2009                                                     Page 3
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 30: Paperless issues and transfers under a global debenture




What are the conditions of our relief?
              RG 30.5        Any relief we grant to facilitate paperless issues and transfers of debentures
                             will generally be subject to the conditions in Table 1.

Table 1:     Conditions of relief for paperless issues and transfers under a global debenture

 Condition                     Description

 Register of debenture         A register of debenture holders must be:
 holders                        maintained by a competent, independent commercial registrar; and
                                audited by an auditor who would be eligible to audit both the registrar and the
                                 debenture issuer.

 Professional indemnity        The registrar must maintain professional indemnity insurance for:
 insurance                      an amount that is at least 1% of the indebtedness under the global debenture; or
                                an amount otherwise approved by ASIC.

 Custody of debenture          The global debenture must be held in safe custody for the debenture holders:
                                by the trustee; or
                                if there is no trustee, by an authorised trustee corporation or a person approved
                                 by ASIC.

 Holders’ rights                Each debenture holder and the trustee for the debenture holders must have
                                 standing to enforce the holder’s or the holders’ rights (as the case may be)
                                 under the global debenture in their own name.
                                The terms of the global debenture and the deed appointing the trustee must not
                                 restrict the holder from taking action to enforce the holder’s rights for more than
                                 21 days after giving the trustee notice of the holder’s intention to do so unless
                                 the trustee takes action within that time.

 Documentation                  On request, the registrar must issue to a debenture holder a document that sets
                                 out the debenture holder’s entry in the register of debenture holders.
                                As soon as practicable after receipt of an application for the global debentures,
                                 the issuer must:
                                 − issue the debentures; or
                                 − to the extent the application is declined, return the application money.
                                Similarly, upon receipt of a valid transfer, the registrar must make the relevant
                                 entries in the register without delay.
                                As soon as practicable after the issue of debentures to an investor, the issuer
                                 must provide the investor with a letter that is not a certificate of title but that
                                 acknowledges the receipt of money and entitlements of the investor to the
                                 debentures as recorded in the register.

 Disclosure documents          Any disclosure document required for the debentures under Ch 6D must contain
                               certain information: see RG 30.6.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2009                                                      Page 4
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 30: Paperless issues and transfers under a global debenture




What must disclosure documents contain under our relief?
              RG 30.6        Under our relief, any disclosure document required under Ch 6D for the
                             debentures must contain the information in Table 2.
                                   Note: A disclosure document for unlisted debentures should also address the
                                   benchmarks described in Regulatory Guide 69 Debentures and notes: Improving
                                   disclosure for retail investors (RG 69).


Table 2:     What disclosure documents must contain under our relief

 Area                          Description

 Letter of                     The disclosure document must contain a statement to the effect that as soon as
 acknowledgement               practicable after the issue of debentures to an investor, the issuer will provide the
                               investor with a letter that is not a certificate of title but that acknowledges the
                               receipt of money and the entitlement of the investor to the debentures as recorded
                               in the register.

 Description of                The disclosure document must contain a description of the global debenture and
 debenture                     its operation, including a description of the mechanisms enabling transfers and
                               transmissions of debentures. See also RG 30.11–RG 30.12.

 Explanation of                The disclosure document must contain a statement to the effect that:
 register                       certificates of title are not issued;
                                an entry in the register of the details of a debenture holder and the amount of
                                 the debt owed to the debenture holder are conclusive evidence of title subject to
                                 rectification for fraud or error; and
                                the issuer of the disclosure document undertakes to ensure that each investor’s
                                 details are entered in the register of debenture holders.

 Custodian’s details           The disclosure document must contain a statement setting out the name and
                               address of the person who has custody of the global debenture.

 Document available            The disclosure document must contain statements to the effect that:
 on request                     on request, the registrar will issue to the debenture holder a document that sets
                                 out the debenture holder’s entry in the register of debenture holders; and
                                any such document issued is not a certificate of title or an acknowledgement of
                                 debt.

 Information about             Where a system of marked transfers operates, the disclosure document must also
 transfers                     contain a statement that describes that system and includes details of how
                               requests for marked transfers will be affected by the closure of the register of
                               debenture holders.




How do you apply for relief?
              RG 30.7        You should submit your application for relief through the ASIC Regulatory
                             Portal. Your application for relief should address the requirements set out in
                             Regulatory Guide 51 Applications for relief (RG 51). You will need to pay
                             fees for your application. We have provided details about payment options in
                             the portal. For more information, see how you apply for relief.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2009                                                     Page 5
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 30: Paperless issues and transfers under a global debenture




Why are we giving relief?
              RG 30.8        Providing certificates or other title documents, particularly where a
                             debenture issuer has a large retail investor base, involves significant time
                             and expense in preparing, issuing, moving and storing large volumes of
                             paper. We consider that the requirement under s1071H was not intended to
                             prohibit alternative methods of documenting or transferring debt obligations,
                             provided investor protection is not diminished. In view of our role in
                             facilitating the reduction of costs and increasing efficiencies in the securities
                             market, we may grant relief so that alternative methods of documenting
                             holdings can be used.

              RG 30.9        The issue and transfer of global debentures and establishment of a paperless
                             system in certain circumstances will provide debenture holders with
                             adequate protection and make the transfer of securities more efficient.
                             Where we consider that relief from s1071H for a paperless issue or offer of
                             debentures is appropriate, it will usually be on the terms set out in Table 1.

              RG 30.10       Debenture issuers should note that, under the operating rules of some prescribed
                             clearing and settlement (CS) facilities (e.g. the CHESS system operated by ASX
                             Settlement and Transfer Corporation), certificates or other title documents need
                             not be issued in some circumstances. If this is the case, the operating rules of
                             the CS facility have effect and the requirements of the Corporations Act will
                             therefore be satisfied: see s1071H(2) and (4).

                                   Note: ASIC Corporations (Securities: NZ FASTER System) Instrument 2016/891
                                   exempts issues and transfers of the securities of Australian companies effected through
                                   the FASTER system in New Zealand in the same way that s1071H(2) and (4) exempt
                                   issues and transfers covered by CHESS.




How may debentures be described?
              RG 30.11       A global debenture should comply with requirements for the appropriate
                             description of debentures under the Corporations Act: see s283BH. We will
                             not grant relief from s283BH merely because debentures are offered or
                             issued under a global debenture.

              RG 30.12       If the issuer complies with s283BH and does not breach the prohibition
                             against misleading or deceptive conduct in s1041H, an investment product
                             may have a specific marketing name (e.g. ‘X Co. Registered Bonds’ or ‘Y
                             Ltd Unsecured Notes’).

                                   Note: When advertising debentures, issuers should comply with the standards described
                                   in Regulatory Guide 156 Advertising of debentures and notes to retail investors
                                   (RG 156).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2009                                                        Page 6
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 30: Paperless issues and transfers under a global debenture




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               global debenture          An undertaking by a corporation (e.g. in a deed poll or
                                                         trust deed) to repay money deposited with or lent to the
                                                         corporation as a debt to each person named for the
                                                         amounts noted in the register. Interests created under a
                                                         global debenture and recorded in the register are
                                                         debentures, whether or not there is a separate document
                                                         acknowledging indebtedness for each debenture holder’s
                                                         interest

                               paperless issue or        An issue or transfer of debentures without relying on a
                               transfer                  document that represents title to, or ownership of, the
                                                         relevant debenture

                               RG 69 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 69)

                               s1071H (for example)      A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 1071H)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2009                                                  Page 7
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 30: Paperless issues and transfers under a global debenture




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             certificate of title, debentures, describing debentures, global debenture, issue
                             of securities, transfer of securities


                             ASIC instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Securities: NZ FASTER System) Instrument 2016/891


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 51 Applications for relief (RG 51)

                             RG 69 Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors
                             RG 156 Advertising of debentures and notes to retail investors


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Ch 2L, Pt 7.11 Div 2, s171, 283BH, 1041H, 1071H,
                             1071H(1), 1071H(2) 1071H(3), 1071H(4)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2009                                                 Page 8
