REGULATORY GUIDE 98

ASIC’s powers to suspend,
cancel and vary AFS licences
and make banning orders

November 2022




About this guide
This guide is for AFS licensees, their representatives, and advisers.

It describes the administrative powers available to ASIC to enforce
compliance with the Corporations Act, including the financial services
licensing provisions, by suspending, cancelling and varying AFS licences
and making banning orders. It also indicates the matters ASIC generally
takes into account when exercising these powers.
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This version was issued in November 2022 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of amendment.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 98, issued November 2010, reissued
                                     July 2012, July 2013 and September 2018
                                    Superseded ASIC guide Licensing: Administrative action against
                                     financial services providers, issued 26 April 2006, rebadged as
                                     Regulatory Guide 98 on 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                           Page 2
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    ASIC’s responsibilities ....................................................................... 5
                                    ASIC’s administrative powers ............................................................ 7
                                    When we will take administrative action ............................................ 7
                                    A person’s rights in dealing with ASIC ............................................... 8
                             B      Suspending, cancelling or varying an AFS licence ..................... 9
                                    Power to suspend, cancel or vary an AFS licence ............................ 9
                                    When we will suspend, cancel or vary an AFS licence ................... 12
                             C      Banning orders .............................................................................. 17
                                    Power to make a banning order ...................................................... 17
                                    When we will make a banning order ................................................ 20
                                    Varying or cancelling banning orders .............................................. 26
                             D      Publicising our decisions ............................................................. 28
                                    Public notification of decisions ......................................................... 28
                                    Public comment ............................................................................... 29
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 30
                             Related information ............................................................................... 33




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                                      Page 3
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              ASIC is responsible for regulating persons who carry on a financial services
                              business in Australia, including:
                              • granting Australian financial services (AFS) licences to those persons;
                              • monitoring AFS licensees for ongoing compliance with their licence
                                conditions and other legal obligations as licensees; and
                              • taking action, where appropriate, to enforce the laws ASIC administers
                                when they are breached by an AFS licensee (or a person acting on their
                                behalf).

                              ASIC’s powers to take action to protect investors and consumers may
                              involve the use of an administrative remedy, which may be in addition to
                              civil or criminal remedies. These remedies may include suspending,
                              cancelling or varying an AFS licence or making a banning order against a
                              person.

                              We will use a remedy, or combination of remedies, where it most effectively
                              and efficiently achieves our aim of promoting the objects of Ch 7 of the
                              Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act): see s760A. This includes by
                              promoting compliance with the law through deterring misconduct and
                              raising professionalism in the financial services industry.


              RG 98.1        This guide provides guidance for participants in the financial services
                             industry on ASIC’s administrative powers to:
                             (a)   suspend, cancel or vary an AFS licence under s914A, 915B and 915C;
                                   and
                             (b)   make a banning order under s920A, prohibiting a person from:
                                   (i)    providing financial services; or
                                   (ii)   controlling, or performing functions involved in carrying on, a
                                          financial services business (including, for example, as an officer or
                                          employee).

                                   Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), divisions (Div), chapters (Ch) and parts
                                   (Pt) are to the Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.

              RG 98.2        It indicates the matters we generally take into account when exercising these
                             powers, with some illustrative examples.

                                   Note: This guide does not discuss the administrative powers that we may exercise in
                                   relation to Australian credit licensees (credit licensees). These are explained in
                                   Regulatory Guide 218 Licensing: Administrative action against persons engaging in
                                   credit activities (RG 218).

              RG 98.3        In this guide, we explain how we approach our task of promoting the objects
                             of the financial services regime. This task includes protecting investors and


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                       Page 4
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             consumers, and reinforcing the integrity and reputation of the financial
                             services industry.

              RG 98.4        This guide should be read in conjunction with regulatory guides and
                             information sheets we have published on how we will administer the
                             financial services provisions of the Corporations Act: see ‘Related
                             information’.

              RG 98.5        This guide does not deal with decision making by the Financial Services and
                             Credit Panel. It also does not deal with the broad range of other
                             administrative actions that might be available to ASIC—including, for
                             example:
                             (a)   making a stop order;
                             (b)   issuing an infringement notice;
                             (c)   issuing warnings and reprimands; or
                             (d)   for AFS licensees who are participants of a financial market, referring
                                   alleged contraventions of the market integrity rules to the Markets
                                   Disciplinary Panel.

              RG 98.6        This guide also does not discuss ASIC’s complementary civil or criminal
                             enforcement powers or its power to accept a court enforceable undertaking.

                                   Note: For guidance on ASIC’s approach to enforcement more generally, see
                                   Information Sheet 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement (INFO 151). For guidance on
                                   ASIC’s approach to court enforceable undertakings, see Regulatory Guide 100 Court
                                   enforceable undertakings (RG 100). For guidance on referrals to the Markets
                                   Disciplinary Panel, see Regulatory Guide 216 Markets Disciplinary Panel (RG 216).
                                   For guidance on the Financial Services and Credit Panel, see Regulatory Guide 263
                                   Financial Services and Credit Panel (RG 263).




ASIC’s responsibilities
              RG 98.7        We are responsible for regulating persons who carry on a financial services
                             business in Australia, as well as those who provide financial services on
                             behalf of persons who carry on a financial services business.

              RG 98.8        Our regulatory responsibilities are underpinned by the objects of the
                             financial services regime, which include promoting:
                             (a)   investors and consumers making confident and informed decisions;
                             (b)   fairness, honesty and professionalism by those who provide financial
                                   services; and
                             (c)   fair, orderly and transparent markets for financial products (see s760A).

              RG 98.9        The financial services regime aims to ensure that investors and consumers
                             can feel confident when dealing with participants in the financial services
                             industry. To promote confidence, industry participants are subject to the


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                               Page 5
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             legal obligations that attach to their participant status, such as their status as
                             an AFS licensee or a financial services provider. ASIC’s powers to protect
                             investors and consumers include the power to apply a variety of
                             administrative remedies against financial services providers and other
                             industry participants that breach or are likely to breach those obligations,
                             where this is appropriate.

              RG 98.10       To promote investor and consumer confidence in the financial services
                             industry, we endeavour to ensure that industry participants comply with their
                             obligations and meet community expectations. We educate investors and
                             consumers so that they will be in a better position to make informed
                             decisions. We also educate industry participants to raise compliance
                             standards generally. Where necessary, we will take action to protect
                             investors and consumers.

              RG 98.11       The administrative action we take against a participant in the financial
                             services industry demonstrates to the person, to industry participants more
                             generally, and to investors and consumers, that the particular conduct is
                             unacceptable. This in turn promotes the objects of the financial services
                             regime and may deter industry participants from engaging in misconduct.

                                  Note: In HIH Insurance Ltd and HIH Casualty and General Insurance Ltd, Re: ASIC v
                                  Adler (2002) 42 ACSR 80, Santow J summarised the principles by which the
                                  discretionary power to disqualify directors is exercised (at [56]). These principles are
                                  applicable to ASIC’s exercise of administrative powers to cancel or suspend a licence or
                                  to make a banning order.


                             AFS licensees and their representatives

              RG 98.12       Our regulatory role in relation to the financial services regime includes a
                             responsibility for licensing persons who wish to carry on a business of
                             providing financial services in Australia. These persons are generally
                             required to hold an AFS licence: see s911A.

              RG 98.13       We are also responsible for monitoring AFS licensees’ ongoing compliance
                             with their licence and other legal obligations. To this end, among other
                             things, we conduct surveillance and analyse the reports of misconduct we
                             receive.

              RG 98.14       Lastly, we are responsible for taking action, where appropriate, to enforce the
                             law when it is breached by an AFS licensee or a person acting on behalf of an
                             AFS licensee. If appropriate, that enforcement action may involve the use of
                             an administrative remedy, sometimes in addition to civil or criminal remedies.

              RG 98.15       When we seek a remedy, we will use the remedy or combination of remedies
                             that best achieves the aims set out in RG 98.8–RG 98.14.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                   Page 6
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




ASIC’s administrative powers
              RG 98.16       The financial services laws over which we have jurisdiction set out the
                             remedies available to ASIC. These remedies can be broadly categorised as:
                             (a)   criminal action;
                             (b)   civil action; and
                             (c)   administrative action.

                             We may use these remedies in combination.

              RG 98.17       Administrative actions that we may take against AFS licensees include:
                             (a)   immediately suspending or cancelling an AFS licence in certain limited
                                   circumstances;
                             (b)   suspending or cancelling an AFS licence after offering a hearing; and
                             (c)   varying AFS licence conditions after offering a hearing, including by
                                   imposing additional licence conditions or removing licence
                                   authorisations.

              RG 98.18       ASIC’s administrative powers to suspend, cancel or vary an AFS licence are
                             explained in more detail in Section B.

              RG 98.19       An administrative action that we may take against a financial services
                             provider or other industry participant is to make a banning order against that
                             person. For example, the order may prohibit that person from:
                             (a)   providing financial services; or
                             (b)   controlling, or performing functions involved in carrying on, a financial
                                   services business (including as an officer, manager, employee,
                                   contractor or in some other capacity).

              RG 98.20       ASIC’s administrative powers to make a banning order are explained in
                             more detail in Section C.



When we will take administrative action

              RG 98.21       Whether we will take administrative action to suspend, cancel or vary an
                             AFS licence or make a banning order will depend on the facts of each
                             matter. Factors underlying our decision about whether to take this type of
                             administrative action include:
                             (a)   whether the proposed action is within ASIC’s powers;
                             (b)   whether taking the action will promote the objects of the financial
                                   services regime;
                             (c)   whether taking the action will deter misconduct;
                             (d)   the strategic significance of taking action;


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                           Page 7
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             (e)   the need to protect investors and consumers; and
                             (f)   whether taking the proposed action is preferable to taking another type
                                   of administrative action, in terms of cost and timeliness.

              RG 98.22       Any administrative action we take may be in addition to civil or criminal
                             action we are taking against the person or business.



A person’s rights in dealing with ASIC
              RG 98.23       For information about a person’s rights in dealing with ASIC, see
                             Information Sheet 9 ASIC decisions: Your rights (INFO 9) and Information
                             Sheet 107 Guidelines for managing allegations of misconduct against ASIC
                             officers (INFO 107).

              RG 98.24       The person may have a right to complain to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
                             or to seek other independent review of our decisions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                           Page 8
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




B          Suspending, cancelling or varying an AFS
           licence

                              Key points

                              Where AFS licensees breach (or we have reason to believe that they are
                              likely to breach) their legal obligations, ASIC’s powers include the power to:
                              • suspend or cancel an AFS licence (with or without a hearing); and
                              • vary or impose further conditions on an AFS licence.

                              The factors we will take into account when deciding whether to suspend, cancel
                              or vary an AFS licence will depend on the circumstances of each matter.

                              Examples of factors we may consider when making these decisions include
                              whether:
                              • we detect non-compliance by an AFS licensee (or by a person acting on
                                their behalf) and the nature and seriousness of that non-compliance;
                              • the AFS licensee has notified ASIC of a reportable situation (previously
                                by lodging a breach report), and the nature and seriousness of the
                                reportable situation;
                              • suspension, cancellation or variation is an appropriate remedy for us to
                                pursue;
                              • there is a more appropriate alternative remedy for us to pursue;
                              • action is desirable to protect investors and consumers;
                              • action is likely to promote confident and informed decision making by
                                investors and consumers;
                              • action may deter industry participants from engaging in misconduct; or
                              • action is likely to promote fairness, honesty and professionalism by
                                industry participants.

                              Where we decide to take administrative action, the type of administrative
                              action we take will depend on the nature and seriousness of the conduct
                              involved.



Power to suspend, cancel or vary an AFS licence

                             Immediate suspension or cancellation

              RG 98.25       If appropriate, we may suspend or cancel an AFS licence in certain
                             circumstances without giving the AFS licensee the opportunity of a hearing
                             or to make submissions: see s915B.

              RG 98.26       The circumstances where we may immediately suspend or cancel an AFS
                             licence vary according to whether the AFS licensee is a natural person, a
                             partnership, a body corporate or a trustee.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                           Page 9
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




              RG 98.27       For instance, if the AFS licensee is a body corporate, we may suspend or
                             cancel the licence without offering a hearing if:
                             (a)   the body ceases to carry on the financial services business;
                             (b)   the body becomes a Chapter 5 body corporate;
                             (c)   an officer of the body becomes an insolvent under administration;
                             (d)   the body is:
                                   (i)     the responsible entity of a registered scheme whose members have
                                           suffered, or are likely to suffer, loss or damage because the body
                                           has breached the Corporations Act;
                                   (ii)    the operator of a notified foreign passport fund whose members
                                           have suffered, or are likely to suffer, loss or damage because the
                                           body has breached the Corporations Act; or
                                   (iii)   a trustee company whose clients have suffered, or are likely to
                                           suffer, loss or damage because the company has breached the
                                           Corporations Act or certain financial services laws relating to
                                           traditional trustee company services;
                             (e)   the body applies to ASIC to have the AFS licence cancelled or
                                   suspended; or
                             (f)   the body is liable to pay a levy imposed by the ASIC Supervisory Cost
                                   Recovery Levy Act 2017 and has not paid in full at least 12 months after
                                   the due date for payment:
                                   (i)     the amount of the levy;
                                   (ii)    the amount of any late payment penalty payable in relation to the
                                           levy; and
                                   (iii)   the amount of any shortfall penalty payable in relation to the levy.

              RG 98.28       We may also cancel an AFS licence held by a body corporate if the body
                             does not provide a financial service covered by the licence within six months
                             after the licence is granted.

                                   Note: See s915B for information on when an AFS licence held by a natural person, a
                                   partnership or a trustee can be suspended or cancelled without a hearing.


                             Suspension or cancellation after offering a hearing

              RG 98.29       We may also suspend or cancel an AFS licence after giving the licensee an
                             opportunity to appear or be represented at a private hearing before ASIC and
                             to make submissions: see s915C.

                                   Note: The principles and procedures we adopt for these hearings are set out in
                                   Information Sheet 1 Administrative hearings (INFO 1) and Regulatory Guide 8
                                   Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct (RG 8).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                    Page 10
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




              RG 98.30       For an AFS licensee, the following circumstances may give rise to
                             suspension or cancellation under s915C:
                             (a)   the licensee has not complied with, or we have reason to believe it is
                                   likely to contravene, its obligations under s912A;
                             (b)   the requirement in s913BA (fit and proper person test) is not satisfied in
                                   relation to the licensee and the licence;
                             (c)   we make a banning order, or a court makes a disqualification order,
                                   under Div 8 of Pt 7.6 against the licensee;
                             (d)   we make a banning order, or a court makes a disqualification order,
                                   under Div 8 of Pt 7.6 against a representative of the licensee, and we
                                   consider that the representative’s involvement in the provision of the
                                   licensee’s financial services will significantly impair the licensee’s
                                   ability to meet its obligations under Ch 7;
                             (e)   the licensee is the operator of an Australian passport fund, or a person
                                   with responsibilities in relation to an Australian passport fund, and each
                                   of the following is satisfied:
                                   (i)    a host regulator for the fund has notified ASIC about the person’s
                                          or fund’s failure or potential failure to comply with law administered
                                          by the host regulator, including applicable Passport Rules; and
                                   (ii)   we are of the opinion that we should suspend or cancel the licence,
                                          given the potential impact of the failure, or potential failure, to
                                          comply on members or potential members of the fund;
                             (f)   the application for the licence under s913A, or the licensee’s application
                                   under s914A(2)(b) for ASIC to impose, vary or revoke conditions on
                                   the licence:
                                   (i)    was false in a material particular or materially misleading; or
                                   (ii)   omitted a material matter; and
                             (g)   any information, audit report or statement lodged with ASIC in
                                   response to our request under s913B(3) in relation to the application for
                                   the licence, or under s914B(3) in relation to the licensee’s application
                                   about licence conditions:
                                   (i)    was false in a material particular or materially misleading; or
                                   (ii)   omitted a material matter.

              RG 98.31       If we suspend or cancel an AFS licence, we may specify that the licence
                             continues in effect for the purposes of specified provisions of the
                             Corporations Act. This continuation will be in relation to specified matters
                             or for a specified period, or both: see s915H.

                                   Note: An example of when we might allow an AFS licence to continue in effect for a
                                   specified purpose would be to enable investors and consumers affected by a licensee’s
                                   conduct to have their complaints dealt with by the Australian Financial Complaints
                                   Authority (AFCA). AFCA is the operator of the AFCA scheme, which is the external
                                   dispute resolution scheme for which an authorisation under Pt 7.10A is in force.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                  Page 11
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             Varying or imposing licence conditions

              RG 98.32       We may impose conditions, or further conditions, on an AFS licence at any
                             time. We may impose conditions when we grant the licence or subsequently,
                             and may vary or revoke the conditions: see s914A(1).

              RG 98.33       Before imposing any such conditions after the licence has been granted, or
                             before varying any such conditions, we must give the AFS licensee an
                             opportunity to appear or be represented at a private hearing before ASIC and
                             to make submissions to ASIC: see s914A(3).

              RG 98.34       If appropriate, we may use ASIC’s power to impose additional licence
                             conditions to address compliance issues. These licence conditions may, for
                             example:
                             (a)   preclude the AFS licensee from providing certain types of financial
                                   services; or
                             (b)   impose different or additional compliance obligations on the licensee—
                                   such as requiring the licensee to engage an independent external compliance
                                   consultant and provide ASIC with ongoing reports of its progress in
                                   remedying previously identified deficiencies in compliance measures.



When we will suspend, cancel or vary an AFS licence

                             Our approach

              RG 98.35       The foundation of ASIC’s approach to taking administrative action to
                             suspend, cancel or vary an AFS licence is to take action where necessary or
                             desirable to promote the objects of the financial services regime: see s760A.

                                   Note: ASIC’s approach is reflected in Sovereign Capital Limited and Australian
                                   Securities and Investments Commission [2008] AATA 901 at [84]: ‘A licence should
                                   only be suspended or cancelled if it is necessary to do so in order to accomplish the
                                   objects of the legislative scheme’.

              RG 98.36       We are likely to take administrative action in instances where there is a need
                             to protect investors and consumers, where there is a need to deter
                             misconduct, or where conduct of the licensee may result in investor or
                             consumer detriment. Whether administrative action will be taken will
                             depend on the facts of each matter. In general, we may consider:
                             (a)   suspending, cancelling or varying an AFS licence where we have
                                   concerns about the licensee, or the way their business is being or has
                                   been conducted; and
                             (b)   cancelling an AFS licence where we have concerns about the accuracy
                                   and completeness of the application.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                   Page 12
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             Relevant factors ASIC will consider

              RG 98.37       ASIC’s licensing powers were amended by the Corporations Amendment
                             (Future of Financial Advice) Act 2012. Additional explanation about ASIC’s
                             licensing powers is provided in paragraphs 2.17–2.27 of the Explanatory
                             Memorandum to the Corporations Amendment (Future of Financial Advice)
                             Bill 2011. In particular, the Explanatory Memorandum notes that in
                             determining whether a licensee is likely to contravene an obligation under
                             s912A, for the purpose of suspending or cancelling an AFS licence, ASIC
                             may take into account any information relevant to this question. For example:
                             (a)   conduct of the licensee that shows deliberation and planning in wilfully
                                   disregarding the law;
                             (b)   the extent of compliance by the licensee with analogous obligations in
                                   another regime; or
                             (c)   any other conduct of the licensee that may lead ASIC to conclude, on
                                   reasonable grounds, that the applicant is not likely to comply.

              RG 98.38       While it is not possible to identify all factors relevant to a decision to
                             suspend, cancel or vary a licence, Table 1 sets out factors that may be taken
                             into account.

                                   Note: The list in Table 1 is not exhaustive and there will be other factors that are not
                                   mentioned in this guide that could lead to these outcomes.


Table 1:    Key factors we consider in deciding to suspend, cancel or vary a licence

 Factors                              Relevant considerations

 Nature and seriousness of the         Whether the conduct of the licensee shows deliberation and planning in
 suspected misconduct                   wilfully disregarding the law
                                       Whether there is evidence that the contravention involved dishonesty or was
                                        intentional, reckless or negligent
                                       Whether the misconduct poses an unacceptable risk to investors and
                                        consumers
                                       The amount of any benefit gained or detriment suffered as a result of the
                                        misconduct
                                       The amount of any loss caused to investors and consumers
                                       The impact of the misconduct on the market, including potential loss of public
                                        confidence
                                       Whether the conduct is continuing or appears likely to recur
                                       Whether the misconduct indicates systemic compliance failures
                                       Whether the licensee has a poor compliance record (e.g. they have
                                        previously engaged in misconduct)
                                       The extent of compliance by the licensee with analogous obligations in
                                        another regime
                                       Whether the licensee has failed to manage a material conflict of interest
                                       Whether information provided by the licensee to ASIC was false in a material
                                        particular or materially misleading, or omitted material information




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                      Page 13
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




 Factors                             Relevant considerations

 Internal controls                    Whether the licensee had effective internal policies and procedures in place
                                       to ensure that the licensee and its representatives complied with obligations
                                       and that any breaches were detected
                                      Whether those policies and procedures were complied with and whether any
                                       breaches of obligations were detected
                                      Whether the licensee notified ASIC of reportable situations (previously by
                                       lodging a breach report)
                                      If the misconduct was committed by a representative of a licensee, whether it
                                       indicates a systemic failure of supervision by the licensee
                                      Whether a corporate culture conducive to compliance with obligations is
                                       evident (e.g. effective educational and compliance programs)

 Conduct after the alleged            When and how the breach came to the attention of ASIC
 contravention occurs                 The level of cooperation with our investigation
                                      Whether timely and effective remedial steps have been taken
                                      Whether the licensee has been proactive in making appropriate changes to
                                       policies and procedures and, where applicable, changing its approach to
                                       ensure the effective functioning of its dispute resolution systems
                                      Whether the licensee has been proactive in compensating client losses and
                                       in communicating with clients about the contravention

 The expected level of public         The protective effect for investors and consumers
 benefit                              The reinforcement of the integrity and reputation of the financial services
                                       industry
                                      Whether the case is likely to help participants in financial markets to better
                                       understand their obligations and thereby promote compliance

 Likelihood that:                     The compliance history of the licensee
  the licensee’s behaviour           Whether there has been a change in control or management of the licensee
   will change in response to a       Whether behaviour (of a licensee or broader industry) is more likely to
   particular action; and/or           change if the licensee has their licence suspended or cancelled
  other industry participants
   will be deterred from
   engaging in similar conduct
   through greater awareness
   of the consequences

 Mitigating factors                   Whether the misconduct relates to an isolated complaint and investors and
                                       consumers have generally not suffered substantial detriment or been placed
                                       in a position of unacceptable risk
                                      Whether the misconduct was inadvertent and the licensee undertakes to
                                       cease or correct the conduct
                                      If the licensee has not commenced to carry on a financial services business,
                                       whether there are genuine reasons for the licensee not doing so



                             Whether suspension, cancellation or variation is more
                             appropriate: Considerations

              RG 98.39       In deciding whether it is more appropriate to suspend or to cancel an AFS
                             licence, we will consider the principle set out in Sovereign Capital Limited


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                              Page 14
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             and Australian Securities and Investments Commission [2008] AATA 901.
                             That is, that a suspension will ordinarily be preferable if there is a reasonable
                             prospect that the licence holder can remedy the defects that prompted the
                             concern. In considering whether there is a reasonable prospect that defects
                             can be remedied, we will have regard to whether the AFS licensee has
                             previously been subject to regulatory action. If so, cancellation of the AFS
                             licence may be more likely to occur.

              RG 98.40       In appropriate cases, the objects of the licensing regime may be satisfied by
                             suspending rather than cancelling a licence (e.g. to enable necessary
                             remedial or compliance measures to be put in place by the licensee).

              RG 98.41       Similarly, in appropriate cases, the objects of the licensing regime may be
                             satisfied by varying licence conditions under s914A rather than suspending
                             or cancelling the licence (e.g. imposing special compliance consultant
                             review and report conditions, or restrictive conduct and enhanced disclosure
                             conditions, might be preferable to suspending or cancelling the licence).


                             Examples of misconduct that may result in cancellation or
                             suspension

              RG 98.42       Examples of misconduct that may result in an AFS licence being cancelled
                             or suspended include:
                             (a)   dishonesty by a licensee;
                             (b)   the licensee failing to implement and maintain effective compliance
                                   measures;
                             (c)   systemic or persistent breaches of the licensee’s obligations;
                             (d)   the licensee, at senior levels of management, misleading or hindering
                                   ASIC, including by concealing or deliberately destroying records it is
                                   required to keep;
                             (e)   there is actual or potential significant risk to investors and consumers
                                   because the licensee does not comply with its obligations under s912A,
                                   for example, by:
                                   (i)    not having adequate resources, risk management arrangements or
                                          arrangements to manage conflicts of interest to continue to meet its
                                          obligations; or
                                   (ii)   not complying with the conditions of its licence; and
                             (f)   the licensee giving information to ASIC that is false in a material
                                   particular or materially misleading, or omits a material matter.

                                   Note: These examples are not exhaustive and are intended to only give an indication of
                                   misconduct that might lead to ASIC taking administrative action.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                  Page 15
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             Administrative action may be taken even if breaches are
                             rectified

              RG 98.43       We may cancel, suspend or vary an AFS licence even if the licensee has
                             rectified breaches. We may do so to deter the licensee or others from
                             engaging in misconduct. In deciding whether to do so, we will consider,
                             among other things, whether the licensee has been reactive rather than
                             proactive in its approach to compliance. The attitude of an individual
                             licensee to compliance and the organisational culture of a corporate licensee
                             are examples of factors we will take into account when forming a view about
                             whether the licensee has a reactive or proactive compliance approach.

                                  Note: See Masu Financial Management Pty Ltd and Australian Securities and
                                  Investments Commission [2017] AATA 97.


                             Change in control does not neutralise history of non-
                             compliance

              RG 98.44       A change in the control or the management of a body corporate AFS licensee
                             does not mean that ASIC will disregard the licensee’s history of non-
                             compliance. In appropriate circumstances, ASIC may cancel, suspend or
                             vary the licensee’s AFS licence even if there is a change in control or in
                             management. This is because even if breaches occurred before the change,
                             those breaches form part of the licensee’s compliance history and may
                             remain relevant.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                              Page 16
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




C          Banning orders

                              Key points

                              ASIC’s powers to protect investors and consumers include the power to
                              make a temporary or permanent banning order prohibiting a person from
                              providing all or specified financial services or controlling, or performing
                              functions involved in carrying on a financial services business. We will
                              consider using these powers where a person breaches (or we have reason
                              to believe that they are likely to breach) their legal obligations, or is
                              involved in another person’s contravention of financial services laws.

                              The factors we will take into account when deciding whether to make a
                              banning order will depend on the circumstances of each matter.

                              Examples of factors we may consider when making these decisions include
                              whether:
                              • we detect non-compliance by the person;
                              • a banning order would be an appropriate remedy for us to pursue;
                              • there is a more appropriate alternative remedy for us to pursue;
                              • action is desirable to protect investors and consumers;
                              • action is likely to promote confident and informed decision making by
                                investors and consumers;
                              • action may deter industry participants from engaging in misconduct; or
                              • action is likely to promote fairness, honesty and professionalism by
                                industry participants.

                              Where we decide to take administrative action, the type of banning order
                              we make will depend on the nature and seriousness of the conduct
                              involved.




Power to make a banning order
              RG 98.45       We can exclude a person from, or limit their participation in, the financial
                             services industry by making one or more banning orders against them: see
                             s920A and 920B.


                             What is a banning order?

              RG 98.46       A banning order is a written order by ASIC that prohibits the banned person
                             from doing one or more of the following:
                             (a)   providing any financial services;
                             (b)   providing specified financial services in specified circumstances or
                                   capacities;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                          Page 17
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             (c)   controlling, whether alone or in concert with one or more other entities,
                                   an entity that carries on a financial services business;
                             (d)   performing any function involved in the carrying on of a financial
                                   services business (including as an officer, manager, employee,
                                   contractor or in some other capacity); and
                             (e)   performing specified functions involved in the carrying on of a financial
                                   services business.

              RG 98.47       A banning order may be permanent or for a specified period. If the banning
                             is because the person has been an officer of two or more corporations that
                             have been unable to pay their debts and the criteria in s920A(1C) are met, a
                             banning order may be for a specified period of up to five years: see s920B(2)
                             and s920A(1)(k).

              RG 98.48       We may also make a banning order that includes a provision allowing the
                             banned person to do specified acts, or specified acts in specified
                             circumstances, that the order would otherwise prohibit them from doing.
                             This provision may be subject to any specified conditions.

              RG 98.49       A banned person cannot be granted an AFS licence contrary to the banning
                             order and must not engage in conduct in breach of the banning order: see
                             s920C.


                             Making a banning order

              RG 98.50       We can make a banning order that has immediate effect, without giving the
                             person the opportunity of a hearing, if the person has been convicted of
                             serious fraud or the person’s AFS licence has been suspended or cancelled
                             under s915B: see s920A(3).

              RG 98.51       In other cases, we can only make a banning order after giving the person the
                             opportunity to appear or to be represented at a private hearing before ASIC
                             and to make submissions: see s920A(1)–(2).

              RG 98.52       We can make a banning order in relation to a person under s920A when:
                             (a)   we suspend or cancel an AFS licence held by the person;
                             (b)   the person has not complied with their obligations under s912A;
                             (c)   we have reason to believe that the person is likely to contravene their
                                   obligations under s912A;
                             (d)   the person becomes a Chapter 5 body corporate or an insolvent under
                                   administration;
                             (e)   the person is convicted of fraud;
                             (f)   we have reason to believe that the person is not a fit and proper person
                                   to:
                                   (i)   provide one or more financial services;


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                          Page 18
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                                   (ii)    perform one or more functions as an officer of an entity that carries
                                           on a financial services business; or
                                   (iii)   control an entity that carries on a financial services business;

                                   Note: For matters that we must take into account when considering whether a person is
                                   not a fit and proper person, see s920A(1A).

                             (g)   we have reason to believe that the person is not adequately trained, or is
                                   not competent, to:
                                   (i)     provide one or more financial services;
                                   (ii)    perform one or more functions as an officer of an entity that carries
                                           on a financial services business; or
                                   (iii)   control an entity that carries on a financial services business;
                             (h)   the person has not complied with any one or more of their obligations
                                   under s921F (requirements relating to provisional relevant providers);
                             (i)   both of the following apply:
                                   (i)     a supervisor referred to in s921F has not complied with any one or
                                           more of their obligations under that section in relation to a
                                           provisional relevant provider; and
                                   (ii)    both the supervisor and the provisional relevant provider are
                                           authorised to provide personal advice to retail clients, on behalf of
                                           the person, in relation to relevant financial products;
                             (j)   both of the following apply:
                                   (i)     a provisional relevant provider has not complied with their
                                           obligations under s921F(7); and
                                   (ii)    the provisional relevant provider is authorised to provide personal
                                           advice to retail clients, on behalf of the person, in relation to
                                           relevant financial products;
                             (k)   we have reason to believe that the person was authorised, in
                                   contravention of s921C(2), (3) or (4), to provide personal advice to
                                   retail clients in relation to relevant financial products;
                             (l)   the person has not complied with a financial services law (other than
                                   s921E(3), which requires relevant providers to comply with the Code of
                                   Ethics);
                             (m)   we have reason to believe that the person is likely to contravene a
                                   financial services law;
                             (n)   the person has been involved in the contravention of a financial services
                                   law by another person;
                             (o)   we have reason to believe that the person is likely to become involved
                                   in the contravention of a financial services law by another person;
                             (p)   the person is the operator of, or another person connected with, an
                                   Australian passport fund, and each of the following is satisfied:


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                 Page 19
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                                   (i)     a host regulator for the fund has notified ASIC in writing that it is
                                           of the opinion that the person or the fund has not complied, is not
                                           complying or is not likely to comply with the law of that host
                                           economy to the extent that the law is administered by the host
                                           regulator for the fund (including the Passport Rules for the host); and
                                   (ii)    we are of the opinion that we should make the banning order, given
                                           the potential impact of the failure, or potential failure, to comply
                                           on members or potential members of the fund;
                             (q)   the person has at least twice been linked to a refusal or failure to give
                                   effect to an AFCA determination relating to a complaint about:
                                   (i)     a financial services business; or
                                   (ii)    credit activities (within the meaning of the National Consumer
                                           Credit Protection Act 2009 (National Credit Act)); or
                             (r)   within the last seven years and in relation to two or more corporations:
                                   (i)     the person was an officer of the corporation when the corporation
                                           was:
                                           (A)   carrying on a financial services business; or
                                           (B)   engaging in credit activities (within the meaning of the
                                                 National Credit Act);
                                   (ii)    the corporation was wound up either:
                                           (A)   while the person was an officer of the corporation; or
                                           (B)   within the 12 months after the person ceased to be an officer
                                                 of the corporation; and
                                   (iii)   a liquidator lodged a report under s533(1) (including that
                                           subsection as applied by s526-35 of the Corporations (Aboriginal
                                           and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006) about the corporation’s
                                           inability to pay its debts.

              RG 98.53       ASIC’s banning powers were amended by the Financial Sector Reform
                             (Hayne Royal Commission Response—Stronger Regulators (2019 Measures))
                             Act 2020. For an explanation of the amendments, see Chs 1 and 5 of the
                             Explanatory Memorandum to the Financial Sector Reform (Hayne Royal
                             Commission Response—Stronger Regulators (2019 Measures)) Bill 2019.



When we will make a banning order

                             Our approach

              RG 98.54       The foundation of ASIC’s approach to taking administrative action to make
                             a banning order is to take action where necessary or desirable to promote the
                             objects of the financial services regime: see s760A.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 20
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




              RG 98.55       We are likely to take administrative action in instances where there is a need
                             to protect investors and consumers, to deter misconduct, or where the
                             person’s conduct may result in investor or consumer detriment. Whether
                             administrative action will be taken will depend on the facts of each matter.
                             In general, we may consider banning a person where we have concerns about
                             the person, or the way their business is being or has been conducted.

              RG 98.56       We may ban a person even if the person has rectified breaches or has taken
                             steps to prevent further non-compliant conduct, such as by completing
                             additional training. We may do so to deter misconduct by the person or
                             others. In deciding whether to do so we will consider, among other things,
                             whether the person has been reactive rather than proactive in their approach
                             to compliance. The person’s attitude to compliance is an example of a factor
                             we will take into account when forming a view about whether they have a
                             reactive or proactive compliance approach.
                                  Note: Consideration of deterring others from engaging in misconduct is fundamental in
                                  determining whether to impose a banning order: see Australian Securities and
                                  Investments Commission v McCormack [2017] FCA 672 at [47].


                             Relevant factors ASIC will consider

              RG 98.57       While it is not possible to identify all factors relevant to a decision to ban a
                             person from providing financial services, controlling an entity that carries on
                             a financial services business or performing functions involved in the
                             carrying on of a financial services business, Table 2 sets out factors that may
                             be taken into account.
                                  Note: The list in Table 2 is not exhaustive and there will be other factors or conduct that
                                  are not mentioned in this guide that could lead to a decision to ban a person from
                                  providing financial services.


Table 2:    Key factors we consider in deciding to make a banning order

 Factors                                             Relevant considerations

 Nature and seriousness of the suspected              Whether there is evidence that the contravention involved
 misconduct                                            dishonesty or was intentional, reckless or negligent
                                                      The amount of any benefit gained or detriment suffered as a
                                                       result of the misconduct
                                                      The amount of any loss caused to investors and consumers
                                                      The impact of the misconduct on the market, including
                                                       potential loss of public confidence
                                                      Failing to discharge obligations on behalf of the financial
                                                       services business
                                                      Whether the conduct is continuing or likely to recur
                                                      Whether the person has a poor compliance record (e.g. they
                                                       have previously engaged in misconduct)
                                                      Failing to manage a material conflict of interest

 Internal controls                                    Whether the person complied with internal procedures



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                    Page 21
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




 Factors                                            Relevant considerations

 Conduct after the alleged contravention             When and how the breach came to the attention of ASIC
 occurs                                              The level of cooperation with our investigation
                                                     Whether timely and effective remedial steps have been taken
                                                     If in a position to do so, whether the person has been
                                                      proactive in making appropriate changes to policies and
                                                      procedures and, where applicable, changing their approach
                                                      to ensure the effective functioning of their dispute resolution
                                                      systems
                                                     Whether the person has been proactive in compensating
                                                      client losses and in communicating with clients about the
                                                      contravention

 The expected level of public benefit                The protective effect for investors and consumers
                                                     The reinforcement of the integrity and reputation of the
                                                      financial services industry
                                                     Whether the case is likely to help participants in financial
                                                      markets to better understand their obligations and thereby
                                                      promote compliance

 Likelihood that:                                    The compliance history of the person and their approach to
  the person’s behaviour will change in              compliance
   response to a particular action; and/or           Whether behaviour (of the person or broader industry) is
  other industry participants will be                more likely to change if the person is banned
   deterred from engaging in similar
   conduct through greater awareness of
   the consequences

 Mitigating factors                                  The extent to which there would be any personal hardship
                                                      were a banning order to be made
                                                     Whether the misconduct relates to an isolated complaint
                                                     Whether investors or consumers have generally not suffered
                                                      substantial detriment or been placed in a position of
                                                      unacceptable risk
                                                     Whether the misconduct was inadvertent and the person
                                                      undertakes to cease or correct the conduct



                             Banning periods

              RG 98.58       Our primary purpose in making banning orders is to promote the objects of
                             the financial services regime. Banning orders protect investors and
                             consumers and deter misconduct. In determining the period of a banning
                             order, deterring others from engaging in misconduct is fundamental.

                                  Note: See Australian Securities and Investments Commission v McCormack [2017]
                                  FCA 672 at [47].

              RG 98.59       It is also appropriate that we assess the risk that the person poses to investors
                             and consumers if they are not banned. A longer banning period will apply to
                             a person assessed as posing a higher risk.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                              Page 22
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




               RG 98.60      In our risk assessment, we consider what the person’s conduct shows about
                             them, and about their motivation, if any, for engaging in the conduct. For
                             example, we are likely to consider that a person who has acted dishonestly,
                             or has chosen to engage in conduct despite knowing that it could potentially
                             adversely affect others, poses a higher risk than a person who should have
                             realised the potential for adverse consequences to others but did not, or a
                             person whose misconduct is the result of being careless.

               RG 98.61      In our risk assessment, we also consider the actual or potential impact of the
                             person’s conduct on relevant persons (e.g. investors and consumers,
                             licensees, ASIC and ASX). For example, conduct that has resulted in unfair
                             enrichment—such as the person receiving excessive commissions—or that
                             has the potential to lead to a loss of confidence in the integrity of a market
                             for financial products is likely to lead to a longer banning period than
                             conduct that has a minimal adverse impact. Actual investor or consumer loss
                             is not a prerequisite for a period of banning.

               RG 98.62      Multiple instances of misconduct can increase the seriousness of risk that the
                             person poses to investors and consumers if they are not banned and may lead
                             to a longer banning period.

               RG 98.63      We emphasise that each case must depend on its particular circumstances
                             and will be determined on a case-by-case basis.

               RG 98.64      We may ban a person if they are involved in another person’s contravention
                             or we have reason to believe that they are likely to become involved in
                             another person’s contravention: see s920A(1)(g) and 920A(1)(h). We may
                             impose a banning period on them that is similar to the banning period that
                             we would impose on the person who engaged in the conduct.

               RG 98.65      Table 3 sets out factors and examples of conduct and indicates the potential
                             banning period that may follow from engaging in that conduct. These factors
                             and examples are indicative only.

Table 3:    Factors and examples of conduct relating to specific periods of banning

 Outcome         Factors                                       Examples of conduct (indicative only)

 Banning for      Conduct is the result of carelessness or     Giving a complying disclosure document, but not
 less than         inadvertence                                  within the required time
 3 years          The person attempted to remedy the           Failing to lodge documents with ASIC as required
                   contravention and has fully cooperated       Failing to notify ASIC about a representative’s
                   with ASIC                                     breach of the licensee’s obligations
                  No loss (or minimal loss) to client          Failing to perform the functions of an officer of a
                                                                 financial services business
                                                                Failing to keep records that must be kept




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                              Page 23
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




 Outcome         Factors                                       Examples of conduct (indicative only)

 Banning for      Conduct is inconsistent with the orderly     Insider trading
 3–10 years        operation of a financial market              Market manipulation or other misconduct in
                  Adverse impact on confidence in or the        relation to a financial product traded on a
                   integrity of a financial market               financial market (e.g. s1041A–1041E)
                  False, misleading or deceptive, or           At least twice being linked to a refusal or failure to
                   unconscionable conduct                        give effect to a determination made by AFCA
                  A deliberate course of conduct to             relating to a complaint that relates to a financial
                   enrich themselves at others’ expense          services business or credit activities

                  Conduct shows incompetence,                  Misconduct in relation to financial products or
                   irresponsibility or a high level of           financial services (e.g. s1041F–1041H and Div 2
                   carelessness, but with the possibility        of Pt 2 of the Australian Securities and
                   that the person may develop requisite         Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act))
                   skills and abilities                         Not acting in the best interests of the client in
                  Disregard for the law and compliance          relation to any personal financial advice given
                   with regulations                              (s961B–961F)
                                                                Failing, in relation to any personal financial
                                                                 advice provided, to give advice that is appropriate
                                                                 (s961G)
                                                                Failing, in relation to any personal financial
                                                                 advice provided, to prioritise the client’s interests
                                                                 (s961J)
                                                                Failing to provide an advice warning where
                                                                 personal financial advice is based on incomplete
                                                                 or inaccurate information (s961H)
                                                                Failing to comply with fee and remuneration
                                                                 obligations in relation to any personal financial
                                                                 advice given (s962–964E)
                                                                Offering or recommending interests in a managed
                                                                 investment scheme that needs to be registered,
                                                                 but has not been
                                                                Carrying on a financial services business without
                                                                 holding an AFS licence
                                                                Failing to perform the functions of an officer of a
                                                                 financial services business
                                                                Controlling a financial services business without
                                                                 the requisite fitness and propriety
                                                                Providing unauthorised financial services
                                                                Providing financial services contrary to s911B
                                                                Failing to keep records that must be kept
                                                                Failing to comply with disclosure requirements,
                                                                 including not disclosing commissions and other
                                                                 benefits or relevant interests and associations
                                                                Unauthorised discretionary trading
                                                                Failure by an officer of the licensee to ensure the
                                                                 licensee complies with its obligations
                                                                Misleading clients about the nature of the
                                                                 products being acquired or disposed of on their
                                                                 behalf that are not for the clients’ benefit




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                               Page 24
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




 Outcome         Factors                                       Examples of conduct (indicative only)

 Banning for      Any dishonest conduct                        Misappropriation of client funds or otherwise
 10 or more       Any intention to defraud                      engaging in fraud or theft
 years and                                                      Falsification, concealment or deliberate
                  Continued, knowing and wilful
 permanent                                                       destruction of records required to be kept
                   contraventions of the law, including
 banning
                   market integrity rules and disregard for     Engaging in a pattern of persistent contraventions
                   legal obligations                             that indicates systemic failure or a general lack of
                  Whether the person has previously             understanding of and regard for compliance
                   contravened the law                          Substantial or ongoing carrying on of a financial
                  Conduct shows serious incompetence            services business without holding an AFS licence
                   and irresponsibility                         Substantial unauthorised discretionary trading
                  Significant adverse impact on                Substantial insider trading
                   confidence in or the integrity of the        Substantial market manipulation or other
                   financial services industry                   significant misconduct in relation to a financial
                  Significant adverse impact on                 product traded on a financial market
                   confidence in or the integrity of a           (e.g. s1041A–1041E)
                   financial market                             Failure to apply a client’s funds in accordance
                  Conduct is significantly inconsistent         with the client’s instructions
                   with the orderly operation of a financial    Forging a client’s signature
                   market
                                                                Providing clients with false documents
                                                                Providing unauthorised financial services
                                                                Providing ASIC with information that is false in a
                                                                 material particular or materially misleading, or
                                                                 omits material information
                                                                Failing to perform the functions of an officer of a
                                                                 financial services business



                             Scope of banning orders

               RG 98.66      ASIC has the power to impose a single banning order that prohibits a person
                             from doing one or more of the things set out in RG 98.46: see s920B(1). We
                             may also make more than one banning order against the same person,
                             prohibiting different conduct. Thus, for example, a person may receive:
                             (a)   a banning order that prohibits them from providing any financial
                                   services; and
                             (b)   a second order that prohibits them from controlling, whether alone or in
                                   concert with one or more other entities, an entity that carries on a
                                   financial services business.

               RG 98.67      When we make a banning order or orders prohibiting more than one type of
                             conduct, we may impose a different banning period for each prohibition.

               RG 98.68      ASIC also has the power to impose a ‘permissive’ banning order. That is, we
                             may impose a banning order that generally prohibits a person from doing an
                             identified act, but also includes a provision allowing the person to perform
                             specified acts, or specified acts in specified circumstances, that the order
                             would otherwise prohibit them from doing: see s920B(3).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                              Page 25
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




              RG 98.69       When determining the scope of a banning order under s920B(1) or (3), we
                             seek to ensure the order addresses our concerns about the person in question.
                             In considering which orders are appropriate to make in any individual
                             matter, we will take into account:
                             (a)   the objects of the financial services regime;
                             (b)   the factors set out in Table 2;
                             (c)   whether such an order is consistent with deterring misconduct; and
                             (d)   whether such an order is consistent with our priority of protecting
                                   investors and consumers.



Varying or cancelling banning orders
              RG 98.70       We may vary or cancel a banning order if we are satisfied that ‘it is
                             appropriate to do so because of a change in any of the circumstances based
                             on which ASIC made the order’: see s920D(1). We may do so on our own
                             initiative or if the person against whom the order was made lodges an
                             application for us to cancel or vary the banning order.

              RG 98.71       If we propose not to vary or cancel a banning order in accordance with an
                             application lodged by a banned person, we must give the person an
                             opportunity to appear or be represented at a private hearing and to make
                             submissions: see s920D(3).

              RG 98.72       Examples of matters that may be relevant to a decision whether to vary or
                             cancel a banning order include:
                             (a)   the seriousness of the misconduct that resulted in the order;
                             (b)   the period that has elapsed since the order was made and whether the
                                   person continues to pose a risk to investors and consumers or to
                                   confidence in the financial system due to the conduct for which we
                                   made the banning order;
                             (c)   any action taken by the person to remedy the misconduct or the cause of
                                   the misconduct (e.g. if the misconduct was the result of incompetence,
                                   the person may have remedied this by satisfactorily completing relevant
                                   training and obtaining relevant qualifications); and
                             (d)   any information that, if it had been known to us at the time, would have
                                   been relevant to our decision to make the banning order.

              RG 98.73       If the person applying for the variation or cancellation of a banning order is
                             doing so to work in the financial services industry, it is likely that we will
                             want to take the following matters into account (as applicable):
                             (a)   the nature of the financial services the person proposes to provide or be
                                   involved in and the capacity in which they will do so;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                          Page 26
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             (b)   the nature of any function the person proposes to perform in the
                                   carrying on of a financial services business and the capacity in which
                                   they will do so;
                             (c)   if the person proposes to act as a representative of an AFS licensee, the
                                   compliance record of the licensee; and
                             (d)   details of the compliance and supervisory regime under which the
                                   person would operate if their application is granted by ASIC, including
                                   details of any independent auditing of the person’s activities.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                          Page 27
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




D          Publicising our decisions

                              Key points

                              We will make public our decisions to vary, suspend or cancel an AFS
                              licence or to make, vary or cancel a banning order by publishing a notice in
                              the ASIC Gazette.

                              We will not publicly comment on these administrative actions before these
                              decisions are gazetted, or the relevant registers are updated.




Public notification of decisions
              RG 98.74       We are required to make public our decisions to vary, suspend or cancel an
                             AFS licence or to make, vary or cancel an order banning a person by
                             publishing a notice in the ASIC Gazette: see s915F and 920E.

              RG 98.75       Such a notice will be gazetted no earlier than the second business day after
                             the person concerned has been given notice of the decision. For example, if
                             the banning decision is given to the person on a Wednesday, the notice will
                             be gazetted no earlier than the following Friday.

              RG 98.76       Similarly, we will update our publicly accessible registers with the relevant
                             details of our administrative actions no earlier than the second business day
                             after the person concerned has been given notice of the decision.

                                  Note: We are required to establish one or more registers relating to financial services:
                                  see s922A(1). A person may inspect the registers, and may make copies of or take
                                  extracts from them: see s922B. The registers must include details about licensees and
                                  people who have been banned: see regs 7.6.05 and 7.6.06 of the Corporations
                                  Regulations 2001.

              RG 98.77       As a general principle, it is our view that there is significant public interest in
                             ensuring that investors, consumers and the broader community are aware of
                             and informed about action we take. Transparency and disclosure are
                             important factors in market integrity and investor and consumer confidence.
                             They serve to educate, deter misconduct and promote compliance by
                             demonstrating the regulatory consequences of engaging in unacceptable
                             conduct.

                                  Note: The importance of the public being promptly informed about our banning
                                  decisions was confirmed by the Full Court of the Federal Court in Australian Securities
                                  and Investments Commission v Administrative Appeals Tribunal (2009) 181 FCR 130.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                    Page 28
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




Public comment
              RG 98.78       Our approach to public comment on our decisions to vary, cancel or suspend
                             an AFS licence or to make, vary or cancel a banning order will be governed
                             by our stated policy: see Information Sheet 152 Public comment on ASIC’s
                             regulatory activities (INFO 152). As set out in INFO 152, we will not make
                             a public comment before we gazette a notice of the decision or update the
                             relevant register.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                          Page 29
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




Key terms


                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              AFCA                      Australian Financial Complaints Authority—the external
                                                        dispute resolution scheme for which an authorisation
                                                        under Pt 7.10A of the Corporations Act is in force

                              AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                        the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                        on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                        services
                                                          Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                              AFS licensee              A person who holds an Australian financial services
                                                        licence under s913B

                              ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                              ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                        2001

                              Australian passport       A registered scheme that is also registered as a passport
                              fund                      fund under Pt 8A.3 of the Corporations Act

                              banning order             A written order by ASIC that prohibits a person from
                                                        engaging in one or more of the types of conduct set out in
                                                        s920B

                              Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                        purposes of that Act

                              court enforceable         A court enforceable undertaking that may be accepted by
                              undertaking               ASIC under reg 7.2A.01 of the Corporations Regulations
                                                        and s93A and s93AA of the ASIC Act

                              credit licensee           A person who holds an Australian credit licence under
                                                        s35 of the National Credit Act

                              financial market          Has the meaning given in s767A of the Corporations Act,
                                                        and includes a facility through which offers to acquire or
                                                        dispose of financial products are regularly made or
                                                        accepted

                              financial product         Generally, a facility through which, or through the
                                                        acquisition of which, a person does one or more of the
                                                        following:
                                                         makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                         manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                         makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                          Note: See Div 3 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                          definition. In addition to the general categories above, this
                                                          specifies certain things as being included or excluded from the
                                                          definition.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                  Page 30
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              financial service         Has the meaning given in Div 4 of Pt 7.1 of the
                                                        Corporations Act

                              financial services        A business of providing financial services
                              business                    Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                          Corporations Act. The meaning of ‘carry on a financial
                                                          services business’ is affected by s761C.

                              financial services law    Has the meaning given in s761A

                              financial services        A person who provides a financial service
                              provider

                              foreign passport fund     A passport fund with a home economy other than
                                                        Australia

                              infringement notice       An infringement notice issued under reg 7.2A.04 of the
                                                        Corporations Regulations

                              market integrity rules    Rules made by ASIC, under s798G of the Corporations
                                                        Act, for trading on domestic licensed markets

                              National Credit Act       National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009

                              Passport Rules            The requirements in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of
                                                        Cooperation on the Establishment and Implementation of
                                                        the Asia Region Funds Passport, as incorporated into the
                                                        domestic law of a participating economy

                              provide a financial       A person provides a financial service if they:
                              service                    provide financial product advice;
                                                         deal in a financial product;
                                                         make a market for a financial product;
                                                         operate a registered scheme;
                                                         provide a custodial or depository service;
                                                         provide a crowd-funding service;
                                                         provide a claims handling and settling service;
                                                         provide a superannuation trustee service; or
                                                         as a trustee company, provide traditional trustee
                                                          company services
                                                          Note: This is a definition contained in s766A.

                              reg 7.6.05 (for           A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                              example)                  example numbered 7.6.05)

                              representative (of an     Means:
                              AFS licensee)              an authorised representative of the licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of the licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of a related body corporate of
                                                          the licensee; or
                                                         any other person acting on behalf of the licensee
                                                          Note: This is a definition contained in s910A of the
                                                          Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                   Page 31
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              RG 100 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 100)

                              s920A (for example)       A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                        numbered 920A), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                             Page 32
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             administrative powers, AFS licensees, Australian financial services licence,
                             banning orders, cancellation, licence conditions, licence variation, public
                             comment, suspension


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 8 Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct

                             RG 100 Court enforceable undertakings

                             RG 216 Markets Disciplinary Panel

                             RG 218 Licensing: Administrative action against persons engaging in credit
                             activities

                             RG 263 Financial Services and Credit Panel


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 1 Administrative hearings

                             INFO 9 ASIC decisions: Your rights

                             INFO 107 Guidelines for managing allegations of misconduct against ASIC
                             officers

                             INFO 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement

                             INFO 152 Public comment on ASIC’s regulatory activities


                             Legislation

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001, Pt 2 Div 2

                             Corporations Act 2001, Ch 7; Pt 7.6 Div 8; Pt 7.10A; s533, 760A, 911A,
                             911B, 912A, 913A, 913B, 913BA, 914A, 914B, 915B, 915C, 915F, 915H,
                             920A, 920B, 920C, 920D, 920E, 921C, 921E, 921F, 922A, 922B, 961B–
                             961H, 961J, 962–964E, 1041A–1041H

                             Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006, s526-35

                             Corporations Amendment (Future of Financial Advice) Act 2012

                             Corporations Regulations 2001, regs 7.6.05, 7.6.06



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                          Page 33
               REGULATORY GUIDE 98: ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders




                             Explanatory Memorandum to the Corporations Amendment (Future of
                             Financial Advice) Bill 2011, paragraphs 2.17–2.27

                             Explanatory Memorandum to the Financial Sector Reform (Hayne Royal
                             Commission Response—Stronger Regulators (2019 Measures)) Bill 2019

                             Financial Sector Reform (Hayne Royal Commission Response—Stronger
                             Regulators (2019 Measures)) Act 2020

                             National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009


                             Cases

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Administrative Appeals
                             Tribunal (2009) 181 FCR 130

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission v McCormack [2017]
                             FCA 672

                             HIH Insurance Ltd and HIH Casualty and General Insurance Ltd, Re: ASIC
                             v Adler (2002) 42 ACSR 80

                             Masu Financial Management Pty Ltd and Australian Securities and
                             Investments Commission [2017] AATA 97

                             Sovereign Capital Limited and Australian Securities and Investments
                             Commission [2008] AATA 901




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                          Page 34
