REGULATORY GUIDE 82

External administration:
Deeds of company
arrangement involving a
creditors’ trust
December 2018


About this guide
This guide is for registered liquidators appointed under Pt 5.3A of the
Corporations Act as a voluntary administrator or deed administrator
(administrator).

It explains:
    our interpretation of administrators’ obligations under the Corporations
     Act and the general law where they are considering a proposed deed of
     company arrangement (DOCA) or a proposed variation of a DOCA
     (collectively, a DOCA proposal) involving a creditors’ trust; and
    in particular, the information that we consider is material to creditors
     and should therefore be disclosed when a DOCA proposal involves a
     creditors’ trust.
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in December 2018 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Guide 220, issued May 2005, rebadged as Regulatory
                                     Guide 82 on 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                Page 2
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    DOCAs and creditors’ trusts ....................................................................4
                                    Administrators’ obligations about using creditors’ trusts .........................4
                             B      DOCAs and creditors’ trusts ................................................................6
                                    What is a creditors’ trust? ........................................................................6
                                    What are the special risks for creditors? .................................................7
                                    ‘Holding’ DOCAs ......................................................................................8
                             C      Administrators’ obligations about creditors’ trusts ..........................9
                                    What are the obligations of administrators? ............................................9
                             D      Disclosing material information .........................................................13
                                    What is material information? ................................................................13
                                    Reasons .................................................................................................15
                                    Key events .............................................................................................16
                                    Return to creditors .................................................................................16
                                    Trustee particulars .................................................................................17
                                    Remuneration and expenses .................................................................17
                                    Indemnities.............................................................................................18
                                    Powers ...................................................................................................18
                                    Claims ....................................................................................................18
                                    Other creditor/beneficiary differences ....................................................19
                                    Fair Entitlements Guarantee scheme ....................................................20
                                    Compliance opinion ...............................................................................20
                                    Solvency statement ...............................................................................20
                                    Taxation issues for company and trust ..................................................21
                                    Taxation issues for individual creditor/beneficiary .................................21
                                    Other issues ...........................................................................................21
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................22
                             Related information .....................................................................................23




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                                        Page 3
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




A          Overview


                              Key points

                              A creditors’ trust in a deed of company arrangement (DOCA) is a
                              mechanism that is used to accelerate a company’s exit from external
                              administration.

                              It is important that voluntary administrators and deed administrators
                              (administrators) are aware of their obligations and properly consider all the
                              relevant issues raised by the use of a creditors’ trust.

                              This guide indicates how we think administrators will adequately and
                              properly perform all their duties and functions when a DOCA proposal
                              involves a creditors’ trust.




DOCAs and creditors’ trusts
              RG 82.1        A creditors’ trust in a DOCA is a mechanism used to accelerate a company’s
                             exit from external administration: see RG 82.6–RG 82.11.

              RG 82.2        We have issued this guide to outline our views on the use of creditors’ trusts
                             and indicate our interpretation of adequate and proper performance by
                             administrators of their duties and functions in this situation.



Administrators’ obligations about using creditors’ trusts
              RG 82.3        Administrators should be aware of and properly consider all the relevant
                             issues raised by the use of a creditors’ trust, to avoid:
                             (a)   submitting a DOCA proposal to creditors that involves a creditors’ trust
                                   without properly considering whether such an arrangement is
                                   appropriate in the company’s circumstances;
                             (b)   failing to disclose all the material information about the creditors’ trust
                                   and its implications; and/or
                             (c)   making an inappropriate recommendation about the DOCA proposal.


                             Is a creditors’ trust appropriate in this situation?

              RG 82.4        We consider that DOCA proposals should not involve creditors’ trusts unless
                             administrators have:
                             (a)   adequately considered the appropriateness of using a creditors’ trust in
                                   the particular case; and


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                Page 4
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




                             (b)   disclosed all material information about the creditors’ trust and its
                                   implications to enable creditors to consider the advantages and
                                   disadvantages for the company, the creditors and the administrator.

              RG 82.5        DOCAs involving a creditors’ trust create special risks for creditors. Once
                             the creditors’ trust has been constituted and the DOCA terminates, the
                             arrangement is no longer governed by Pt 5.3A of the Corporations Act 2001
                             (Corporations Act) and the protective mechanisms of that part—including
                             the supervisory and remedial jurisdiction of the courts—cease to apply.
                             Administrators recommending a creditors’ trust bear a heavy burden of
                             explaining to creditors the implications of adopting such a proposal.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                Page 5
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




B          DOCAs and creditors’ trusts


                              Key points

                              A creditors’ trust in a DOCA is a mechanism used to accelerate a
                              company’s exit from external administration.

                              The company and/or third parties promise to make payment (or transfer
                              other property) to the trustee to satisfy the creditors’ claims, and to
                              extinguish their rights, against the company.

                              We consider that there are different and additional risks for creditors where
                              a DOCA proposal involves a creditors’ trust.

                              We are aware that creditors (particularly of large companies) have been
                              asked to approve a ‘holding’ DOCA.




What is a creditors’ trust?
              RG 82.6        A creditors’ trust in a DOCA is a mechanism used to accelerate a company’s
                             exit from external administration. It has been used most commonly (but not
                             exclusively) in connection with the rehabilitation of public companies listed
                             on ASX. In some cases, this leads to a ‘backdoor’ listing.

              RG 82.7        Typically, under the terms of the DOCA and one or more interconnected
                             deeds, a trust entity is created and the company’s obligations to some or all
                             of the creditors bound by the DOCA are compromised and transferred to the
                             trust. Those creditors become beneficiaries of the trust. Occasionally, there
                             may be separate creditors’ trusts for employee and non-employee creditors,
                             or for secured and unsecured creditors.

              RG 82.8        The company and/or third parties promise to make one or more payments (or
                             transfer other property) to the trustee to satisfy the creditors’ claims against
                             the company. In return, the creditors’ rights against the company are
                             extinguished.

              RG 82.9        The trustee of the new trust becomes solely responsible to the former
                             creditors (now beneficiaries) for:
                             (a)   ensuring that the company and/or other third parties perform their
                                   payment and other obligations to the trustee;
                             (b)   determining how much each of the former creditors is entitled to receive
                                   from the trust; and
                             (c)   in due course, making any distribution to those former creditors.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                Page 6
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




              RG 82.10       Usually, the DOCA is ‘effectuated’ (and terminates) after the creditors’
                             claims against the company have been removed in this way. In most cases,
                             the DOCA terminates immediately on creation of the trust, which usually
                             occurs when or shortly after the DOCA is executed.

              RG 82.11       When the DOCA terminates, the company ceases to be externally
                             administered, the directors regain full control of the company and the
                             company is no longer required to use the notification ‘subject to deed of
                             company arrangement’ on its public documents (as otherwise would be
                             required by s450E(2) of the Corporations Act).



What are the special risks for creditors?
              RG 82.12       We consider that there are different and additional risks for creditors where a
                             DOCA proposal involves a creditors’ trust. The significance of the risks in a
                             particular case will depend on the quality of the information the
                             administrator provides to creditors and the actual terms of the DOCA, trust
                             deed and any other related documentation.

              RG 82.13       The key additional risks are that:
                             (a)   under the DOCA proposal, the DOCA may be effectuated and creditors’
                                   rights against the company extinguished before:
                                   (i)     the amount available for distribution to creditors of the
                                           company/beneficiaries of the trust has been ascertained;
                                   (ii)    the trust fund has been received in full by the trustee; or
                                   (iii)   creditors of the company/beneficiaries of the trust have received
                                           any payment from either the deed administrator or the trustee;
                             (b)   creditors may have fewer (or, in some circumstances, no) legal rights if
                                   the DOCA proposal is not fully complied with by all relevant parties;
                                   and
                             (c)   creditors may agree to the DOCA proposal without being aware (or
                                   fully appreciating the implications) of these matters.

              RG 82.14       The following factors increase the severity of these risks:
                             (a)   creditors’ lack of knowledge and inexperience;

                                   Note: The use of a creditors’ trust in a DOCA will be beyond the reasonable knowledge
                                   or experience of most creditors bound by the DOCA. Creditors (particularly unsecured
                                   creditors) of an insolvent company usually have limited knowledge of (or previous
                                   experience with) corporate insolvency laws and processes. Any previous experience is
                                   likely to be with the Corporations Act and ASIC as the relevant regulator, and they will
                                   generally expect their claims against the company and their dealings with the external
                                   administrator to be governed by the Corporations Act. Many creditors will have no or
                                   limited knowledge of trust law.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                    Page 7
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




                             (b)   inadequate disclosure by administrators of material information about
                                   the DOCA proposal;
                             (c)   the additional complexity of the legal and documentary arrangements
                                   needed to support the use of a creditors’ trust under a DOCA;
                             (d)   the trustee’s identity, skills, remuneration and insurance arrangements;
                             (e)   non-uniformity of the state and territory Trustee Acts governing trusts
                                   and trustees;
                             (f)   differences in the ways trustees and registered liquidators are regulated
                                   and supervised, particularly by ASIC and the courts;
                             (g)   potential difficulties for ASIC and creditors (as beneficiaries of the
                                   trust) in monitoring and enforcing proper conduct by the trustee; and
                             (h)   legal uncertainties and other issues for ASIC, creditors bound by the
                                   DOCA or other persons in challenging a DOCA that has already
                                   terminated.



‘Holding’ DOCAs
              RG 82.15       Creditors are sometimes asked to approve a ‘holding’ DOCA. A holding
                             DOCA may be proposed when it is not in the interests of creditors that the
                             administration end, nor that the company be wound up. Holding DOCAs
                             give a voluntary administrator more time to develop proposals for
                             restructuring or otherwise resuscitating the company. Where this is the case,
                             the voluntary administrator does not need to seek an extension from the court
                             of the convening period for the second creditors’ meeting under s439A.

                                   Note: See Mighty River International Limited v Hughes [2018] HCA 38.

              RG 82.16       Generally, we think a holding DOCA should not propose the subsequent
                             creation of a creditor’s trust unless all the information specified in this guide
                             is provided to creditors voting on the holding DOCA. We think it is unlikely
                             that information will be available to a voluntary administrator at the time of
                             proposing a holding DOCA, given the nature and purpose of a ‘holding’
                             DOCA. In our view, the appropriate course is to obtain express creditor
                             approval of the creditors’ trust by means of a formal variation of the DOCA
                             when that information is available.

              RG 82.17       Where a holding DOCA is proposed, we consider that its terms should:
                             (a)   exclude an open-ended or very lengthy period to formulate a concrete
                                   proposal for continuing the company or its business; and
                             (b)   include a program for interim reporting to creditors on steps taken and
                                   results obtained by the deed administrator, so that creditors can monitor
                                   the deed administrator’s efforts.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                Page 8
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




C          Administrators’ obligations about creditors’ trusts


                              Key points

                              Administrators have an overriding obligation to perform their duties and
                              functions adequately and properly. Where a DOCA proposal is concerned,
                              we consider that an administrator who is fulfilling this obligation will:
                              • evaluate the proposal before submitting it to creditors (see RG 82.20–
                                RG 82.23);
                              • disclose all material information about the proposal to creditors (see
                                RG 82.24–RG 82.27), and
                              • express an opinion about the proposal that adequately protects the
                                interests of creditors (see RG 82.28–RG 82.30).

                              Administrators may be subject to disciplinary or other action if they do not
                              fulfil their obligations when a DOCA proposal involving a creditors’ trust is
                              put to creditors.




What are the obligations of administrators?
              RG 82.18       Administrators have an overriding obligation to perform their duties and
                             functions adequately and properly. This includes ensuring that the interests
                             of creditors are adequately protected. Where a DOCA proposal is concerned,
                             we consider that an administrator who is fulfilling this obligation will:
                             (a)   evaluate the proposal before submitting it to creditors (see RG 82.20–
                                   RG 82.23);
                             (b)   disclose all material information about the proposal to creditors (see
                                   RG 82.24–RG 82.26); and
                             (c)   express an opinion about the proposal that adequately protects the
                                   interests of creditors (see RG 82.28).

              RG 000.19      Administrators may be subject to disciplinary or other action if they do not
                             fulfil their obligations when a DOCA proposal involving a creditors’ trust is
                             put to creditors.


                             Evaluating the proposal

              RG 82.20       Before submitting any DOCA proposal to creditors, administrators should
                             consider whether the proposal is suitable to submit. For example, it will
                             rarely be appropriate for an administrator to submit a DOCA proposal to
                             creditors where the administrator does not have sufficient concrete details to
                             comply with all of their disclosure obligations: see RG 82.24–RG 82.26.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                Page 9
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




              RG 82.21       Where the DOCA proposal involves a creditors’ trust, administrators should
                             specifically consider whether such a mechanism is appropriate in the
                             company’s circumstances. We think this includes considering whether the
                             DOCA proposal (if accepted) may be an abuse of Pt 5.3A or otherwise
                             contrary to the public interest. If so, it may be appropriate for the
                             administrator to seek directions from the court before submitting the DOCA
                             proposal to creditors.

              RG 82.22       Section 435A sets out the policy objective of Pt 5.3A:
                                   … for the business, property and affairs of an insolvent company to be
                                   administered in a way that:
                                   (a) maximises the chances of the company, or as much as possible of its
                                      business, continuing in existence; or
                                   (b) if it is not possible for the company or its business to continue in
                                      existence, results in a better return for the company’s creditors and
                                      members than would result from an immediate winding up of the
                                      company.

              RG 82.23       We consider that any mechanism for a creditors’ trust should only be
                             included in a DOCA:
                             (a)   when there is a sound commercial reason that persuades the
                                   administrators that in all the circumstances it is in the best interests of
                                   creditors to adopt a DOCA with a creditors’ trust—to obtain a better
                                   return than from an immediate winding-up;
                             (b)   if it is consistent with the policy objective of Pt 5.3A, as outlined in
                                   s435A; and
                             (c)   if it is consistent with the public interest.

                                   Note 1: We consider, for example, that it is likely to be an abuse of Pt 5.3A, or
                                   otherwise contrary to the public interest, for a DOCA to involve a creditors’ trust where
                                   the DOCA proposal contemplates that the company would or could (after the DOCA
                                   has been effectuated in accordance with its terms) continue in existence in an insolvent
                                   financial condition. See Australian Law Reform Commission, Report No. 45, General
                                   Insolvency Inquiry, 13 December 1988 (the Harmer Report), vol. 1, pp. 62–63.

                                   Note 2: See Re Bevillesta Pty Ltd (in voluntary administration) [2011] NSWSC 417.
                                   Regarding the importance of the statutory regime under Pt 5.3A and the protections or
                                   advantages provided to creditors see also Sydney Land Corp P/L v Kalon P/L (1998) 26
                                   ACSR 427 at 430, Young v Sherman (2002) 170 FLR 86, Bovis Lend Lease P/L v Wily
                                   (2003) 45 ACSR 612 and Blacktown City Council v Macarthur Telecommunications
                                   P/L (2004) 47 ACSR 391.


                             Disclosing material information

              RG 82.24       Section 75–225 of the Insolvency Practice Rules (Corporations) 2016
                             (Insolvency Practice Rules) sets out matters that a voluntary administrator
                             must include in their report and statement that accompany the notice of the
                             second meeting of creditors convened under s439A of the Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                    Page 10
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




                             The report must contain all information that is material to the creditors’
                             decision, including material details of what a proposed DOCA will contain.

                                  Note: See M&S Butler Investments Pty Ltd v Granny May’s Franchising Pty Ltd (1997)
                                  24 ACSR 695 and Commissioner of Taxation v Comcorp Australia Ltd (1996) 70 FCR
                                  356; 21 ACSR 590 which were decided under the predecessor to s75–225 of the
                                  Insolvency Practice Rules and s439A(4) of the Corporations Act.

              RG 82.25       Section 445D of the Corporations Act reinforces the disclosure obligations
                             of administrators by providing that the court may terminate a DOCA if
                             (among other things) information that is material to the creditors’ decision to
                             approve the proposed DOCA was omitted or was false or misleading.

              RG 82.26       When submitting a DOCA proposal to creditors that involves a creditors’
                             trust, administrators should disclose all the information that is material to the
                             creditors’ decision about whether to accept the particular risks associated
                             with the proposal. In Section D, we set out the information we think is
                             material to that decision.

                             Disclosure before variation of DOCA

              RG 82.27       We consider that deed administrators have an implied obligation to include
                             similar matters in the documents that accompany a notice of meeting when a
                             DOCA variation is proposed.


                             Expressing an opinion that protects creditors’ interests

              RG 82.28       Administrators have an obligation to provide creditors with a statement
                             setting out (among other things) the administrator’s opinion about whether it
                             would be in the creditors’ interests for the company to execute a proposed
                             DOCA or DOCA variation and the reasons for that opinion: see
                             s75–225(3)(b) of the Insolvency Practice Rules and RG 82.27.

              RG 82.29       Where a DOCA proposal involves a creditors’ trust, we consider that
                             administrators fulfilling this obligation will discuss the advantages and
                             disadvantages for creditors of the proposed creditors’ trust when making
                             their recommendation.

              RG 82.30       We also consider that the obligation to ensure the interests of creditors are
                             adequately protected means that there are some circumstances when an
                             administrator should not recommend that creditors approve a DOCA
                             proposal involving a creditors’ trust: see Table 1.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                               Page 11
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




Table 1:     Examples of circumstances when an administrator should not recommend a
             proposal involving a creditors’ trust

 Circumstance                          Details

 The proposed value of the             When the proposed value of the creditors’ trust fund cannot be reasonably
 creditors’ trust fund cannot be       estimated at the time the proposal will be voted on by the creditors. This is
 reasonably estimated                  because the amount that may become available to the creditors (as
                                       beneficiaries of the trust) will be so speculative that it will never be in the
                                       creditors’ interests for the company to execute a DOCA that terminates,
                                       almost immediately, their status and rights as creditors.
                                            Note: DOCAs that do not involve a creditors’ trust may, in some cases,
                                            propose a return to creditors that could be described as speculative. However,
                                            in those cases, the interests of creditors are different because the creditors’
                                            status as creditors (and their rights against the company under Pt 5.3A) will not
                                            be prematurely extinguished as may occur when a creditors’ trust is used.

 There is concern about whether        When the administrator has reason for concern about whether the trustee
 the trustee will receive all of the   will receive all of the trust fund, or at least adequate and enforceable
 trust fund                            security for the trust fund, before the DOCA terminates and the creditors’
                                       rights (as creditors) against the company are extinguished. This is because
                                       it will rarely be in the creditors’ interests to place on them (and the trustee)
                                       all the risks of failure of the trust if there is future non-performance of
                                       obligations undertaken under the DOCA by the company or a third party.
                                            Note: See also Kalon v Sydney Land Corp P/L (1998) 26 ACSR 593 upholding
                                            Sydney Land Corp P/L v Kalon P/L (1998) 26 ACSR 427.

 The DOCA or trust deed                When the DOCA or trust deed provisions will permit the trustee (or any
 provisions will permit the trustee    replacement trustee) of the creditors’ trust to be a person who does not
 (or any replacement trustee) of       have the necessary skills and experience or is otherwise unsuitable to be
 the creditors’ trust to be a          the trustee. The risk to creditors from an unsuitable trustee is severe. In our
 person who does not have the          view, the interests of creditors are likely to be adequately protected if the
 necessary skills and experience       trustee of the creditors’ trust is a registered liquidator, but will never be
                                       adequately protected if the trustee will or could be the company the subject
                                       of the proposed DOCA.
                                            Note: This does not imply that the trustee should always be the same person
                                            as the deed administrator; the trustee could be another registered liquidator.

 Concern about adequate civil          When there is reason for concern about whether the proposed trustee will
 liability insurance for the trustee   have adequate civil liability insurance for their conduct as trustee of the
                                       creditors’ trust.

 DOCA/trust will not provide           When the DOCA and/or the trust deed will not provide processes and rights
 rights at least as favourable as      that are at least as favourable to the beneficiaries as the processes for and
 rights of creditors under the         rights of creditors under the Corporations Act.
 Corporations Act

 Concrete details about the            When concrete details about the proposed structure and terms of the
 proposed structure and terms of       DOCA and trust deed cannot be provided. Because of the additional
 the DOCA and trust deed cannot        complexity of creditors’ trust arrangements, we do not consider that a broad
 be provided                           outline of the proposed DOCA and proposed creditors’ trust deed is
                                       sufficient. In practical terms, we think it is unlikely that administrators will be
                                       able to satisfy their disclosure obligations to creditors unless a draft DOCA
                                       and a draft trust deed have been prepared.
                                            Note: See also Kirwan v Cresvale Far East Ltd (in liq) [2002] NSWCA 395 at
                                            [382] per Young CJ; (2003) 44 ACSR 21 and Commissioner of Taxation v
                                            Comcorp Australia Ltd (1996) 70 FCR 356 at 389; 21 ACSR 590 at 624.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                      Page 12
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




D          Disclosing material information


                              Key points

                              Administrators have an obligation to give creditors material information that
                              will enable them to understand a DOCA proposal for a creditors’ trust and
                              make an informed decision whether to approve it.

                              Table 2 lists some of the types of information we consider an administrator
                              must disclose to creditors and/or express an opinion about.




What is material information?
              RG 82.31       Administrators have an obligation to give creditors material information that
                             will enable them to:
                             (a)   understand a DOCA proposal; and
                             (b)   appreciate the legal and practical implications for them of authorising
                                   the company to execute the proposed DOCA (or DOCA variation).

              RG 82.32       In this section, we set out what we think is material information when a
                             DOCA proposal involves a creditors’ trust. Depending on the particular case,
                             administrators may also need to disclose other material information.

                                   Note: Parts of this section may also be relevant to DOCAs that do not involve a
                                   creditors’ trust.

              RG 82.33       The information should be set out in the report and statement made under
                             s75–225 of the Insolvency Practice Rules (or explanation that accompanies
                             the notice of meeting where a DOCA variation is proposed) as simply,
                             clearly and succinctly as possible in the circumstances.

              RG 82.34       When the DOCA proposal involves a creditors’ trust, we consider this
                             obligation means that information should be provided that enables creditors
                             to understand the actual and potential implications and specific risks for
                             them of the proposed creditors’ trust arrangements. Creditors should be able
                             to make a realistic and informed assessment of the proposal and whether
                             they should approve it (including, but not limited to, whether they are likely
                             to receive a better return under the particular DOCA proposal, under a
                             DOCA that does not involve a creditors’ trust, or under a winding-up). In
                             Parkview Constructions Pty Ltd v Tayeh and Others [2009] NSWSC 186 at
                             [76], Justice Barrett said that:
                                   Administrators recommending to creditors the adoption of a deed of
                                   company arrangement that will give birth immediately to a creditors’ trust
                                   and then itself promptly die bear a heavy burden of explaining to creditors



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                     Page 13
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




                                   the implications of the shift from a regime incorporating a court
                                   administered scheme of creditor protection to one in which creditors
                                   become passive trust beneficiaries.

               RG 82.35      Much of the information that we think should be provided to creditors will
                             describe the administrator’s understanding of the law. Therefore, we
                             consider that administrators should base such information on legal advice
                             received by them that is applicable to the particular DOCA proposal.

               RG 82.36      Because of the additional complexity involved in a DOCA proposal
                             involving a creditors’ trust, we consider that creditors should be given
                             adequate opportunity to obtain (if they wish) professional advice about the
                             proposal, its implications and risks before they vote on the proposal. This
                             may affect the appropriate period of notice of a meeting, the need for an
                             extension of the convening period, or the need for an adjournment of the
                             meeting.

               RG 82.37      ASIC, creditors and the public can only properly understand the DOCA by
                             also understanding the associated arrangements. Where a DOCA (or DOCA
                             variation) involving a creditors’ trust is approved and executed, we expect
                             administrators to lodge the DOCA (or DOCA variation) with ASIC, as well
                             as lodging:
                             (a)   a copy of the creditors’ trust deed; and
                             (b)   any other associated document (such as an ‘implementation deed’) that
                                   is referred to in the DOCA or is otherwise necessary to support the
                                   creditors’ trust arrangements.

Table 2:      Material information to disclose to creditors

Information                  Description                                                    Reference

Reasons                      The reasons why the DOCA proposal involves a                   RG 82.38–RG 82.40
                             creditors’ trust

Key events                   The anticipated sequence of key events if the DOCA             RG 82.41–RG 82.42
                             proposal is approved, and the implications for creditors

Return                       The anticipated return to creditors/beneficiaries              RG 82.43

Trustee particulars          The identity, skills, experience and insurance of the          RG 82.44
                             proposed trustee

Remuneration                 The proposed remuneration and expenses of the deed             RG 82.46–RG 82.47
                             administrator and trustee

Indemnities                  Details of any indemnities for fees or liabilities             RG 82.48

Powers                       The differences between the powers of a deed                   RG 82.49–RG 82.50
                             administrator under the Corporations Act and the trustee
                             under the DOCA proposal




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                               Page 14
                  REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




Information                    Description                                                    Reference

Claims                         How creditors’ claims will be dealt with under the DOCA        RG 82.51–RG 82.52
                               proposal and in what priority

Other creditor/beneficiary     A comparison of the protections and rights of creditors        RG 82.53–RG 82.56
differences                    under the Corporations Act and of beneficiaries under the
                               DOCA proposal

Fair Entitlements              Any effect on employee entitlements under FEG                  RG 82.57
Guarantee scheme (FEG)

Compliance opinion             An opinion on the capability of the company (and               RG 82.58
                               relevant third parties) to comply with obligations to the
                               trustee

Solvency statement             The basis for an opinion that the company will be solvent      RG 82.59
                               at the date of effectuation of the DOCA

Tax issues for                 Details of the taxation and stamp duty implications for the    RG 82.61
company/trust                  company and the trust

Tax issues for individual      Potential differences in taxation implications for creditors   RG 82.62
creditor/beneficiary           and beneficiaries

Other                          Any other material aspects or implications                     RG 82.63–RG 82.64




Reasons
                 RG 82.38      Administrators should provide an explanation of the reasons why the DOCA
                               proposal involves a creditors’ trust, instead of a DOCA where creditors’
                               claims and rights would be dealt with directly under the DOCA and the
                               Corporations Act.

                 RG 82.39      We expect this explanation to include identification of any legal or
                               commercial reasons, and a discussion of why it is considered to be in the
                               interests of creditors as a whole to use the proposed creditors’ trust.

                 RG 82.40      If one of the stated reasons is to enable listing of the company or re-
                               quotation of the company’s financial products on a financial market such as
                               ASX, the administrator should also provide details of:
                               (a)   the market operator’s requirements for listing or re-quotation and how it
                                     is proposed that the company would meet those requirements; and
                               (b)   how and why listing or re-quotation would be in the interests of the
                                     creditors (as opposed to the directors, shareholders or some other party).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                 Page 15
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




Key events
              RG 82.41       Administrators should explain the anticipated sequence and relative timing
                             for each of the following key events if the DOCA proposal is approved, and
                             the implications of each event for creditors:
                             (a)   execution of the DOCA;
                             (b)   creation of the creditors’ trust;
                             (c)   termination of the DOCA;
                             (d)   receipt of the creditors’ trust fund by the trustee; and
                             (e)   distribution to creditors/beneficiaries.

              RG 82.42       The explanation of implications should include the nature of the legal
                             relationship of the creditors to the company after each event (and
                             specifically, when they would cease to be creditors), and what will happen if
                             any of these events, or their timing, does not occur as anticipated.



Return to creditors
              RG 82.43       Administrators should provide information about the anticipated return to
                             creditors/beneficiaries under the DOCA proposal, including:
                             (a)   the anticipated date(s) when the trust fund will be received by the
                                   trustee and from which sources;
                             (b)   the anticipated value of the total trust fund and of the portion that would
                                   be available for distribution to beneficiaries, with an explanation of any
                                   difference in those values;

                                   Note: See also Table 1.

                             (c)   the anticipated date(s) for distribution by the trustee to the beneficiaries;
                             (d)   the anticipated rate(s) of distribution by the trustee;
                             (e)   risks to creditors/beneficiaries associated with any delay in receipt of
                                   the trust fund by the trustee, or in distribution by the trustee to the
                                   beneficiaries; and
                             (f)   the potential return to creditors if the DOCA proposal did not involve a
                                   creditors’ trust.

                                   Note: We consider that the information in this paragraph should be linked to other
                                   information provided (e.g. information about remuneration, expenses and taxation) so
                                   that creditors are able to identify and weigh up the additional overall costs involved
                                   because of the creditors’ trust and any potential increase in the distribution to them,
                                   against the likelihood of, and any delay in, receiving that distribution.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                    Page 16
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




Trustee particulars
              RG 82.44       Administrators should provide information about the proposed trustee,
                             including:
                             (a)   why that trustee is proposed and is considered appropriate, with details
                                   of their qualifications, skills and relevant experience to perform the
                                   duties and functions they will have as trustee of the creditors’ trust;

                                   Note: See also Table 1.

                             (b)   whether the DOCA proposal requires the trustee (and any replacement
                                   trustee) of the creditors’ trust to be the deed administrator or other
                                   person registered by ASIC under s20–30 of Sch 2 to the Corporations
                                   Act as a liquidator;
                             (c)   whether ASIC or any other government regulator will have supervisory
                                   powers over conduct by the proposed trustee in that capacity, and if so,
                                   the nature of those powers;

                                   Note: Administrators should note our view that ASIC has certain supervisory powers
                                   under Div 40 of Sch 2 to the Corporations Act over conduct by the trustee where the
                                   DOCA and trust deed provide that the trustee is a registered liquidator.

                             (d)   whether the proposed trustee would have any potential conflict of
                                   interests when acting as trustee, and, if so, the nature of the conflict and
                                   how it would be managed; and
                             (e)   whether the proposed trustee has civil liability insurance (including
                                   professional indemnity and fidelity) that will cover conduct by them in
                                   their capacity as trustee of the proposed trust, and the nature and
                                   aggregate value of any such insurance.

                                   Note: See also Table 1 and RG 82.45.

              RG 82.45       If the proposed trustee is a registered liquidator, administrators should
                             confirm whether that insurance policy covers conduct by the registered
                             liquidator in the capacity of trustee. If not, additional insurance would be
                             needed.



Remuneration and expenses
              RG 82.46       Administrators should provide details of the remuneration and anticipated
                             expenses of the deed administrator and proposed trustee, and a comparison
                             of the remuneration process for the deed administrator and the trustee.

              RG 82.47       The information should cover:
                             (a)   how and when the deed administrator and trustee would be paid and at
                                   what rates;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                 Page 17
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




                             (b)   the effect of the fees and expenses of each of the deed administrator and
                                   trustee on the anticipated distribution to beneficiaries of the trust (see
                                   also RG 82.43). This includes identifying any additional fees and
                                   expenses involved because of the use of a creditors’ trust (such as
                                   through duplication of activity); and
                             (c)   the rights that beneficiaries would have to approve and/or challenge
                                   fees charged by the trustee (including what law and courts would decide
                                   those rights), compared with the rights they would have as creditors of a
                                   company subject to a DOCA.

                                   Note: See also Table 1.




Indemnities
              RG 82.48       Administrators should provide the details and implications for
                             creditors/beneficiaries of any indemnity for fees or liabilities that has been
                             (or will be) provided to the deed administrator or trustee, including the
                             relationship between the indemnifier, the company, the deed administrator
                             and the trustee. This includes any indemnity or lien in favour of the deed
                             administrator or trustee over the assets of the company or over the trust fund
                             under the proposed terms of the DOCA or trust deed.



Powers
              RG 82.49       Administrators should explain the differences between the powers of a deed
                             administrator under the Corporations Act and the powers the trustee would
                             have under the proposed trust deed and the relevant state or territory
                             Trustee Act.

              RG 82.50       This includes identification of any likely deficiencies in the powers of the
                             trustee to perform the functions envisaged under the proposed trust deed, and
                             which may lead to applications to court (and associated costs) by the trustee
                             that would not be necessary for a deed administrator.



Claims
              RG 82.51       Administrators should explain how creditors’ claims against the company
                             will be dealt with under the DOCA proposal and in what priority. This
                             includes whether the value of those claims will be determined by the deed
                             administrator or by the trustee. If by the trustee, there should be an
                             explanation of what the process of determination will be and confirmation
                             that the trustee will have unrestricted and free access to all the books and
                             records of the company necessary to determine claims.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                               Page 18
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




              RG 82.52       If unsecured creditors’ priorities (as beneficiaries of the trust) will not follow
                             the priorities set out in s556 of the Corporations Act, the nature of and
                             reasons for the divergence from s556 should be explained. If the claims
                             adjudication processes by the trustee and the associated rights of
                             beneficiaries would differ from the processes and rights under the
                             Corporations Act for creditors’ claims, the differences and their implications
                             for beneficiaries should also be explained.

                                   Note: See also Table 1.




Other creditor/beneficiary differences
              RG 82.53       The difference between Pt 5.3 of the Corporations Act, a creditors’ trust and
                             general trust law must be drawn to the attention of creditors. The use of a
                             creditors’ trust results in the loss of court supervision under the Corporations
                             Act. Although courts can still provide relief under the general law of trusts,
                             the safeguards available to creditors under Pt 5.3A are no longer available.

              RG 82.54       Administrators should provide a comparison of the protections and rights
                             that creditors would have under the Corporations Act as creditors of a
                             company subject to a DOCA, and the protections and rights they would have
                             as beneficiaries of the proposed creditors’ trust.

              RG 82.55       In relation to creditors, we expect this comparison to include explanation of
                             the ability of a creditor to:
                             (a)   challenge decisions, actions or omissions by a deed administrator,
                                   including decisions about the value of their claim against the company;
                             (b)   be informed (including through reports to creditors, meetings of creditors,
                                   and lodgement of statements of receipts and payments with ASIC, where
                                   these are required) about the progress of the external administration;
                             (c)   require a deed administrator to call a meeting of creditors to put a
                                   resolution to vary or terminate a DOCA;
                             (d)   apply to the court for the DOCA to be varied, terminated or avoided; and
                             (e)   complain to ASIC about conduct by the deed administrator.

              RG 82.56       In relation to beneficiaries of the proposed trust, we expect this comparison
                             to include explanation of:
                             (a)   the law that would govern interpretation of the trust deed and the
                                   trustee’s powers and duties;
                             (b)   how beneficiaries, individually and collectively, would be able to
                                   monitor and enforce compliance by the trustee, the company and any
                                   relevant third parties with the terms of the DOCA, the trust deed and
                                   any ‘implementation deed’ or other document setting out obligations




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                               Page 19
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




                                   connected with the creditors’ trust. This includes the rights that
                                   beneficiaries would have (and against whom) if any part of the trust
                                   fund is not paid to the trustee in accordance with the proposed DOCA,
                                   trust deed or other aspect of the arrangements;
                             (c)   the rights that a beneficiary would have to challenge decisions, actions
                                   or omissions by the trustee, including decisions about the value of their
                                   entitlement to a distribution out of the trust fund;
                             (d)   how, when and by whom the terms of the trust deed could be varied,
                                   including the rights that a beneficiary would have to call, or require the
                                   trustee to call, a meeting of beneficiaries to vary or terminate the trust
                                   deed; and
                             (e)   how, and to which supervisory body, a beneficiary could complain
                                   about decisions or other conduct by the trustee.



Fair Entitlements Guarantee scheme
              RG 82.57       Administrators should disclose the effect (if any) for employee creditors of
                             becoming a beneficiary of a creditors’ trust on their rights under the FEG, or
                             on the Australian Government’s rights of subrogation under FEG.



Compliance opinion
              RG 82.58       Administrators should state:
                             (a)   the inquiries they have made about the capability (including financial
                                   capability) of the company and any relevant third party to comply with
                                   their obligations under the DOCA proposal;
                             (b)   the information they have received in response to those inquiries; and
                             (c)   based on this information, their opinion on whether the company (and any
                                   relevant third party) is capable of complying and is likely to comply with
                                   its obligations to the trustee, if the DOCA proposal is approved by creditors.

                                   Note: See also Table 1.




Solvency statement
              RG 82.59       Administrators should state the reasons why they have formed the opinion
                             that the company will be solvent at the date of effectuation of the DOCA, if
                             the DOCA is wholly effectuated on the terms proposed.

              RG 82.60       An administrator who has not formed or cannot form this opinion should
                             re-evaluate the proposal: see RG 82.23.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                               Page 20
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




Taxation issues for company and trust
              RG 82.61       Administrators should provide details of the taxation (including capital gains
                             tax), stamp duty and other financial implications for the company and for the
                             trust of:
                             (a)   establishing the trust;

                                   Note: Trusts are entities that are subject to Australian Business Number (ABN)
                                   registration requirements and to Australian income tax legislation.

                             (b)   transferring to the trust the company’s liabilities to its creditors and,
                                   where applicable, other property of the company;
                             (c)   where applicable, realising trust assets; and
                             (d)   distributing trust assets to the beneficiaries.

              RG 82.62       This should include explanation of how these costs will impact on the
                             anticipated return to creditors/beneficiaries: see also RG 82.45.



Taxation issues for individual creditor/beneficiary
              RG 82.63       Administrators should provide a statement in general terms about the
                             potential taxation implications for a creditor of receiving distributions (in
                             their capacity as beneficiary) from a trust, rather than payment from the
                             company in their capacity as creditors, with a statement advising creditors to
                             seek professional advice about their individual taxation circumstances.



Other issues
              RG 82.64       Administrators should provide information about any other material aspects
                             or implications of the particular DOCA proposal, such as:
                             (a)   whether an Australian financial services (AFS) licence or authorisation
                                   would be needed by the trustee and, if so, the financial and other
                                   implications for creditors/beneficiaries;

                                   Note: Administrators should note that the automatic AFS licensing exemptions
                                   available to external administrators under s911A(2)(f) of the Corporations Act may not
                                   apply to registered liquidators acting as trustee of a creditors’ trust.

                             (b)   if the DOCA proposal involves preservation of the corporate shell, any
                                   independent opinion about the estimated value of the corporate shell; and
                             (c)   if the DOCA proposal involves a proposed equity raising and
                                   reorganisation of the company’s share capital, information about what
                                   this would involve (including costs and the implications of those costs
                                   for the return to creditors/beneficiaries), and the implications of relevant
                                   fundraising or takeover laws.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                    Page 21
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




Key terms

                            Term                        Meaning in this document

                            ABN                         Australian Business Number

                            administrator               Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                                                              Note: It therefore includes both deed administrators and
                                                              voluntary administrators.

                            AFS licence                 An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                        the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                        on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                        services
                                                              Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                            AFS licensee                A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                        Corporations Act

                            ASIC                        Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                            ASX                         ASX Limited or the exchange market operated by ASX
                                                        Limited

                            Corporations Act            Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                        purposes of that Act

                            deed administrator          A person appointed to administer a deed of company
                                                        arrangement under Pt 5.3A of the Corporations Act

                            DOCA                        A deed of company arrangement

                            DOCA proposal               A proposed DOCA or proposed variation of a DOCA

                            FEG                         Fair Entitlements Guarantee scheme

                            Insolvency Practice         Insolvency Practice Rules (Corporations) 2016
                            Rules

                            Pt 5.3A (for example)       A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                        5.3A), unless otherwise specified

                            registered liquidator       A person registered by ASIC under s20–30 of Sch 2 to
                                                        the Corporations Act

                            s439A (for example)         A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                        numbered 439A), unless otherwise specified

                            voluntary administrator     An administrator of a company but not of a deed of
                                                        company arrangement




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                                  Page 22
                REGULATORY GUIDE 82: External administration: Deeds of company arrangement involving a creditors’ trust




Related information


                             Headnotes

                             creditors’ trust, deed of company arrangement, DOCA, material information,
                             registered liquidator


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 33 Security deposits


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Pt 5.3A; s435A, 439A, 445D, 450E(2), 556, 911A; Sch 2,
                             Div 40, s20–30

                             Insolvency Practice Rules, s75–225


                             Cases

                             Blacktown City Council v Macarthur Telecommunications P/L (2004)
                             47 ACSR 391

                             Bovis Lend Lease P/L v Wily (2003) 45 ACSR 612

                             Commissioner of Taxation v Comcorp Australia Ltd (1996) 70 FCR 356;
                             21 ACSR 590

                             Kalon v Sydney Land Corp P/L (1998) 26 ACSR 593

                             Kirwan v Cresvale Far East Ltd (in liq) [2002] NSWCA 395; (2003)
                             44 ACSR 21

                             M&S Butler Investments Pty Ltd v Granny May’s Franchising Pty Ltd
                             (1997) 24 ACSR 695

                             Mighty River International Limited v Hughes [2018] HCA 38

                             Parkview Constructions Pty Ltd v Tayeh and Others [2009] NSWSC 186

                             Re Bevillesta Pty Ltd (in voluntary administration) [2011] NSWSC 417

                             Sydney Land Corp P/L v Kalon P/L (1998) 26 ACSR 427

                             Young v Sherman (2002) 170 FLR 86




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2018                                               Page 23
