REGULATORY GUIDE 40

Good transaction fee
disclosure for bank, building
society and credit union
deposit and payments products
(transaction accounts)

June 2002
  REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                           payments products




About this document
                      This Guide is designed to promote improved disclosure of transaction fees for
                      retail payments and deposit products (transaction accounts) offered by banks,
                      credit unions and building societies. ASIC's aim in producing the Guide is to
                      provide an easy reference for institutions and consumers to current transaction fee
                      disclosure requirements contained in legislation and self-regulatory instruments as
                      well as ASIC's views on what constitutes good transaction fee disclosure practice.
                      We hope it will encourage ever improving fee disclosure practices so that
                      consumers are in an informed position about how best to manage the cost of their
                      banking. In writing the Guide we have sought to create a reasonable balance
                      between the needs of consumers to have clear and timely fee information and the
                      costs of delivering such information.
                      The Guide was written against a background of considerable activity in the area of
                      disclosure and transaction accounts.1 Its content is a summary of legal and self-
                      regulatory requirements as of 26th June 2002 – in particular, the requirements in:


                           •    The financial services reforms. These reforms are contained in the
                                Corporations Act 2001 (as amended by the Financial Services Reform Act
                                2001) and the Corporations Regulations 2001 (as amended by a series of
                                Corporations Amendments Regulations issued in 2001 and 2002)2 .
                           •    The Uniform Consumer Credit Code (UCCC).
                           •    Various codes applicable to banks, building societies and credit unions.
                      As noted in the Guide, the requirements of the Financial Services Reforms won’t
                      apply to existing products until two years after 11 March 2002 unless an institution
                      opts in at an earlier time.
                      The material on self-regulatory codes is likely to change during 2002.
                      The contents of this Guide do not constitute legal advice. Every effort has
                      been taken to ensure that the Guide correctly summarises the law as at the
                      26th June 2002, however, institutions should always check applicable legal
                      requirements for themselves.




                      1 More recently, the focus on fee disclosure has extended to other financial products, in particular,

                      investment linked products such as superannuation, managed investments and investment linked life
                      insurance. Fee disclosure for these other financial products is currently the subject of a separate project
                      announced by ASIC on 20 December 2001 in Media Release 01/487.
                      2 References to sections and regulations in this Guide are references to sections of the Corporations Act

                      2001 and regulations in the Corporations Regulations 2001.


                                                      © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                            Page 2
  REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                           payments products



Executive summary
                      This Guide sets out ASIC’s views on what constitutes good fee disclosure practices
                      by banks, building societies and credit unions in relation to deposit and payments
                      products (transaction accounts).
                      ASIC produced the Guide because evidence suggests that many consumers do not
                      understand the fees that currently apply to their transaction accounts and would
                      like better disclosure either to guide their own habits or because they think others
                      will benefit from it.3
                      The content of the Guide was developed with the assistance of a working group of
                      industry, consumer and government representatives (see Appendix A). The Guide
                      also incorporates relevant legislative and self-regulatory requirements.
                      In ASIC’s view, improvements to transaction fee disclosure are important if
                      consumers are to be able to make choices between transaction products and
                      providers on the basis of price and conduct their banking so as to minimise fees.
                      They are also important if pricing competition is to be encouraged. We have been
                      pleased to see that since the process of drafting this Guide commenced, a number
                      of important improvements to disclosure practices have already occurred.
                      There are five times at which transaction fee disclosure is particularly relevant:
                      • at the time a consumer is selecting a product or product provider;
                      • when changes are made to the level of fees or when, why or how they are
                          charged;
                      • when a statement is received;
                      • when a consumer is actively seeking information (this time may coincide
                          with one of the other 4 times); and
                      • immediately prior to making a transaction.
                      This Guide discusses options for good transaction fee disclosure in relation to
                      these 5 times. The text is based upon the following 5 general principles of good
                      disclosure.4
                      •    Pre-contractual disclosure - At the time a consumer is selecting a
                           product or product provider they should have access to information about
                           all fees and charges that will apply to the product, when they will be
                           incurred and factors impacting upon their level and imposition;
                      •    Notice of changes - Consumers should be provided with personally
                           addressed written notice, about any changes to fee amounts or the conditions
                           for incurring fees, and the effect of those changes, in sufficient time before the
                           changes occur to allow them to make any alterations they deem necessary to


                      3 This view was confirmed in research undertaken for ASIC by Chant Link in 2000 on consumers'

                      understanding of the fees and charges they pay and what they would like in terms of disclosure.
                      4 These principles are consistent with the good disclosure principles in Policy Statement 168: Disclosure:

                      Product Disclosure Statements (and other disclosure obligations) but have been formulated specifically
                      for transaction accounts. Institutions should also have regard to Policy Statement 168.


                                                      © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                            Page 3
REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                         payments products

                        their banking arrangements or providers. Written notice can be in an
                        electronic form if the consumer so elects.
                    •   Disclosure on statements - Included on the statements of customers
                        who are potentially liable to pay fees should be clear information about
                        transactions undertaken and any fees incurred during the period. This
                        information should not be bundled. It should clearly show the cost of
                        each transaction per different delivery channel and the number of such
                        transactions undertaken. The impact of any free transaction limit, rebate
                        scheme or other relationship variable should also be reflected in the
                        summary.
                    •   Disclosure following a specific request - Consumers should have access
                        to information about the fee structures which apply to transaction
                        accounts through a range of access methods at the time that they seek it.
                    •   Disclosure at the time of the transaction, including of transaction
                        fees, foreign ATM fees, surcharges and of overdraw fees – Ideally,
                        consumers should have optional access to information relevant to the cost
                        of a specific transaction immediately prior to deciding whether or not to
                        undertake the transaction.

                        It is recognised that because of the costs associated with complying with
                        this last principle, it may be some time before many institutions are in a
                        position to meet it.


                    The Guide also discusses matters relating to the administration of the Guide.
                    The issue of fee disclosure is a topical one and it is possible that there will be
                    further legislative and self-regulatory initiatives that will fall within the scope of this
                    Guide. In particular, the provisions of the Banking Code of Conduct, and possibly
                    other payments system codes, are likely to change in 2002. The Guide will
                    therefore be a living document which will be reviewed from time to time. The
                    content of this version summarises the relevant law as at 26th June 2002.




                                               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                     Page 4
REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                         payments products



                    Contents

                    About this document.......................................................................2
                    Executive summary .........................................................................3
                    Purpose and status of the Guide....................................................6
                    Pre-contractual disclosure .............................................................6
                    Notice of change..............................................................................9
                    Disclosure on statements .............................................................12
                    Disclosure on request. ..................................................................17
                    Real time disclosure immediately prior to any transaction .......19
                    Guide administration.....................................................................24
                    Regulatory and financial impact...................................................25
                    Appendix A: Membership of the Transaction Fee Disclosure
                    Working Group ..............................................................................26




                                                © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                      Page 5
     REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                              payments products



Purpose and status of the Guide
1.      What is the purpose of the Guide?
                         This Guide is designed to promote improved disclosure of transaction fees for
                         retail payments and deposit products (transaction accounts) offered by banks,
                         building societies and credit unions. Parts of the Guide will also be relevant for
                         credit products if transaction fees are, or can be, imposed.5
                         This Guide is intended to be an all in one source of information for institutions
                         and consumers on the fee disclosure requirements of legislation and self-regulatory
                         instruments and of ASIC’s views on good practice.

2.      What status do the provisions of this Guide have?
                         The status of the provisions of the Guide vary depending upon whether they:
                              •    refer to legislation which binds all parties it applies to;
                              •    refer to self-regulatory requirements which must be complied with by all
                                   parties to the self-regulatory instrument;
                              •    are ASIC’s views on how best to comply with these legislative or self-
                                   regulatory requirements; or
                              •    are none of the above, but are a statement of what ASIC considers to be
                                   good practice, in which case compliance will normally be voluntary.




Pre-contractual disclosure
3.      The Good Disclosure Principle.
                         At the time a consumer is selecting a product or product provider they should have
                         access to information about all fees and charges that will apply to the product,
                         when they will be incurred and factors impacting upon their level and imposition.

4.      Why do consumers need pre-contractual transaction fee
        disclosure?
                         Consumers need pre-contractual disclosure of transaction fee information to
                         enable them to compare products and choose the appropriate product and service
                         provider for their needs.




                         5 Disclosure requirements under the Corporations Act and Regulations, referred to in this Guide, do not

                         generally apply to credit products.


                                                         © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                               Page 6
     REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                              payments products


5.      What are the legislative requirements?
                         Prior to 11 March 2002, there were no legislative requirements in effect for pre-
                         contractual transaction fee disclosure for transaction accounts. This has changed
                         so that new pre-contractual transaction fee disclosure requirements will apply to
                         deposit products:
                         (a)        when the transition period provided for under the Corporations Act 2001
                                    expires on 11 March 2004 (section 1438(3)(a)); or
                         (b)        on the date specified in a notice lodged with ASIC by a product issuer who
                                    elects to be subject to the new product disclosure provisions during the
                                    transition period for a particular product (section 1438(3)(b)),
                         whichever is the earlier.6 These transitional arrangements do not apply to products
                         offered by new financial institutions that came into being on or after 11 March
                         2002.
                         From then, a retail client must generally be given a Product Disclosure Statement
                         (PDS) before they acquire a transaction account (see Section 1012A, 1012B, 1012D
                         and 1012G). Under Section 1013D(1)(d)(ii) the PDS is required to include
                         information about “any amounts that will or may be payable by a holder of the
                         product in respect of the product after its acquisition, and the times at which those
                         amounts will or may be payable”. Under regulation 7.9.72A, the requirement to
                         show the amount payable can be satisfied if the PDS gives the basis on which the
                         amount of liability would be calculated rather than specifying the actual figure.
                         Additional information must also be provided to retail customers before they
                         acquire a transaction account, if they request it (section 1017A(1)).
                         The Uniform Consumer Credit Code (UCCC) includes requirements for pre-
                         contractual disclosure for credit products (s. 14(1)). Included in this disclosure
                         must be those matters required by s15 to be in the contract. Section 15G requires
                         the disclosure of:
                               •    the credit fees and charges7 that are, or may become payable under the
                                    contract, and when each such fee or charge is payable, if ascertainable;
                               •    the amount of any fee or charge if ascertainable, but if not, the method of
                                    calculation of the fee or charge, if ascertainable; and
                               •    the total amount of credit fees and charges payable under the contract to
                                    the extent that it is ascertainable.




                         6 For more information about the new disclosure requirements and transitional arrangements see ASIC’s

                         Transition Guide – Licensing and Disclosure: Making the transition to the FSR regime – An ASIC Guide, Media
                         Release 01/380.
                         7 Under the UCCC, "credit fees and charges" do not include interest charges or "any fees or charges that

                         are payable to or by a credit provider in connection with a credit contract in connection with which both
                         credit and debit facilities are available if the fees or charges would be payable even if credit facilities were
                         not available." They also don't include government charges or enforcement expenses.


                                                           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                                 Page 7
     REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                              payments products


6.      What are the self-regulatory requirements?
                         The situation with self-regulatory codes is presently in a state of flux.
                         Clause 4 of the Code of Banking Practice as at 26 June 2002 requires that:
                                   A bank shall, before or at the time of providing a particular Banking Service to a
                                   Customer for the first time or otherwise on request by a Customer, make available
                                   to the Customer a schedule containing the Standard Fees and Charges which
                                   currently apply to the Banking Service.

                         The provisions in the Building Society and Credit Union Codes are similar.
                         However, it should be noted that the Code of Banking Practice has just been
                         reviewed. Should the reviewer's recommendation be followed in the revised Code,
                         and we understand that it will be, then it is probable that from the date the revised
                         Code becomes operational, this provision will only apply to credit products which
                         are not regulated by the UCCC. The reviewer recommended the narrower
                         application of the provision to avoid duplication with the financial services reforms
                         which are now embodied in the Corporations Act 2001 and the Uniform
                         Consumer Credit Code.
                         The Credit Union Code is presently also under review and it is probable that it will
                         follow a similar course to that taken in the Banking Code of Practice on this issue.
                         Clause 2.3(a) of the revised Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) Code provides
                         that before an access method is first used the cardholder should be provided
                         with documentation on:
                                   Any charges for the issue or use of an access method, separate from activity or
                                   other charges applying to the account generally.8

7.      What should be included in these pre-contractual disclosures
        if they are to be done well?
                         ASIC interprets these regulatory and self-regulatory requirements as meaning
                         that pre-contractual fee disclosure should include:
                         • clear details of the fees per transaction, broken down by channels if
                             different fees are charged depending upon the delivery mode;
                         •   details of what does and does not constitute a transaction for fee charging
                             purposes (eg are checking on an account balance, having a direct debit
                             bounce or depositing a cheque transactions for the purposes of fees?);
                         •   the details of any rebates scheme (including information on the factors that
                             will affect the size of the rebate);
                         •   the details of any free transaction scheme including any specific conditions
                             applying to it (such as a limit on over-the-counter transactions);
                         •   clear information on when the period for calculating rebates or counting
                             free transactions commences and ends;




                         8 All references to the EFT Code are to the revised EFT Code which became fully operational on 1 April

                         2002.


                                                        © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                              Page 8
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          • any balance minimums, or loyalty arrangements (such as having a mortgage
                            with the institution), which impact upon the need to pay fees;
                          • any other conditions relevant to assessing the fees the consumer will have
                            to pay; and
                          • information on when transaction and account keeping fees will be debited
                               to the account so that consumers don't find themselves unknowingly
                               overdrawn on their account.
                          ASIC’s research on consumers’ understanding of the fees they pay suggests that
                          some consumers find it difficult to identify which fees apply to their account where
                          the fees for all of an institution’s products are listed in one long fee schedule. This
                          suggests that good practice involves making every effort to provide fee information
                          as part of the package of information about an individual product. The Product
                          Disclosure Statements required under the Corporations Act 2001 will facilitate this.
                          That said, information being available in one place on the fees applying to similar
                          products offered by an institution may be helpful for comparison purposes. There
                          is, therefore, still a useful role for easily understood information about the fees
                          applying to a range of products.




Notice of change
8.       The Good Disclosure Principle.
                          Consumers should be provided with personally addressed written notice, about any
                          changes to fee amounts or the conditions for incurring fees, and the effect of those
                          changes, in sufficient time before the changes occur to allow them to make any
                          alterations they deem necessary to their banking arrangements or providers.
                          Written notice can be in an electronic form if the consumer so elects.9

9.       Why do consumers need notice of change?
                          Consumers need to be notified of changes to fee amounts or the conditions for
                          incurring fees so that they can decide whether they wish to alter their practices or
                          change products so as to avoid incurring additional costs or to minimise costs.

10.      What are the legislative notice requirements?
                          Prior to 11 March 2001, there were no legislative notice requirements in effect for
                          deposit accounts. New legislative notice requirements will apply to deposit
                          products:
                          (a)       when the transition period provided for under the Corporations Act 2001
                                    expires on 11 March 2004 (section 1438(3)(a)); or


                          9 Under section 1017B of the Corporations Act 2001, the ability to provide electronic notification is not

                          dependent upon the customer electing to receive electronic notice. However, given the stage of usage of
                          electronic forms of communication, good practice suggests that gaining the customers consent to
                          receiving electronic notice is desirable. The principle also reflects the thinking behind clause 22.1 of the
                          EFT Code which requires that consumers have made a positive election to receive information
                          electronically before it can be so provided as a substitute for paper notification.


                                                          © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                                Page 9
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          (b)        on the date specified in a notice lodged with ASIC by a product issuer who
                                     elects to be subject to the new product disclosure provisions during the
                                     transition period for a particular product (section 1438(3)(b)),
                          whichever is the earlier. These transitional arrangements do not apply to products
                          offered by new financial institutions that came into being on or after 11 March
                          2002.
                          Under section 1017B(5) and (7) of the Corporations Act 2001, institutions will be
                          required to give notice of an increase in fees or charges 30 days before the change
                          takes effect.10 This requirement doesn’t apply to fees and charges payable under
                          Commonwealth or State/Territory law, (Note that section 1017B does not
                          generally apply to credit products that are covered by the UCCC).
                          Section 1017B(4) makes it clear that the notice must give the consumer the
                          information that is reasonably necessary for them to understand the nature and
                          effect of the change or event.
                          Section 1017B(3) requires that the consumer must be notified in writing,
                          electronically, or in the way specified in the regulations.
                          Under the section 61 (1) of the Uniform Consumer Credit Code credit providers
                          must, not later than 20 days before a change in the amount of a credit fee or charge
                          (including a new credit fee or charge), or a change in the frequency or time for
                          payment of a credit fee or charge, give the consumer written notice setting out the
                          particulars of the change. Section 61(2) provides that "notice relating to a change
                          in the amount of a credit fee or charge (including a new credit fee or charge) may
                          be given by publishing a notice in a newspaper but must then give particulars
                          before or when the next statement is due." Advance notice is not required if the
                          change reduces the customer’s obligations (i.e. a fee is decreased).

11.      What are the self-regulatory notice requirements
                          The situation with self-regulatory codes is presently is a state of flux.
                          Clause 9.1 of the Code of Banking Practice as at 26 June 2002 provides that:
                                     When, in relation to a Banking Service, a Bank intends to introduce a fee or
                                     charge (other than a government charge), the bank shall provide written notice of
                                     the change to each affected Customer at least 30 days before it takes effect.

                          Clause 9.3, however, provides that:
                                     A Bank shall notify affected Customers of variations to the Terms and Conditions
                                     (including a variation of Standard Fees and Charges or of an interest rate) in
                                     relation to a Banking Service by advertisement in the national or local media or in
                                     writing to affected Customers, no later than the day on which the variation takes
                                     effect.

                          The provisions of the Building Society and Credit Union Codes are similar.



                          10 A change or event which might result in an increase in fees or charges is treated as if it would result in an

                          increase in fees or charges: section 1017B(7).


                                                            © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                                 Page 10
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          As noted, the Code of Banking Practice has been reviewed. The reviewer
                          recommended that clauses 9.1 and 9.3 of the Code be amended so that they only
                          apply to banking services which aren't regulated by the UCCC or the financial
                          services reforms now embodied in the Corporations Act 2001. It is expected that
                          the recommended approach will be adopted so as to avoid duplication between the
                          code and legislation.
                          The Credit Union code is also under review and it is probable that they will take a
                          similar approach once their review is completed and implemented.
                          Under the revised EFT Code, account institutions wishing to vary or modify the
                          EFT Terms and Conditions to impose or increase charges relating solely to the use
                          of an access method, or issue of an additional or replacement access method must
                          provide written notification to the account holder, and allow a period of notice of
                          at least 20 days (or where the applicable legislation requires a longer notice period,
                          that longer period) before the change takes effect. (cl 3.1).
                          In practice this will mean that changes covered by the Corporations Act 2001 will
                          require 30 days’ notice and most others, including those covered by the UCCC, will
                          require 20 days’ notice.



12.      What constitutes a change?
                          The types of changes which ASIC believe require adequate notice include:
                          • any increase in the level of fees;
                          • any new fees;
                          • any changes to minimum balance requirements which impact upon fees;
                               and
                          • changes to other conditions relevant to the level of fees a consumer is
                               liable to pay.
                          The disclosure regimes under the Corporations Act 2001 and UCCC only require
                          prior notice of increases in fees, not decreases. In ASIC’s view, however, good
                          transaction fee disclosure requires notice of fee decreases as well as increases. This
                          is because most transaction fee regimes vary depending upon the channel used, and
                          a reduction in fees for a channel may suddenly make it a more attractive alternative
                          than was previously the case. That said, the cost of communication is substantial.
                          Unless otherwise required, where an institution is notifying a consumer about fee
                          increases they should also notify of reductions at the same time. However, where
                          reductions are not accompanied by increases, minimum good practice would be to
                          provide notice of the change with the next statement and on online banking
                          facilities and other locations where it is likely to come to the attention of
                          consumers.
                          Good disclosure also requires that the notice of the change should highlight how
                          the change differs from the previous arrangement. In ASIC's view, this would be
                          good disclosure practice for section 1017B(4) of the Corporations Act 2001 which
                          requires notices of changes to give consumers the information that is reasonably
                          necessary for them to understand the nature and effect of the change or event." As


                                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                          Page 11
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          with all disclosures, the more personalised the notice of change is, the more
                          effective it is likely to be.




Disclosure on statements
13.      The Good Disclosure Principle.
                          Included on the statements of customers who are potentially liable to pay fees
                          should be clear information about transactions undertaken and any fees incurred
                          during the period. This information should not be bundled. It should clearly show
                          the cost of each transaction per different delivery channel and the number of such
                          transactions undertaken. The impact of any free transaction limit, rebate scheme
                          or other relationship variable should also be reflected in the summary.

14.      Why do consumers need transaction fee disclosure on statements?
                          Statements provide personalised information and are more likely to be read than
                          other modes of communication, which are separated from the transaction.
                          Statements can also provide an overall picture of an individual’s transaction
                          practices allowing consumers to see how they can change those practices to lower
                          costs.

15.      What are the legislative requirements?
                          Under the Corporations Act 2001, institutions must generally11 provide a regular
                          statement of account to holders of deposit products through which the holder
                          makes an investment (section 1017D(1)). Under Regulation 7.9.75, a periodic
                          statement must include the cost of a transaction, including the amount payable and
                          amount of taxes and charges in relation to the transaction if the transaction has
                          occurred during the reporting period and advice of the cost of the transaction has
                          not been shown in a confirmation of transaction. In addition, a periodic statement
                          must include the amounts paid by the holder in respect of the financial product
                          during the reporting period and the times at which those amounts were paid.
                          These requirements will apply:
                          (a)       when the transition period provided for under the Corporations Act 2001
                                    expires on 11 March 2004 (section 1438(3)(a)); or
                          (b)       on the date specified in a notice lodged with ASIC by a product issuer who
                                    elects to be subject to the new product disclosure provisions during the
                                    transition period for a particular product (section 1438(3)(b)),
                          whichever is the earlier. These transitional arrangements do not apply to products
                          offered by new financial institutions that came into being on or after 11 March
                          2002.




                          11 Basic deposit products that are "passbooks" are not subject to the periodic statement requirement in

                          section 1017D (regulation 10.2.208).


                                                          © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                               Page 12
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          For credit products, the UCCC requires that periodic statements of account must
                          be provided at regular intervals (s. 31(1)). The statement must include “particulars
                          of any fees and charges debited to the debtor’s account during the statement
                          period” (s. 32(F)).

16.      What are the self-regulatory requirements?
                          The issue of disclosure of fees on statements is not dealt with in the Banking,
                          Credit Union or Building Society Codes of Practice.
                          Clause 4.3(b) of the revised EFT code requires statements to show “any charges
                          relating solely to the use of access method (identified as a separate line item).”
                          The substance of this provision wasn’t changed in the recent review of the Code
                          because it was outside the review’s scope. While the meaning of this requirement
                          is arguably ambiguous, the practice of most financial institutions that are members
                          of the code is to disclose a total figure for the fees charged, rather than to break
                          that disclosure down to show the costs of particular transactions.

17.      Good practice for disclosure of transaction fees on statements
                          Fee summary information should, where relevant, be provided on transaction
                          account statements to enable customers to make informed choices about how they
                          conduct their transactions. This information should enable customers to clearly
                          understand the fees, by distribution channels and number of transactions, which
                          apply to their accounts during the charging period and other key relevant
                          information. That is, separate fees should be separately shown, not bundled, and
                          the basis on which charges are calculated should be explained. Foreign ATM fees
                          should be included in the fee summary information. In meeting this principle,
                          institutions are encouraged to respond with measures that are relevant to the needs
                          of their customers.
                          The format of statement disclosure will necessarily vary according to the fee
                          structure of the account. For example, some accounts have a number of free
                          transactions, with the free transactions either calculated at the end of the period
                          based on which were the most expensive or charged when the number of
                          transactions exceeds the free limit. Other accounts charge for all transactions, but
                          provide a fee rebate, the amount of which depends on the customer’s overall
                          relationship with the institution.
                          Two examples of good statement disclosure are provided on the next pages. The
                          illustrations deliberately include references to channels not used in the charging
                          period since an important part of the educative effect of such statements is being
                          able to compare the cost of channels, including those not presently being used by
                          the person receiving the account. ASIC also believes that it is important that
                          foreign ATM fees are included with the examples to highlight their relative cost.
                          Another important issue with statement disclosure is ensuring that the charging
                          period is clear and that other factors which impact upon fees and may be subject to
                          change (such as minimum balance requirements) are clearly highlighted.
                          Ideally, any institution introducing improved statement disclosure will test
                          proposed formats with focus groups that are representative of their customers.


                                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                          Page 13
REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                         payments products

                    When determining whether or not fee information should be included on a
                    statement the key determinate should be whether or not the consumer pays fees or
                    could potentially pay them (eg if they exceeded their allocated number of free
                    transactions or rebate even if they haven't currently done so). If a particular
                    product or customer is exempted from paying any fees then whether or not fee
                    information is shown is an issue for the institution.
                    There is also evidence to suggest that customers find tips on how to reduce fees
                    helpful. Statements are one place where such tips could usefully be delivered.




                                               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                    Page 14
   REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                            payments products


Example of good transaction disclosure for an account with a
number of free transactions per month

                       Transaction             Total        Free Transactions Cost per    Total
                       Type                    transactions      Charged for  transaction charged.

                       Cheque                  2                 0       2                  50c             $1.00
                       withdrawal

                       Cheque deposit          1                 0       1                  50c             $0.50

                       Own bank ATM            4                 2       2                  65c             $1.30
                       withdrawal

                       Other bank ATM     1                      1       0                  $1.50           $0.00
                       withdrawal/inquiry

                       EFTPOS                  4                 0       4                  50c             $2.00
                       withdrawal

                       Own bank mini           1                 1       0                  $1.00           $0.00
                       statement

                       Over the counter        1                 1       0                  $2.50           $0.00
                       withdrawal

                       Telephone               1                 0       1                  40c             $0.40
                       banking

                       BPAY instruction        2                 0       2                  40c             $0.80

                       Internet banking        0                 0       0                  30c             $0.00

                       Direct debit or         0                 0       0                  40c             $0.00
                       periodic payment

                       Total transaction                                                                    $6.00
                       fees

                       Total account                                                                        $5.00
                       keeping fees
                       Total fees                                                                           $11.00
                       payable

                       You are entitled to 5 free transactions per calendar month, of which there is a limit
                       of two free over the counter transactions and two cheque withdrawals. We will
                       include the more expensive transactions in your free allocation first. Note no
                       account keeping fees apply if the minimum monthly balance is above $2,000.
                       Transaction fees are deducted from your account on XXXX date and account
                       keeping fees on the first working day of the month. Call xxxxx for more
                       information.




                                                   © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                        Page 15
   REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                            payments products


Example of good transaction fee disclosure for an account with a
rebate system

                       Transaction             Number of                Cost per                Amount charged
                       type                    transactions             transaction

                       Cheque                  2                        $0.50                   $1.00
                       withdrawal

                       Cheque deposit          1                        $0.50                   $0.50

                       Own bank ATM            4                        $0.65                   $2.60
                       withdrawal

                       Other bank ATM          1                        $1.50                   $1.50
                       withdrawal/inquiry

                       EFTPOS                  4                        $0.50                   $2.00
                       withdrawal

                       Own bank mini           1                        $1.00                   $1.00
                       statement

                       Over the counter        1                        $2.50                   $2.50
                       withdrawal

                       Telephone               1                        $0.40                   $0.40
                       banking

                       BPAY instruction        2                        $0.40                   $0.80

                       Internet banking        0                        $0.30                   $0.00

                       Direct debit or         0                        $0.40                   $0.00
                       periodic payment

                       Total transaction                                                        $12.30
                       fees

                       Transaction fees                                                         $7.30
                       less monthly
                       rebate of $5.00

                       Monthly account                                                          $5.00
                       keeping fee
                       Total fees                                                               $12.30
                       payable

                       Each calendar month we will pay a minimum of $5.00 worth of the fees you incur.
                       We will give you an additional rebate of $1.00 each month for every $5,000 you
                       have in other deposit or loan accounts with us. We will calculate your monthly
                       rebate on the first day of the charging period. Note that no account keeping fees
                       apply if the minimum monthly balance is above $2,000. Transaction fees are
                       deducted from your account on XXXX date and account keeping fees on the first
                       working day of the month. Call xxxx for more information.

                                                   © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                        Page 16
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products



Disclosure on request.
18.      Good disclosure principle
                          Consumers should have access to information about the fee structures which apply
                          to transaction accounts through a range of access methods at the time that they
                          seek it.

19.      Why do consumers need transaction fee disclosure on
         request?
                          One of the keys to effective disclosure is getting information to consumers at the
                          time that it is likely to be relevant to them. If consumers want information about
                          the fee structure applying to their account then providing it at the time they seek it
                          is likely to be the most useful way of ensuring that consumers have the information
                          when they need it.

20.      What are the legislative requirements?
                          While, as discussed above, there are legislative requirements for the provision of
                          information about fees at particular times, there is no general legislative
                          requirement to provide this information on demand for transaction accounts.
                          There is, however, a more confined legislative requirement for providing additional
                          information on request prior to acquiring a product (see section 1017A).
                          Regulation 7.9.75 requires an annual periodic statement to include a statement that
                          further information in relation to the product is available on request. The
                          regulation does not set out any details on what further information must be made
                          available on request. These arrangements will apply:
                          (a)      when the transition period provided for under the Corporations Act 2001
                                   expires on 11 March 2004 (section 1438(3)(a)); or
                          (b)      on the date specified in a notice lodged with ASIC by a product issuer who
                                   elects to be subject to the new product disclosure provisions during the
                                   transition period for a particular product (section 1438(3)(b)),
                          whichever is the earlier. These transitional arrangements do not apply to products
                          offered by new financial institutions that came into being on or after 11 March
                          2002.

21.      What are the self-regulatory arrangements?
                          There are no current self-regulatory requirements to provide fee information on
                          demand. In the recent review of the Banking Code of Practice, however, the
                          reviewer has recommended that the code be amended to provide that:


                                   A Bank shall provide expeditiously to any person on request:
                                       •   full particulars of fees and charges that are or may become payable
                                           for any banking service we provide.



                                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                          Page 17
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          As the wording of the recommendation is taken from the submission of the
                          Australian Bankers' Association it seems likely that this provision will be included
                          in the revised code and become binding on members from the date the revised
                          code becomes operational.

22.      What are ASIC's views about good practice?
                          In addition to being able to request a PDS at branches, ASIC believes that other
                          delivery channels should also be capable of responding to requests for information
                          about fees. In saying this, however, it is recognised that some channels are more
                          suited to this purpose than others. Internet banking channels, for example, are
                          ideal for this type of disclosure. EFTPOS machines, on the other hand, are not.
                          It is not clear to ASIC what demand there is for generic fee information through
                          ATMs. Whether the benefit of delivering such information through ATMs at this
                          time would outweigh the costs is one for institutions to examine for themselves.


                          Good generic fee disclosure practices on internet banking sites
                          Internet banking sites should include a clear and prominent link to information
                          about fees and charges for each product offered through the site.
                          The information should include all of the information listed in paragraph 7 of this
                          Guide.
                          The link should be to information about the fees for that particular product. If
                          appropriate, there could be a further link to comparative information about the fee
                          structures for a range of competing products offered by the institution.


                          Good generic fee disclosure practices for telephone banking
                          Telephone banking services should include an option that enables consumers to
                          access information about fees that apply to those transaction accounts accessible
                          through telephone banking. The institution can determine whether the information
                          is provided in an automated fashion, by putting the consumer through to an
                          operator or by sending the consumer information.12


                          Good generic fee disclosure practices for ATMs
                          Where an institution chooses to provide generic fee information through its ATMs,
                          that information should, at a minimum, include information about the cost of
                          ATM transactions and the key variables impacting upon those costs such as any
                          rebates or free transaction limits.




                          12The wording of this principle, takes account of the different levels of automation of telephone banking
                          services presently in existence and the concerns of institutions about not unnecessarily expanding “talk
                          time”.


                                                         © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                              Page 18
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products



Real time disclosure immediately prior to any
transaction
23.      Good Disclosure Principle
                          Ideally, consumers should have optional access to information relevant to the cost
                          of a specific transaction immediately prior to deciding whether or not to undertake
                          the transaction.

24.      Why is information at the time of the transaction desirable?
                          Information about the cost of a transaction at the time of the transaction is
                          desirable as it may influence the transaction a consumer undertakes. Such
                          information needs to be provided in time to allow the customer to cancel or
                          change the transaction at no cost. An example of where the information may be
                          particularly useful is where the consumer has used up all of their free transactions
                          or rebate entitlements for the period and so may choose to withdraw more cash.
                          Real time transaction specific fee information is also likely to have an educative
                          effect which could help consumers reduce the cost of their banking.
                          Finally, real time disclosure could play a role in promoting competition between
                          institutions in terms of the fees they impose.

25.      What are the legislative and self-regulatory requirements?
                          There are no regulatory or self-regulatory requirements for real time transaction
                          specific fee information at the time of the transaction.
                          Under section 1017F of the Corporations Act 2001, institutions will generally13 be
                          required to:
                               (a) confirm any transaction as soon as is reasonably practicable after the
                                   transaction occurs, or
                               (b) establish and maintain a facility so that the retail clients can confirm for
                                   themselves any transaction as soon as is reasonably practicable after
                                   the transaction occurs (see section 1017F(1) and (2))
                          Generally, the confirmation must give information that the institution reasonably
                          believes the client needs (having regard to the information that the holder has
                          received before the transaction) to understand the nature of the transaction,
                          including any amount paid or payable by the client in relation to the transaction
                          (See section 1017F(7) and (8) and regulations made for the purposes of 1017F(8)).
                          However, this information will not have to be provided before the transaction is
                          made. Also, the information about the cost of a transaction will not have to be
                          provided if the amount payable by the client is not known at the time the


                          13 The Corporations Regulations contain a number of exceptions to the confirmation of transaction

                          requirement in section 1017F. Basic deposit products that are "passbook accounts" are not subject to
                          the confirmation of transaction requirements contained in section 1017F (see regulation 10.2.209). Also,
                          a number of transactions, including transactions relating specifically to basis deposit products, are not
                          required to be confirmed (see subregulation 7.9.62(3)).


                                                         © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                              Page 19
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          confirmation is made (Regulation 7.9.63). In these circumstances, information
                          about the amount payable can be provided later (i.e. when it becomes known) by
                          giving the client a secondary confirmation notice, via a facility of the type
                          mentioned above or in the next periodic report (Part 15, Schedule 10A of the
                          Regulations).
                          These new confirmation of transaction requirements apply from 11 March 2002.

26.      Good practice for real time transaction fee disclosure
                          Ideally, institutions should be aiming for a situation whereby consumers are
                          able to optionally access information about the cost of an actual transaction
                          and/or, where relevant:
                          • information about the number of transactions they have conducted during
                              the period or the number of free transactions they may still make during
                              the period; or
                          • the amount of potential rebate for the period they have used or have left
                              to use.
                          This information should be available prior to a transaction being completed so that
                          the consumer has the opportunity to cancel or alter the transaction should they so
                          chose.
                          Such optional information should be available on own-institution ATMs, internet
                          and telephone banking services and, in the longer term, foreign ATMs.
                          Convenience concerns suggest that such an option is not suitable for EFTPOS
                          transactions though, ideally, EFTPOS receipts would in the long term include,
                          where relevant, information about the number of transactions conducted during
                          the period or the amount of any rebate used up to date.
                          The principle deliberately talks about consumers being given the "option" of
                          getting this information since providing it for every transaction would be costly and
                          would lengthen the time taken for transactions. Importantly, this is information
                          that most consumers are unlikely to want for every transaction but will want to be
                          able to access from time to time (eg when they suspect they have used up their free
                          limit for the period but aren't sure).
                          The information suggested for disclosure is done in this “and/or” format so that a
                          move to real time disclosure doesn’t necessarily result in consumers losing the
                          benefit of some existing fee regimes whereby their most expensive transactions for
                          the period are included within the free limit. Under these schemes the cost of an
                          individual transaction can’t be calculated until the end of the period. Real time
                          disclosure here could involve telling a customer how many transactions they have
                          conducted for the period. Institutions taking this approach may wish to consider
                          whether they should also disclose the cost of that type of transaction should the
                          customer be charged for it or whether such additional information would be
                          confusing for customers. Knowing the number of transactions already conducted
                          for the period won't necessarily tell the customer if they will eventually be charged
                          for a particular transaction but it will let them know whether they are now paying
                          fees for transactions because they have had more transactions than are included in
                          the free limit.


                                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                          Page 20
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products


27.      Complex fee structures and good disclosure.
                          In a number of cases, ASIC has been told that an institution cannot introduce real
                          time disclosure because of aspects of their fee structure. In ASIC's view,
                          institutions dedicated to maintaining good disclosure practices who have fee
                          structures which are inconsistent with real time disclosure of the actual cost of the
                          transaction, should ask themselves - does the consumer benefit sufficiently from
                          the present structure to justify it and/or could the structure be altered in some way
                          so that real time disclosure could be achieved without the consumer losing any
                          benefits?
                          An example of fee structures which appear to provide sufficient benefits for
                          consumers to justify a deviation from real time actual cost disclosure, is those
                          schemes which count the most expensive transactions for the period in the free
                          limit. Under these schemes institutions can't work out the cost of a particular
                          transaction until the end of the period when they know which transactions will be
                          included in the free limit. In these cases real time disclosure could be modified to
                          require disclosure of the number of transactions undertaken so far during the
                          period or of the number of free transactions remaining.
                          On the other hand, problems associated with some rebate schemes appear capable
                          of resolution. These schemes, provide a rebate on fees to consumers. The amount
                          of the rebate is dependant upon details of the consumers' relationship with the
                          institution during the period and is thus not known until the end of the period.
                          There would seem to be no good reason why these rebate schemes couldn't
                          calculate rebates on the basis of the previous month's relationship.

28.      Implementing this principle
                          ASIC understands that the costs associated with implementing real time disclosure
                          are very significant and could run to many millions of dollars per institution. We
                          also recognise that different institutions will have different time tables for
                          introducing the types of changes to computer and processing systems that will be
                          necessary before such real time disclosure can become a reality. ASIC does not
                          have the power to set a timetable for the introduction of real time disclosure.
                          ASIC does, however, strongly urge institutions to:
                              •    factor the desirability of real time disclosure into their systems redesigns
                                   and equipment upgrade and replacement programs now;
                              •    introduce interim measures which can assist consumers to work out the
                                   likely cost of an actual transaction. Possible interim measures that have
                                   been suggested to ASIC by institutions include:
                                       o    the provision of mini statements;
                                       o the provision of best available information about costs and / or
                                         how many transactions have been made for the period – subject to
                                         cheque clearances and based upon the limits of 24 hour batching
                                         and lack of relationship information;
                                       o providing a phone number people can call to find out transaction
                                         specific fee information and having it available in branches; and


                                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                          Page 21
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                                       o end of day disclosure (this would involve the calculation of fees at
                                         the end of the day with a fee balance being provided at the
                                         beginning of the next day. The information would always be 24
                                         hours behind).
                              •    Co-operate with the ASIC monitoring proposals outlined in paragraph 34
                                   of this guide – these will include providing ASIC with a proposed
                                   timetable for the introduction of real time disclosure.

29.      Good practice for real time foreign ATM fee disclosure
                          What are foreign ATM fees and why should they be disclosed?
                          A foreign ATM fee is a fee that a financial institution charges its own customer for
                          having used another institution’s ATM (including other Australian institutions’
                          ATMs). It is important that consumers understand when they are likely to be
                          charged a foreign ATM fee as these fees are usually at least twice as much as the
                          fees for using their own institution’s ATM.


                          What legislative and self-regulatory requirements?
                          As with other forms of real time disclosure, there are no legislative or self-
                          regulatory requirements for disclosure of foreign ATM fees.


                          Good practice and disclosure of foreign ATM fees
                          Consumers should know, at the point of making the transaction, whether they
                          could be charged a “foreign ATM fee” because the ATM is not in their network.
                          Institutions should determine for themselves whether they comply with this by
                          attaching notices/stickers to the ATM or its surrounds or by onscreen disclosure.
                          In the longer term, it would be desirable to have onscreen disclosure of the actual
                          amount of the foreign ATM fee.

30.      Good practice for real time disclosure of surcharges.
                          What are surcharges and why should they be disclosed?
                          A surcharge is a fee charged by the owner of an ATM or EFTPOS machine (who
                          may not be a financial institution) for the use of that machine. It is charged directly
                          to the consumer. At present the fees that financial institutions charge their own
                          account holders for the use of their machines are excluded from this definition of
                          surcharges – these fees are simply categorised as transaction fees. Unlike foreign
                          ATM fees, where the fee is uniform regardless of which other institution’s machine
                          you use, surcharges can vary from machine to machine and even from time to time
                          and place to place. Consumers need surcharges to be disclosed so that they can tell
                          which machines are the cheapest ones to use.




                                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                          Page 22
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          What are the legislative and self-regulatory requirements?
                          As with other forms of real time disclosure, there is no legislative requirement for
                          disclosure of surcharges.
                          Clause 4.6 of the revised EFT Code (which, unlike the rest of the Code, doesn't
                          become fully effective until 1 April 2003) provides:
                                   An account institutions shall include in its agreements with any person who makes
                                   electronic equipment available to a user so that the user may perform an EFT
                                   transaction, a requirement that the person disclose to the user (at a time which
                                   enables the user to cancel the EFT transaction without cost to the user) the
                                   amount of any fee (such as a surcharge) charged by the person for the use of its
                                   electronic equipment which will be directly passed on to the user or account
                                   holder.

                          The approach set out in the revised EFT Code recognises that not all ATM owners
                          will be account institutions and therefore some may not subscribe to the Code. As
                          the Code can only bind subscribers it has therefore taken the approach of requiring
                          subscribers to make disclosure of surcharges a condition of their agreements with
                          EFT machine owners. Should a more effective means for requiring such
                          disclosures be implemented elsewhere the Code can be changed.


                          Good ATM surcharge disclosure practices
                          Where an ATM operator charges a consumer a direct fee for the use of one of
                          their ATMs, for a transaction on an account which is not held with the ATM
                          operator, that fact and the amount of the fee should be disclosed to the consumer
                          in sufficient time for the consumer to determine whether they wish to go ahead
                          with the transaction or cancel or alter it in some way.


                          Good EFTPOS surcharge disclosure practices
                          Where an EFTPOS operator, including a merchant, charges consumers a
                          surcharge for the transaction there should be clear and prominent signage alerting
                          consumers to this fact and the amount of the fee.

31.      Good Practice and the disclosure of overdraw fees prior to
         making the transaction.
                          Why is pre-transaction disclosure of overdraw fees desirable?
                          Consumers need to be aware that a transaction may attract an overdraw fee so that
                          they can make an informed decision about whether or not they wish to proceed
                          with the transaction. This is particularly important given the significant size of
                          some of these fees.




                                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                          Page 23
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          What are the legislative and self-regulatory requirements?
                          There are presently no legislative or self-regulatory requirements for disclosure of
                          overdraw fees immediately prior to making the transaction.14


                           Good overdraw fee disclosure
                          Where a consumer undertakes an electronic transaction that will result in them
                          being charged on overdraw fee, they should be notified of this fact and the amount
                          of the fee in sufficient time to allow them to cancel the transaction.
                          For technical reasons it may not be possible to apply this principle to EFTPOS
                          transactions or foreign Bank ATM transactions, at least for the time being. It is
                          also recognised that such disclosure would need to be based upon existing
                          information and could not take account of unprocessed cheques.15




Guide administration
32.      Promoting the Guide
                          ASIC will publish the Guide on its website: www.asic.gov.au and will undertake
                          other methods to ensure that relevant institutions and consumers are aware of it.

33.      Future research
                          Research on consumers' understanding of fee regimes
                          Subject to resource constraints, ASIC will follow-up its 2000 research on
                          consumers' understanding of fees charged by banks, building societies and
                          credit unions in respect of transactions on payments and deposit accounts by
                          commissioning research on:
                          • the extent to which consumers understand the fees regimes applying to
                              their accounts;
                          • their views on the adequacy of existing disclosure practices;
                          • changes, if any, they would like to see in disclosure practices.
                          This research will take place after the first monitoring exercise or two years after
                          the Guide is published – whichever is the later. Amongst other things, it will
                          consider changes, if any, in levels of understanding from the first survey.




                          14 Note that UCCC and Banking Code requirements may mean that there needs to be pre-contractual

                          disclosure of potential overdraw fees. ASIC is also of the view that 1013D of the Corporations Act 2001
                          requires information about potential overdraw fees to be disclosed in the Product Disclosure Statement
                          prior to the acquisition of a deposit product.
                          15   Many institutions choose not to have arrangements for overdrawing accounts.


                                                           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                                Page 24
      REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                               payments products

                          Research on overseas implementation of real time transaction
                          fee disclosure and technology issues associated with this
                          issue.
                          ASIC will maintain a watching brief on the extent to which real time transaction fee
                          disclosure (as opposed to surcharge disclosure) is occurring overseas. We will also
                          continue to monitor technology developments which could help or hinder in
                          making real time transaction fee disclosure common practice.

34.      Monitoring adoption of the Guide and reporting
                          ASIC will monitor and publicly report on the extent to which the Guide has been
                          adopted or is planned to be adopted. The initial monitoring shall occur, at the
                          latest, 18 months from the date the Guide is published. ASIC's monitoring will
                          have a particular focus on:
                              •    the extent to which improvements to statement disclosure of fees has been
                                   implemented;
                              •    the extent to which real time transaction fee disclosure has been
                                   implemented;
                              •    the extent of planning and timetabling for real time transaction fee
                                   disclosure and other disclosure reforms;
                              •    the extent to which institutions have given a public commitment to their
                                   timetable for improvements; and
                              •    the interim measures institutions have introduced to assist consumers to
                                   determine when fees will apply to a transaction and, where possible, the fee
                                   that will apply.
                          ASIC will report publicly on the outcome of its monitoring and may make
                          recommendations to the Government if there are insufficient signs of
                          improvement.

35.      Review of the Guide
                          ASIC will review the Guide, at the latest, 3 years after it is published.
                          Outside of reviews, the Guide may also be amended on an as needs basis to reflect
                          changes in legislative and self-regulatory requirements and evidence of the
                          effectiveness of various disclosure approaches.




Regulatory and financial impact
                          The principles in this Guide have sought to achieve an appropriate balance
                          between facilitating informed decision-making by consumers and the legitimate
                          business concerns of financial institutions.




                                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                          Page 25
  REGULATORY GUIDE 40: Good transaction fee disclosure for bank, building society and credit union deposit and
                                                                                           payments products



Appendix A: Membership of the Transaction Fee
Disclosure Working Group
                      Industry associations
                      •   The Australian Bankers’ Association
                      •   Credit Union Services Corporation (Australia) Ltd
                      •   The Australian Association of Permanent Building Societies
                      •   National Credit Union Association
                      •   Australian Finance Conference/Queensland Association of Permanent
                          Building Societies (one person representing both)

                      Consumer organisations
                      • The Australian Consumers’ Association
                      • Financial Services Consumer Policy Centre

                      Financial institutions
                      •   ANZ Bank
                      •   National Australia Bank
                      •   Commonwealth Bank of Australia
                      •   Westpac Banking Corporation
                      •   St George Bank
                      •   AMP Bank

                      Government organisations
                      • ASIC (Chair)
                      • Treasury

                      Other
                      • The Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman
                      • Cannex

                      Parties not on the working group but kept informed of its work
                      •   The Reserve Bank of Australia
                      •   Coles Myer
                      •   The Australian Payments Clearing Association (from 2nd half of project)
                      •   The Reviewers of the Banking and Credit Union Codes of Conduct




                                                 © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2002
                                                                                                      Page 26
