REGULATORY GUIDE 38

The hawking prohibition

September 2021




About this guide
This guide is for people who offer financial products for issue or sale. It sets
out our guidance on the hawking provisions in s992A and 992AA of the
Corporations Act.

In particular, this guide explains how to comply with the hawking prohibition
contained in s992A, a prohibition that aims to protect consumers from
unsolicited offers of financial products.
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation, ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how regulated
                                      entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in September 2021 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             In March 2024 we deleted the previous RG 38.10, renumbering the
                             preceding two paragraphs, and updated some legislative instruments.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 38 The hawking prohibitions, issued
                                     December 2019
                                    Superseded guide The hawking prohibitions: An ASIC guide, issued
                                     July 2002 and reissued May 2005, and rebadged as a regulatory guide
                                     5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                        Page 2
                                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




Contents

                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Purpose of this guide ...............................................................................4
                                    The hawking prohibition ...........................................................................5
                                    General consumer protection provisions .................................................6
                             B      Scope of the hawking prohibition ........................................................7
                                    What the prohibition applies to ................................................................7
                                    Interaction with personal financial advice ................................................8
                                    Interaction with the deferred sales model regime for add-on
                                    insurance products ..................................................................................9
                                    Products and situations exempt from the hawking prohibition ................9
                             C      Making offers because of or during unsolicited contact .................13
                                    Forms of contact subject to the prohibition ............................................13
                                    Real-time interaction in the nature of a conversation or discussion ......14
                                    Offers, requests and invitations .............................................................14
                                    Meaning of ‘because of’ in the hawking prohibition ...............................17
                             D      Establishing consumer consent to be contacted.............................19
                                    The giving of consent generally .............................................................19
                                    Consent must be positive and voluntary ................................................20
                                    Consent must be clear and reasonably understood ..............................23
                                    Determining the scope of consent .........................................................29
                                    Method of contact ..................................................................................35
                                    Tracking consumer consent...................................................................36
                             E      Consequences of breaching the hawking prohibition .....................39
                                    Conduct that breaches the hawking prohibition.....................................39
                                    General consequences of a breach .......................................................40
                                    Return of a product ................................................................................40
                                    Refunds to consumers ...........................................................................41
                             Appendix: Products exempt from the hawking provision as a result
                                of ASIC legislative instrument or class order ...................................44
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................46
                             Related information .....................................................................................48




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                                     Page 3
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              Under the hawking prohibition, a person must not, in the course of, or
                              because of, an unsolicited contact with a retail client:
                              • offer financial products for issue or sale; or
                              • request or invite the client to ask or apply for financial products.

                              The objective of the prohibition is for consumers to have greater control
                              over their decisions to purchase financial products—the prohibition allows
                              them to determine how they want to be contacted and the kinds of financial
                              products they are offered.

                              This guide explains:
                              • the scope of the hawking prohibition;
                              • how an offeror can comply with the prohibition; and
                              • the consequences of a breach of the prohibition.




Purpose of this guide
              RG 38.1        This guide is for people who offer financial products for issue or sale, and
                             concerns situations involving unsolicited contact with consumers.

              RG 38.2        It sets out our guidance on the hawking provisions in s992A and 992AA of
                             the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act). In particular, this guide
                             explains:
                             (a)   the scope of the hawking prohibition in s992A (see Section B);
                             (b)   what it means to make an offer because of or during an unsolicited
                                   contact (see Section C);
                             (c)   the nature of the consent a consumer must give in order for a contact not
                                   to be unsolicited (see Section D); and
                             (d)   the consequences of a breach of the prohibition, including a consumer’s
                                   right to return a product and receive a refund (see Section E).

                                   Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), divisions (Div) and parts (Pt) are to the
                                   Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.

              RG 38.3        This document contains general guidance only. The application of the
                             hawking prohibition will depend on the particular facts and circumstances of
                             each case.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                        Page 4
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.4        In this guide, we have highlighted the core statutory provisions of the
                             hawking regime (see, for example, at RG 38.5). Where we have done so, we
                             have indicated the relevant subsections or paragraphs of s992A and 992AA
                             to which we are referring.
                                   Note: These core statutory provisions are highlighted at RG 38.5, RG 38.20, RG 38.34,
                                   RG 38.39, RG 38.48, RG 38.57–RG 38.58, RG 38.63, RG 38.69, RG 38.85, RG 38.102,
                                   RG 38.108, RG 38.111, RG 38.115, RG 38.127–RG 38.128, RG 38.129, RG 38.132–
                                   RG 38.134, RG 38.135–RG 38.136.




The hawking prohibition

              RG 38.5        Under s992A(1), a person (the ‘offeror’) must not offer financial products
                             for issue or sale to a retail client if the offer is made in the course of, or
                             because of, an unsolicited contact.

              RG 38.6        An offeror includes an issuer or seller of a financial product, as well as their
                             agent or representative: see paragraph 5.31 of the Explanatory Memorandum
                             to the Financial Sector Reform (Hayne Royal Commission Response) Bill
                             2020 (Explanatory Memorandum). The prohibition also extends to
                             requesting or inviting a retail client to ask or apply for or purchase a
                             financial product: see paragraph 5.28 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.7        ‘Unsolicited contact’ is contact by telephone, face-to-face, or any other real-
                             time interaction in the nature of a discussion or conversation to which the
                             consumer did not consent: see s992A(4).
                                   Note: In this guide, a person who offers, issues or sells a product, or who invites or
                                   requests a consumer to purchase or apply for a product is referred to as an ‘offeror’ and
                                   an existing, potential or prospective retail client or customer is referred to as a
                                   ‘consumer’, unless otherwise indicated.

              RG 38.8        The hawking prohibition is intended to provide consumers with a degree of
                             control over their decisions to purchase financial products—it allows them to
                             determine how they want to be contacted and the kinds of products they are
                             offered: see paragraph 5.4 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.9        The prohibition aims to protect consumers from unsolicited offers of
                             financial products, which often contribute to consumers purchasing products
                             that do not meet their needs: see paragraph 5.16 of the Explanatory
                             Memorandum.

              RG 38.10       A failure to comply with the hawking prohibition is an offence of strict
                             liability (see s992A(9)), and will give rise to a right of return on the part of
                             the consumer: see s992AA(1).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                     Page 5
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




General consumer protection provisions
              RG 38.11       This guide should be considered in the context of the general consumer
                             protection provisions of the Corporations Act and the Australian Securities
                             and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act).

              RG 38.12       Regardless of whether an offeror is subject to the hawking prohibition for a
                             particular interaction, the offeror needs to ensure that they otherwise comply
                             with:
                             (a)   the product design and distribution obligations (see Pt 7.8A of the
                                   Corporations Act); and
                             (b)   the prohibitions on:
                                   (i)     unconscionable conduct (see s12CA–12CC of the ASIC Act and
                                           s991A of the Corporations Act);
                                   (ii)    misleading or deceptive conduct (see s12DA–12DB of the ASIC
                                           Act; s1041E–1041H of the Corporations Act); and
                                   (iii)   harassment or coercion in connection with supply or payment for
                                           financial services (see s12DJ of the ASIC Act).

              RG 38.13       The obligations under the hawking regime are distinct from, and
                             complementary to, the obligations above.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                        Page 6
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




B          Scope of the hawking prohibition

                              Key points

                              The hawking prohibition applies when:
                              • a consumer is offered a financial product during or because of
                                unsolicited contact; or
                              • a consumer is requested or invited to ask for, apply for or purchase a
                                financial product, in the course of, or because of unsolicited contact.

                              Offerors of certain types of products are exempt from the requirements
                              under the hawking prohibition: see RG 38.23–RG 38.33.

                              The hawking prohibition does not apply when the offer, request or invitation
                              is made in the course of giving personal financial advice: see RG 38.20.




What the prohibition applies to
              RG 38.14       In general terms, the hawking prohibition in s992A(1) prohibits offers,
                             requests or invitations to ask for, apply for or purchase a financial product in
                             certain circumstances (‘offers, requests or invitations’). The prohibition
                             applies where these offers, requests or invitations are made during or
                             because of ‘unsolicited contact’ that is, partly or wholly, in the form of a
                             real-time interaction in the nature of a conversation or discussion.

                                   Note: The term ‘unsolicited contact’ is defined in s992A(4) and (5). See also Sections C
                                   and D. In particular, for cases where consumers initiate contact, see RG 38.81–RG 38.84.

              RG 38.15       The prohibition in s992A(1) applies to the making of offers, requests or
                             invitations, not to the sale or issue that may result. This means that a breach
                             happens when the offer, request or invitation is made. It is not a defence that
                             a consumer had or was given time after an offer, request or invitation to
                             consider whether to proceed, nor that the consumer was ultimately not issued
                             or sold the product.

              RG 38.16       Under s992A(1) ‘a person’ is prohibited from making these offers, requests
                             or invitations. A person includes a body corporate. Paragraph 5.31 of the
                             Explanatory Memorandum notes:
                                   … Applying the prohibition to such persons means that it is not limited to
                                   the provider of a financial service product—it can include, but is not
                                   limited to, agents and representatives of the provider of a financial product.
                                   Further, as entities are responsible for the actions of their agents and
                                   representatives, the hawking prohibition cannot be circumvented by
                                   engaging a third party to make offers on their behalf. Where there is no
                                   such relationship between a provider of a financial product and a third
                                   party who makes an offer, request or invitation, the third party will be
                                   solely responsible for any contravention of the hawking prohibition.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                   Page 7
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                             Offers made to retail clients

              RG 38.17       The hawking prohibition applies only to offers that are made to a retail
                             client: see s992A(1)(a).

                                   Note: ‘Retail client’ has the meaning given in s761G of the Corporations Act and Div 2
                                   of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations).

              RG 38.18       For superannuation products, an offeror will not breach the hawking
                             prohibition where they contact an employer to discuss the employer’s choice
                             of default fund for employees who do not nominate a fund to receive
                             payments.

              RG 38.19       Although employers are generally considered to be retail clients within the
                             meaning of the Corporations Act in respect of default fund arrangements,
                             employers are not typically offered, or requested or invited to apply for an
                             interest in the fund as part of these conversations. An employer selecting a
                             superannuation fund as a default fund for its employees does not constitute
                             the issue or sale of a financial product to that employer.

                                   Note: Trustees are, however, subject to the prohibition under s68A of the
                                   Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 (SIS Act) regarding employer
                                   inducements, as well as the obligation to give an employer a Product Disclosure
                                   Statement (PDS) at or before the time they become an employer sponsor: see s1012I of
                                   the Corporations Act.




Interaction with personal financial advice
              RG 38.20       Under s992A(2), the hawking prohibition does not apply to an offer, request,
                             or invitation made in the course of giving personal advice to the consumer
                             by a person who is required under Div 2 of Pt 7.7A to act in the consumer’s
                             best interests.

                                   Note 1: For further guidance on the best interests duty and related obligations for
                                   financial advisers, see Regulatory Guide 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—
                                   Conduct and disclosure (RG 175).

                                   Note 2: For more information on whether particular conduct amounts to the provision of
                                   financial product advice, see Regulatory Guide 36 Licensing: Financial product advice
                                   and dealing (RG 36).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                  Page 8
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




Interaction with the deferred sales model regime for add-on
insurance products
              RG 38.21       An offer, request or invitation relating to an ‘add-on insurance’ product is
                             not subject to the hawking prohibition during any ‘add-on insurance deferral
                             period’: see s992A(2)(b) and 992A(3). Except when provided for by
                             regulation, add-on insurance products will be subject to the hawking
                             prohibition prior to, and after, any add-on insurance deferral period.

                                   Note 1: Section 12DO of the ASIC Act defines an ‘add-on insurance product’ and
                                   s12DP defines ‘add-on insurance deferral period’.

                                   Note 2: It is a separate offence to offer an add-on insurance product during any
                                   applicable add-on insurance deferral period (see s12DR of the ASIC Act). For further
                                   information on the regulation of add-on insurance products, see Regulatory Guide 275
                                   The deferred sales model for add-on insurance (RG 275).

              RG 38.22       Where an add-on insurance product is exempt from the deferred sales model
                             regime (such as by s12DX or 12DY of the ASIC Act), the hawking regime
                             will generally apply to it: see paragraph 3.120 of the Explanatory
                             Memorandum. An offeror must then consider whether the product is
                             reasonably within scope of the consumer’s consent under the hawking
                             regime: see s992A(5)(a)(ii) and (b)(ii).



Products and situations exempt from the hawking prohibition
              RG 38.23       Regulations may be made for the purpose of exempting products or classes
                             of products from the hawking prohibition: see s992A(2)(c) and 992AA(3).


                             Basic banking products

              RG 38.24       The Corporations Regulations exempt certain offers, requests or invitations
                             that relate to basic banking products, including certain deposit products: see
                             reg 7.8.21A(h) and (i). This exemption applies to offers relating to what are
                             commonly treated as ‘basic’ deposit products for the purposes of the
                             Corporations Act, including term deposits where funds can only be
                             withdrawn after giving the issuer 31 days’ notice: see Example 1.

              RG 38.25       Under the exemption, any offer, request or invitation made in the course of
                             contact that the consumer initiated is not subject to the hawking prohibition.

                              Example 1: Basic banking product

                              Tamanna has inherited a sum of money and attends her local bank branch
                              to deposit it. In speaking to the bank teller, Hitesh, Tamanna mentions that
                              she is looking to put it away for safe keeping. Hitesh notices that she is
                              planning to deposit the money into a non-interest bearing account.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                 Page 9
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              Hitesh suggests that if she wants, he could arrange for the money to be put
                              into a three-year term deposit that she could terminate within 31 days’
                              notice. Hitesh informs Tamanna that, this way, she can get some interest on
                              the money she is depositing, especially if she plans not to use it for some time.
                              Hitesh’s conduct does not breach the prohibition, as the contact was initiated
                              by Tamanna, and the product he introduces is a basic deposit product.


                             Listed securities

              RG 38.26       Offers, requests or invitations made to consumers by telephone in relation to
                             listed securities or interests in listed managed investment schemes are
                             exempt from the hawking prohibition: see reg 7.8.21A(a) of the
                             Corporations Regulations.


                             Certain offers of products to existing clients

              RG 38.27       The hawking prohibition does not prevent contact with an existing client
                             about a product already held by or on behalf of that client if the discussion
                             does not involve an offer or invitation to apply for a new financial product:
                             see paragraph 5.34 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.28       In some cases, existing clients may need to be contacted in relation to
                             product renewals. These renewals may involve the offer of a new financial
                             product that is substantially similar to the one the consumer already holds. In
                             such cases, the existing client can be contacted so long as they held the
                             product to be renewed within the 30 days prior to the offer: see
                             reg 7.8.21A(j) of the Corporations Regulations. This may arise:
                             (a)   in the case of some types of financial products, when renewal of those
                                   products by a consumer involves the issuing of a new financial product
                                   (such as with term deposits or contracts for insurance);
                             (b)   where the consumer is looking to renew a legacy product, and an offer
                                   is made in respect of a non-legacy product equivalent; or
                             (c)   where the product held by the consumer lapsed within the last 30 days,
                                   and the ‘renewal’ requires the issuing (and therefore offering) of a new
                                   financial product.

                              Example 2: Insurance contract renewal

                              Sam’s motor vehicle insurance is about to expire, and they are contacted
                              by Rosita, a representative of their insurer. On that call, Sam indicates to
                              Rosita that they are considering swapping insurers. In response to this,
                              Rosita offers to renew Sam’s policy for another year at a discounted rate.

                              The renewal involves the issuing of a new financial product. However, as
                              Sam is an existing customer of Best Insurance and the offer made was in
                              relation to a contract still in force, Rosita will not have breached the hawking
                              prohibition in making the offer on the telephone call: see reg.7.8.21A(j).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 10
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              Example 3: Lapsed policy

                              Lotte has pet insurance for her cat through Zel Insurance. The annual
                              premium is paid every July by direct debit via her credit card. In April, Lotte
                              decides to swap credit card providers, but forgets to change the direct debit
                              information with Zel Insurance. In July, the payment of the insurance
                              premium is declined by her old card issuer. As a result, her policy with Zel
                              Insurance lapses.

                              Three weeks later, Lotte receives a phone call from Fallon, a representative
                              from Zel Insurance. Fallon indicates that he is calling because he noticed
                              that the payment had been declined, and wanted to confirm with Lotte that
                              she was aware that her insurance policy had lapsed. Lotte says she did not
                              realise this had happened. Fallon says that he is able to reinstate Lotte’s
                              policy if she would like. Lotte agrees.

                              Fallon’s conduct in offering Lotte to reinstate her policy is not a breach of
                              the hawking prohibition. Despite the fact that the reinstatement would
                              involve the issue of a new financial product, the offer is permitted as it was
                              in the nature of a renewal, involved a substantially similar policy to the one
                              Lotte previously held, and was made within 30 days of the policy lapsing:
                              see reg.7.8.21A(j).

              RG 38.29       Where the offer is for the issue or sale of securities or interests in managed
                             investment schemes, the hawking prohibition does not apply, if that offer is
                             made to a client on whose behalf the offeror acquired or disposed of
                             products in the last 12 months: see reg 7.8.21A(b) and (c).

                              Example 4: Stockbrokers

                              Juanita, an authorised representative of a market participant, calls a
                              selection of her current clients—who Juanita has traded securities for in the
                              past 12 months—to provide them with an offer to buy securities she
                              thought they may be interested in. Some clients confirm their interest and
                              ask to hear more about the offer. Juanita emails the relevant offer
                              documents during the call, so that she can talk the client through the offer.

                              This conduct is not subject to the hawking prohibition as reg 7.8.21A(b) of
                              the Corporations Regulations allows for offers of securities to a client of an
                              offeror through whom the client has bought or sold securities within the last
                              12 months.


                             Off-market unsolicited offers

              RG 38.30       The prohibition does not apply to unsolicited offers to purchase financial
                             products off-market under Div 5A of Pt 7.9. A person who makes an offer to
                             purchase financial products from another person should consider how
                             Div 5A applies to that offer.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 11
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                             Offers, requests or invitations made as result of a specific
                             statutory requirement

              RG 38.31       A superannuation trustee will not breach the hawking prohibition if it
                             contacts a consumer to fulfil its statutory obligations as trustee, which may
                             involve making an offer, request or invitation: see Example 5.

                              Example 5: Unsolicited contact required by law

                              Joe recently passed away. His superannuation fund Seraphic Super has a
                              record of Joe’s binding death benefit nomination in which he nominated his
                              husband, Jerry, as his beneficiary.

                              Seraphic Super makes the relevant enquiries—which include contacting
                              Jerry over the phone—and determines that Jerry is the person entitled to
                              receive the benefit. Seraphic Super provides Jerry with a range of options
                              for the payment of the benefit in accordance with Seraphic Super’s
                              governing rules and the relevant requirements of the Superannuation
                              Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994.

                              The hawking prohibition does not apply in this circumstance because there
                              is a specific statutory obligation requiring contact (in contrast to a general
                              prohibition). Seraphic Super has a statutory obligation to pay the benefit to the
                              person entitled to receive it as soon as practicable after the member has died.
                              Seraphic Super must contact the beneficiary to fulfil this statutory obligation.


                             Other exemptions

              RG 38.32       In addition to the exemptions mentioned above, the Corporations
                             Regulations also exempt offers, requests or invitations in relation to:
                             (a)   a crowd-sourced funding offer (see reg 7.8.21A(d));
                             (b)   a financial product that is made under an eligible employee share
                                   scheme (see reg 7.8.21A(e));
                             (c)   medical indemnity insurance provided to a medical professional as
                                   defined in the Medical Indemnity Prudential (Supervision and Product
                                   Standards) Act 2003 (see reg 7.8.21A(f)); and
                             (d)   an interest in a scheme that is in the nature of an insolvency litigation
                                   funding scheme, or a litigation funding arrangement (where declared
                                   not to be a managed investment scheme) (see reg 7.8.21A(g)).

              RG 38.33       In addition, certain types of financial products and certain entities are
                             exempt from the requirements of s992A and s992AA under ASIC legislative
                             instruments: see Table 1 in the appendix. The legislative instruments listed
                             in that table give broader relief from a range of regulatory requirements
                             (e.g. disclosure obligations) as well as the hawking prohibition, to products
                             the function or features of which are such that it is not appropriate for the
                             whole (or part) of the financial product regulatory regime to apply. We have
                             given relief where there is low risk of consumer harm.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 12
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




C          Making offers because of or during unsolicited
           contact

                              Key points

                              An offer, invitation or request that takes place in the course of, or because
                              of, an unsolicited contact is prohibited by s992A: see RG 38.39–RG 38.42
                              and RG 38.48–RG 38.56.

                              For the purposes of the hawking regime, unsolicited contact is contact that
                              takes place in real time to which the consumer did not consent: see
                              RG 38.34–RG 38.38.

                              The hawking prohibition does not generally apply to advertising or the mere
                              provision of information: see RG 38.43–RG 38.47.

                              The words ‘because of’ limit the breadth of offers that are prohibited to
                              those where there is a ‘causal nexus’ between the unsolicited contact and
                              the offer, request or invitation: see RG 38.48–RG 38.56.




Forms of contact subject to the prohibition
              RG 38.34       Under s992A(4)(a), unsolicited contact in connection with a financial
                             product is one which is, wholly or partly, in the form of:
                             (a)   a telephone call;
                             (b)   a face-to-face meeting; or
                             (c)   any other real-time interaction in the nature of a discussion or
                                   conversation.

              RG 38.35       An offeror is not prevented by the hawking prohibition from using
                             communications that are not in real time to encourage consumers to request
                             future contact: see Example 6. However, the offeror would need to ensure
                             that any later offer, request, or invitation complies with the hawking
                             prohibition.

                              Example 6: Bulk mail-out

                              Banksia Bank sends unsolicited letters and emails through a bulk mail-out
                              to consumers. These letters and emails contain a reply slip for a consumer
                              to request that Banksia call them at a future time and date convenient to
                              the consumer to discuss certain types of products.

                              Such letters and emails would not breach the hawking prohibition, as they
                              do not constitute a real-time interaction. Further, if a consumer returns the
                              reply slip and Banksia contacts them within six weeks of its return, the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 13
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              telephone call is not unsolicited, even though the consumer did not consent
                              to receiving the original letter.

                              By contrast, if the consumer had not returned the reply slip, but Banksia
                              nonetheless called the consumer and offered them products for sale, this
                              call would be unsolicited, and the offers would constitute hawking.




Real-time interaction in the nature of a conversation or discussion
              RG 38.36       The hawking prohibition is technology neutral. This means that, in addition
                             to telephone calls and face-to-face meetings, the hawking prohibition also
                             extends to other real-time interactions that are in the nature of a discussion or
                             conversation, including instant messages, as well as through media that use
                             artificial intelligence such as chat-bots: see s992A(4)(a)(iii).

              RG 38.37       The hawking prohibition cannot be circumvented by engaging a third party
                             to make offers on a person’s behalf (as their representative or agent): see
                             paragraph 5.31 of the Explanatory Memorandum. We consider that this
                             includes where third parties are contracted to develop artificial intelligence
                             sales tools, such as chat-bots. In such cases, the person commissioning the
                             chat-bot’s use, or under whose licence it operates will be responsible for any
                             offer, request or invitation made by the chat-bot.

              RG 38.38       Real-time interactions are ones where the offeror and consumer respond to
                             each other continuously in real time, or where an expectation exists that both
                             parties will provide an immediate response to each other: see paragraph 5.59
                             of the Explanatory Memorandum. This includes both verbal and written
                             communication. As a result, whether forms of contact, such as text
                             messages, constitute real-time interactions for the purposes of s992A(4)
                             depends on the circumstances. Some messages may create an expectation of
                             an immediate response, while others may not.



Offers, requests and invitations

              RG 38.39       Section 992A(1) provides that a person must not offer a financial product for
                             issue or sale to a consumer, or request or invite the consumer to ask or apply
                             for a financial product or to purchase a financial product if the consumer is a
                             retail client and the offer, request or invitation is made in the course of, or
                             because of, an unsolicited contact with the consumer.

              RG 38.40       The hawking prohibition cannot be avoided by approaching a consumer and
                             inviting or requesting them to ask or apply for a financial product: see
                             paragraph 5.28 of the Explanatory Memorandum.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 14
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.41       Some of the factors involved in determining whether conduct constitutes an
                             offer, request or invitation are likely to include the context of the interaction,
                             behaviour of the consumer and offeror, as well as the actual words
                             exchanged between the parties: see Example 7.

              RG 38.42       However, there are certain practices we consider would generally constitute
                             an offer, request or invitation. For example:
                             (a)   providing a consumer with a quote (e.g. in the case of an insurance
                                   product) (see Example 5.5 in the Explanatory Memorandum); or
                             (b)   requesting or inviting a consumer to complete an application form (see
                                   paragraph 5.28 and Example 5.2 in the Explanatory Memorandum).
                                   Note: Consumers can still be provided with application forms, but they cannot be asked
                                   to fill them out.


                              Example 7: Welcome calls and service calls

                              Minh recently took out insurance on her boat with Xenial Insurance. The
                              representative Minh organised the insurance with, Damian, makes a
                              welcome call to Minh to ensure the product has been set up correctly and
                              to identify any further assistance or products Minh may require. Minh did
                              not request this call.

                              During the course of the conversation, Minh mentions that she has just
                              bought a caravan, and Damian identifies that Minh may need caravan
                              insurance. Damian explains what Xenial’s caravan insurance covers and
                              gives Minh some general information about the product’s features.

                              This call is unlikely to have breached the hawking prohibition, as Damian’s
                              conduct did not amount to the making of an offer, request or invitation in
                              relation to a financial product.

                              However, if Damian used the welcome call as an opportunity to make an
                              invitation, offer or request, that conduct would likely breach the hawking
                              prohibition.


                             Advertising or giving information

              RG 38.43       An offeror can provide information to a consumer in real time—including
                             discussing the existence, function and purpose or features of a product—
                             without breaching the hawking prohibition provided that no offer, invitation
                             or request is made, even when this contact is not requested by the consumer.

              RG 38.44       For the avoidance of doubt, where advertising or giving information involves
                             practices that are not in the nature of a conversation, discussion, or real-time
                             interaction, such as brochures, television or radio advertising, that conduct is
                             not within the scope of the prohibition.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                Page 15
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.45       Depending on the circumstances, offers, requests or invitations made using
                             non-real time channels (such as email) following an unsolicited contact may
                             still constitute a breach of the hawking prohibition. This is because offers,
                             requests or invitations cannot be made ‘because of’ an unsolicited contact
                             that is in real time: see also RG 38.48––RG 38.56.

                              Example 8: Promotional material

                              One-Stop for Everything is a supermarket chain that offers a variety of
                              insurance products and regularly has tables set up inside its stores to hand
                              out pamphlets about their cover.

                              Harish is doing his shopping and walks past a stall. Freya, a promoter for
                              One-Stop for Everything, offers Harish a pamphlet about the chain’s
                              insurance products, and asks if he knew that One-Stop for Everything
                              offers insurance. Harish indicates that he did not, and Freya explains that
                              they provide a variety of car, home building and contents, and pet
                              insurance policies. Harish thanks Freya for her explanation, takes the
                              pamphlet, and continues shopping.

                              In providing factual information about One-Stop for Everything’s products,
                              Freya has not breached the hawking prohibition. Her conduct is unlikely to
                              have amounted to a request or invitation to apply for the product.


                              Example 9: Following up information provided in real time with non-
                              real-time communication

                              Rocio visits her local bank branch to get a bank cheque and explains that
                              she needs the cheque to purchase a car. Lowanna is a staff member at the
                              branch. Lowanna asks if Rocio has organised car insurance. Rocio indicates
                              that she has not, but that she would like information on how to get it.

                              Lowanna provides Rocio with a brochure and asks if she can send Rocio
                              an email with further benefits and features of the different options. Rocio
                              agrees and provides her email address.

                              The following day, Rocio receives an email containing a telephone number
                              to call and a hyperlink to apply online. Rocio clicks the ‘apply here’ link and
                              follows the instructions to fill in her details and generate a quote.

                              It is unlikely that a contravention of the hawking prohibition has occurred in
                              this scenario. Lowanna provided information in real time and followed up
                              with information about the product not in real time. Rocio took an active
                              step to apply for the product after being provided information.

                              If Lowanna made Rocio an offer for car insurance during the real-time
                              interaction in the branch, this would be unsolicited, and would likely breach
                              the hawking prohibition.

                              If the email Lowanna sent Rocio after their meeting contained a quote for
                              car insurance, this would likely breach the hawking prohibition because a
                              quote constitutes an offer, and was because of unsolicited contact.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 16
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              Example 10: Pop-up advertisements

                              Donnah is checking her account balance on her investment loan on a
                              personal banking app. A pop-up appears on her screen asking if she would
                              like landlord insurance.

                              The pop-up contains a link that allows Donnah to fill in her details and
                              generate a quote for the insurance. There is also a button that allows
                              Donnah to dismiss the pop-up.

                              It is likely that this pop-up does not constitute a real-time interaction in the
                              nature of a conversation or discussion; rather it is likely to be an
                              advertisement. This is because the consumer and offeror are not
                              responding to each other in real time, such that there is an expectation of
                              immediate response: see paragraph 5.60 of the Explanatory Memorandum.
                              As a result, the pop-up is unlikely to breach the hawking prohibition.

              RG 38.46       The hawking prohibition does not apply to the advertising of an offer, or the
                             publication of a statement about an offer that otherwise complies with or is
                             subject to an exemption in s734 or s1018A: see s992A(7).
                                   Note: See also Regulatory Guide 254 Offering securities under a disclosure document
                                   (RG 254).

              RG 38.47       When advertising or providing information, offerors still need to ensure that
                             they comply with any other relevant laws, including the misleading or
                             deceptive conduct and consumer protection provisions discussed at
                             RG 38.11–RG 38.12. Offerors should also note ASIC’s guidance in relation
                             to advertising financial products and services.
                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 234 Advertising financial products and services (including
                                   credit): Good practice guidance (RG 234) for information on obligations relating to
                                   advertising or promotional material.



Meaning of ‘because of’ in the hawking prohibition

              RG 38.48       Under s992A(1)(b), for a breach of the hawking prohibition to occur, the
                             offer, request or invitation to the consumer must be made ‘because of’ or ‘in
                             the course of’, an unsolicited contact.

              RG 38.49       An offer, request or invitation made during an unsolicited contact with a
                             consumer will constitute one made ‘in the course of’ that contact: see
                             paragraph 5.52 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.50       Paragraph 5.53 of the Explanatory Memorandum states that the words
                             ‘because of’ limit the breadth of offers that are prohibited to those where
                             there is a ‘causal nexus’ between the unsolicited contact and the offer,
                             request, or invitation. In addition, the paragraph says that:
                                   …[T]he inclusion of the words ‘because of’ seeks to address the situation
                                   in which a person makes unsolicited contact with a consumer, but the
                                   actual offer, request, or invitation is made during subsequent contact that is
                                   solicited by the consumer.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                               Page 17
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.51       The prohibition may still apply to offers, requests, or invitations that take
                             place through a medium other than one that is a real-time interaction. For
                             example, emailing a consumer an offer during or directly after an unsolicited
                             outbound sales call with them would likely be ‘because of’ that call.

              RG 38.52       Ultimately, whether the offer is caused by, or is a result of, the unsolicited
                             contact, will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case: see
                             paragraph 5.54 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.53       For example, the causal nexus will be broken if a consumer obtains personal
                             advice about a product after the unsolicited contact, and subsequently
                             consents to further contact in relation to that product: see paragraph 5.56 of
                             the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.54       The causal nexus may also be broken if, between an unsolicited contact and
                             subsequent offer, request or invitation, the consumer has:
                             (a)   taken active steps of their own accord to consent to further contact
                                   regarding the offer, request or invitation;
                             (b)   had a reasonable opportunity to consider any information that they have
                                   been provided about a financial product; and
                             (c)   had a reasonable opportunity to assess the product’s suitability prior to
                                   receiving the offer: see paragraph 5.55 of the Explanatory
                                   Memorandum.

              RG 38.55       If during the course of an initial unsolicited contact, an offeror pressures or
                             manipulates a consumer into providing consent to future contact in relation
                             to a financial product, then any such future contact would continue to be
                             unsolicited: see paragraph 5.57 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.56       Generally, we consider that the following circumstances are unlikely, of
                             themselves, to break the causal nexus:
                             (a)   the consumer obtaining general advice;
                             (b)   the consumer receiving a prospectus or PDS; or
                             (c)   the offeror providing a disclaimer to the consumer, or obtaining a
                                   declaration from the consumer, to the effect that the offer is not because
                                   of the initial unsolicited contact.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 18
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




D          Establishing consumer consent to be contacted

                              Key points

                              In order to make an offer, request, or invitation in relation to a financial
                              product, an offeror must receive consent from a consumer to contact them.
                              The consent must be:
                              • positive and voluntary (see RG 38.63–RG 38.68);
                              • clear and such that a reasonable person would have understood that
                                the consumer consented to the contact (see RG 38.69–RG 38.78); and
                              • given before the start of such contact (see RG 38.57–RG 38.59).

                              This consent can be withdrawn at any time prior to or during the course of
                              the contact: see RG 38.115–RG 38.121.

                              In turn, the contact must:
                              • relate to financial products specifically consented to, or that are
                                reasonably within the scope of the consent (see RG 38.85–RG 38.107);
                                and
                              • be by a method of communication set out in the consumer’s consent,
                                where this is specified (see RG 38.108–RG 38.110).




The giving of consent generally

              RG 38.57       Under s992A(4)(b), contact with a consumer by an offeror is ‘unsolicited
                             contact’ if the consumer did not consent to the contact.

              RG 38.58       Under s992A(5)(c) and (h), the consent must be given prior to the contact.
                             The consent must not have been withdrawn before the contact occurs.

              RG 38.59       These requirements mean an offeror cannot elicit consent from a consumer
                             for that or further contact: see paragraphs 5.72, 5.74 and 5.75 of the
                             Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.60       If a consumer’s consent indicates the form of contact that the consumer
                             wants, an offeror may only contact them in that form: see s992A(5)(f).

              RG 38.61       Consent will be unsolicited unless it takes place after a consumer has given
                             consent that is positive, voluntary, and clear. That consent must also be such
                             that a reasonable person would have understood that the consumer was
                             consenting to the contact: see s992A(5)(d)-(e), and paragraph 5.22 of the
                             Explanatory Memorandum.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 19
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.62       A consumer may consent to a meeting, telephone call or other real-time
                             interaction for one or more purposes, and the consent could take a number of
                             forms. The consent may relate to a single instance or multiple instances of
                             contact—for example, a request to receive telephone calls for a particular
                             purpose over a period of time, not exceeding six weeks. In any case, the
                             consent obtained should be positive, voluntary, and clear.



Consent must be positive and voluntary

              RG 38.63       Under s992A(5)(d), offerors may only rely on a consumer’s consent to be
                             contacted if it is positive and voluntary.


                             Positive consent

              RG 38.64       Positive consent involves an active step by the consumer, such as initiating
                             contact with the offeror through a telephone call or online form: see paragraph
                             5.75 of the Explanatory Memorandum. This involves a conscious decision
                             by the consumer, and cannot be given through silence or a failure to act.

              RG 38.65       Consent cannot be provided in response to a leading question: see paragraph
                             5.76 of the Explanatory Memorandum. This includes situations where a
                             leading question is used to attempt to obtain a renewal of consent.

              RG 38.66       Generally, positive consent may involve either:
                             (a)   consent sought through a standalone communication or interaction that
                                   demonstrates the consumer’s decision; or
                             (b)   where consent is sought in a broader discussion or larger document
                                   (e.g. forms relating to a separate product or service), clearly bringing to
                                   the consumer’s attention the consent being sought, such that it allows
                                   for an express decision to be made: see paragraph 5.73 of the
                                   Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.67       A consumer’s failure to act does not constitute a positive act of providing
                             consent for the contact: see paragraph 5.76 of the Explanatory Memorandum.
                             For example, the fact that a consumer did not opt-out of receiving future
                             telephone calls when given an opportunity to do so on an application form
                             will not, on its own, mean that subsequent telephone calls from the offeror
                             are solicited: see Example 11.

                              Example 11: Opt-out notices

                              Good Deal Derivatives recently bought a client book from a dormant over
                              the counter (OTC) derivatives dealer, Dazzling Derivatives, to obtain new
                              clients for their business. As a dormant dealer, Dazzling Derivatives has
                              not made contact or sought consent from any clients in the last year.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 20
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              Good Deal Derivatives sends a letter to all individuals whose contact
                              details it has acquired. In the letter, Good Deal Derivatives asks them to
                              respond if they wish to opt-out of future financial product offers. A week
                              later, Good Deal Derivatives calls all individuals in the client book, inviting
                              them to start trading OTC derivatives using their platform. None of the
                              recipients of the letter responded prior to receiving the telephone call.

                              By telephoning these individuals with an invitation, Good Deal Derivatives
                              has breached the hawking prohibition. The consumers did not clearly and
                              positively consent to this real-time interaction. Failure to respond or an
                              absence of objection does not constitute consent to be contacted by the
                              offeror. Previous consents that may have been granted by individuals in
                              relation to offers from Dazzling Derivatives would have expired six weeks
                              after they were given. In any event, such consents would not extend to
                              offers from Good Deal Derivatives.


                              Example 12: Follow-up phone calls

                              Natasha makes a phone call to her bank to query a transaction on her
                              account, and speaks with a customer service representative, Pierre. In the
                              course of the conversation, Natasha mentions that she will be starting a
                              new job the following week. The conversation progresses as follows:

                              Pierre:                  That’s exciting!

                              Natasha:                 Yeah …

                              Pierre:                  Given you’ll be starting a new job soon, perhaps you
                                                       would like some information on our income protection
                                                       options and for us to draw up some quotes?

                              Natasha does not respond. Pierre notices the silence, and continues:

                              Pierre:                  I know you might not have time to talk about it now,
                                                       but I’ll give you a call tomorrow and we can have a
                                                       chat about it then.

                              Pierre calls Natasha the following day to make an offer for income
                              protection. Pierre’s conduct has breached the hawking prohibition because
                              the call on which the offer was made was unsolicited, as it did not take
                              place in response to positive consent. Natasha did not decline Pierre’s
                              proposed course of action, but this does not constitute positive consent.


                             Voluntary consent

              RG 38.68       The consumer must have voluntarily made the decision to be contacted. A
                             consent is not valid if the consumer was forced, pressured, or manipulated
                             into consenting to be contacted by an offeror, or induced to contact the
                             offeror, so the consumer could, for example, receive another service or take
                             up another opportunity: see paragraphs 5.57, 5.75, and 5.77 of the
                             Explanatory Memorandum, Example 13 and Example 14. This includes
                             situations where the consent is to further or future contact in which an offer
                             is to be made: see Example 15.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                        Page 21
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              Example 13: Timeshare presentation

                              A promoter has a stall at a shopping centre with a banner about free movie
                              tickets. The promoter approaches a consumer, Peter, about participating in
                              a survey on holiday destinations and hearing information about holidays.
                              The promoter offers Peter free movie tickets in return. The survey will take
                              place at a nearby venue.

                              Peter goes to the venue and is told that the survey will take place at the
                              end of a presentation and the free movie tickets will be handed out then.
                              Peter discovers that the presentation is about a time-sharing scheme and is
                              invited to apply for an interest in the scheme during the presentation.

                              Peter did not provide voluntary consent because it was not made clear that
                              the consent being sought was for contact in relation to an offer to purchase
                              an interest in a time-sharing scheme. In any case, the offer is ‘because of’
                              the promoter’s initial, unsolicited contact with the consumer.

                              Had the promoter properly informed Peter that the presentation was for the
                              purposes of offering interests in, or inviting or requesting applications for
                              interests in, a time-sharing scheme, then consent given by Peter would
                              have been voluntary.



                              Example 14: Price comparison website

                              Hong wants to switch comprehensive car insurers. He searches the internet
                              for more information and finds an insurance price comparison website, ‘Best
                              Price Compare’. The homepage shows the logos of ten different insurance
                              providers and describes the insurance that they offer. Hong clicks on a
                              button that reads ‘Compare your quotes’. Once he clicks on this button a
                              dialogue box appears:

                              ‘By providing your details to Best Price Compare you are consenting to be
                              contacted by telephone about offers of comprehensive car insurance by our
                              Best Price Compare members. Do you wish to proceed?’

                              Hong wants to receive the quotes from Best Price Compare so answers
                              ‘yes’ and proceeds to fill out his details on a webform, and submits it. He
                              then compares the quotes that now appear on the page. Hong
                              subsequently receives a telephone call from three of the member insurance
                              providers offering to complete the purchase process.

                              These calls were solicited because Best Price Compare has made it clear
                              to consumers that by answering ‘yes’ and filling out the form they will be
                              contacted by telephone by Best Price Compare’s member insurance
                              providers. Hong has taken positive action by acknowledging that he
                              consents to being contacted by the member insurance providers, and
                              subsequently voluntarily submitted his details on the webform.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 22
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              Example 15: Eliciting consent for further contact

                              Lerato calls Zaff Bank and asks for information about their term deposits
                              and speaks with a sales representative, Akeno.

                              At the end of the call, unprompted by Lerato, Akeno asks:

                              ‘Can I call you tomorrow to discuss the superannuation products we offer?’

                              Lerato agrees. The following day, Akeno calls Lerato and in the course of
                              the call invites him to apply for a superannuation product, ‘Zaff MySuper’.

                              This constitutes an unsolicited invitation to apply, despite Lerato’s consent
                              to receive the call. This is because Akeno’s question elicited Lerato’s
                              consent for the subsequent call: see paragraph 5.57 of the Explanatory
                              Memorandum. Offerors cannot rely on consent that has been elicited.

                              Had Akeno asked Lerato if there is anything else he wishes to discuss, and
                              Lerato had positively, clearly and voluntarily indicated that he would like to
                              discuss superannuation and that he would like a follow-up call, then the
                              telephone call to Lerato the following day would not have been elicited.




Consent must be clear and reasonably understood
              RG 38.69       Under s992A(5)(e), a consumer’s consent must be clear, and such that a
                             reasonable person would have understood that the consumer consented to the
                             contact: see also paragraphs 5.79 and 5.81 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.70       This means that a consumer’s consent must demonstrate that they understand
                             they are consenting to being contacted for the purpose of being offered, or
                             invited to purchase or apply for, a financial product. For consent to be clear,
                             it must not be vague or ambiguous: see paragraph 5.79 of the Explanatory
                             Memorandum.

              RG 38.71       In addition, silence on the part of a consumer will generally not provide a
                             clear basis for consent for contact in relation to the offer, request or
                             invitation of a financial product.

              RG 38.72       The purpose of the contact being consented to by the consumer should be
                             clear from the language used to communicate it. The consumer must have
                             clearly stated either the type of financial product they are interested in
                             discussing or the type of outcome they wish to achieve through a financial
                             product: see paragraph 5.80 of the Explanatory Memorandum and
                             RG 38.86–RG 38.106. This means that an offeror cannot rely on broad
                             consent solicited from a consumer that does not specify products or a
                             particular consumer need.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 23
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.73       The effect of s992A(5)(e) is that an offeror must be satisfied on a reasonable
                             basis that the consumer was sufficiently informed so as to understand that:
                             (a)   they have provided consent to being contacted by the offeror; and
                             (b)   the contact may result in an offer of a financial product or a request or
                                   invitation to apply for a financial product (see paragraph 5.82 of the
                                   Explanatory Memorandum).

                              Example 16: Vague or ambiguous language for consent

                              Ahmad is looking for home contents insurance. He uses the instant chat
                              box function on Sibylline Insurance’s website to enquire. Farah from
                              Sibylline Insurance responds. During the instant chat exchange, Ahmad
                              mentions he has just purchased an engagement ring. Farah indicates that
                              Sibylline Insurance also offers personal valuables insurance. The following
                              conversation then takes place:

                              Ahmad:        I don’t think I need personal valuables insurance. I’ll need to
                                            check.

                              Farah:        Well, I could call you tomorrow and run you through an
                                            application if you like?

                              Ahmad:        Ummm … I don’t know, maybe …

                              Ahmad’s language does not indicate clear and positive consent to be
                              contacted by Farah in relation to personal valuables insurance. If Farah
                              calls Ahmad and offers him such a product, this contact would be
                              unsolicited and would breach the hawking prohibition. If Farah was
                              uncertain whether Ahmad properly understood that any subsequent
                              telephone calls were for the purpose of signing up to personal valuables
                              insurance, she could have simply provided further information about that
                              insurance.

              RG 38.74       Whether there is a reasonable basis for considering a consumer to have
                             understood what they are consenting to will depend on the circumstances in
                             each case. For example, where a consumer begins filling out an online form
                             but does not submit it, the partial supply of information does not provide a
                             reasonable basis for considering the consumer to have consented to contact.

              RG 38.75       Equally, where a consumer is handed a pamphlet about a product without
                             any context and asks what it is about and why they have been given it, this is
                             not a reasonable basis for considering the consumer to have consented to
                             contact.

              RG 38.76       It is unlikely that a consumer would understand what they are consenting to
                             if they are incentivised to consent hastily to contact about a financial product
                             (e.g. as part of the terms and conditions of entering a competition): see
                             paragraph 5.83 of the Explanatory Memorandum and RG 38.97.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 24
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              Example 17: Competition form

                              A company runs a campaign where a consumer can fill in a form to enter a
                              draw to win a new car. Small print contained in the lengthy terms and
                              conditions attached to the form states that, by submitting their entry, the
                              consumer consents to being called about the sale or offer of financial products.

                              Any telephone calls for the offer or sale of financial products that take place
                              as a result of the information provided on the form would be considered
                              unsolicited. The company did not specifically, or separately, draw the
                              consumer’s attention to being contacted about financial products. As a
                              result, no reasonable person would likely have understood that the
                              consumer had consented to contact in relation to the offer of financial
                              products.

              RG 38.77       Where an offeror does not obtain consent personally from a consumer,
                             because it is obtained through a third party (e.g. if they use a third party
                             promoter or lead generator), it remains a matter for the offeror to establish
                             that the consent was positive, voluntary, clear and reasonably understood
                             prior to making an offer. An offeror may breach the prohibition even if they
                             had not intended to rely on consent that had not been properly given by a
                             consumer: see Example 18.

                              Example 18: Website lead generator

                              Taraji has heard on the news about a surge in retail securities trading and
                              decides to search the internet for more information. A link for Quick Traders
                              appears stating, ‘Learn about trading securities today!’. Taraji submits her
                              contact details in a webform on the Quick Traders website.

                              Taraji is surprised when she later receives a call from Zuri, a representative
                              from Dealin’ Derivatives, who had used Quick Traders to generate leads.
                              Zuri gives Taraji general information about securities trading, but in the
                              course of this conversation invites Taraji instead to begin trading OTC
                              derivatives using the Dealin’ Derivatives platform.

                              Zuri’s invitation is unsolicited as it does not take place in response to a
                              consent voluntarily given in relation to the invitation to trade financial
                              products, or for that matter to be contacted about derivatives. This breach
                              occurs regardless of whether Zuri believes that Quick Traders properly
                              sought consent from Taraji.

              RG 38.78       As a matter of good practice, we suggest that offerors:
                             (a)   encourage consumers to specify which financial products or classes of
                                   financial products they wish to discuss;
                             (b)   provide consumers with enough information in a sufficiently prominent
                                   way so as to allow them to carefully consider whether to consent to the
                                   contact, and the form of that contact; and
                             (c)   if in doubt, clarify and/or confirm the scope of the contact to which the
                                   consumer gives consent.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 25
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                             Clarifying the scope of a consumer’s consent

              RG 38.79       It may be necessary to clarify or confirm the scope of the consumer’s
                             consent where they use vague or ambiguous language, or where there may
                             be a misunderstanding as to the function or purpose of a product. It may be
                             the case that a clarification of the consumer’s stated purpose (and therefore
                             scope of consent) results in an offer of a different product than had been
                             initially proposed. Offerors should not use the process of clarifying the
                             consumer’s objectives to artificially broaden or elicit consent.
                                   Note: For more information on ‘eliciting’, see paragraph RG 38.97.



                              Example 19: Clarifying consent

                              Ezekiel, who lives in Sydney, calls his insurer, Papaya Insurance, to
                              organise insurance for his car.

                              When he speaks to the customer service representative, Fatima, he
                              indicates that he wants minimal insurance. Fatima explains to Ezekiel that
                              all he is required to have by law is compulsory third-party (CTP) insurance.
                              Ezekiel says CTP insurance is what he is after.

                              During the process of asking Ezekiel questions to generate a quote for CTP
                              insurance, it becomes apparent to Fatima that Ezekiel assumes the product
                              covers damage to the vehicle. She alerts him to the fact that CTP
                              insurance will not cover damage to his car, and asks if he would like a
                              product, such as comprehensive car insurance or third-party fire and theft
                              insurance, that does cover the car itself. Ezekiel thanks Fatima and says
                              that he does want insurance that will cover any kind of damage to his car.

                              Fatima continues explaining the differences between the types of
                              insurance, and ultimately provides quotes in respect of comprehensive car
                              insurance as well as CTP insurance.

                              Fatima’s quote for comprehensive insurance does not breach the hawking
                              prohibition on the basis that coverage for any kind of damage to the car
                              was the outcome Ezekiel sought. She identified a possible
                              misunderstanding, and her questions clarifying the scope of his consent
                              were appropriate and unlikely to breach the hawking prohibition.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                          Page 26
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              Example 20: Offering products reasonably within the scope of the
                              consent

                              Emmily telephones Venture Insurance Co and speaks with a sales
                              representative, Laura about acquiring insurance. The following
                              conversation takes place:
                              Emmily:            I want to be protected if there’s a bushfire near my house.
                              Laura:             Okay, we can help you with that. Before I do—you
                                                 mentioned your house. Are you renting, or do you own it?
                              Emmily:            I own the house.
                              Laura:             In that case, you may wish to consider home building
                                                 insurance, which we offer, as well as some form of
                                                 contents insurance that will cover your possessions in the
                                                 case of fire.
                              The discussion continues, and Laura eventually offers Emmily contents
                              insurance and home building insurance.
                              While Emmily did not request either insurance by name, Emmily’s initiation
                              of contact constitutes consent to being contacted in relation to the offer of
                              multiple insurances covering the same financial risk—loss she may suffer
                              as the result of a fire: see RG 38.78. As Laura established that Emmily
                              owned her place of residence, the offer of home building insurance does
                              not breach the prohibition.


              RG 38.80       Consent must at all times be clear, positive, and voluntary. Offerors are
                             reminded that if they are unable to clarify consent so that they can be
                             satisfied that there is valid consent in place, they are always able to provide
                             consumers with information about products during the interaction. The
                             consumer can then consider this information before taking a next step. This
                             is consistent with the regime’s objectives to give consumers greater control
                             over their decisions to purchase financial products by determining the kinds
                             of financial products they are offered: see paragraph 5.4 of the Explanatory
                             Memorandum.


                             Consent in consumer-initiated interactions

              RG 38.81       Section 992A(5)(c) requires that offerors rely only on consent provided by
                             consumers before the start of the contact. However, where the consumer
                             initiates real-time interaction directly, it is not technically possible for
                             consent to be given before the contact commences. Therefore, the
                             Explanatory Memorandum provides that the fact that the consumer initiates
                             contact is taken to mean that they understand the nature of the contact to
                             which they are consenting: see paragraph 5.83 of the Explanatory
                             Memorandum.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 27
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.82       Any consent provided by a consumer still needs to satisfy the criteria at
                             s992A(5)(d) and (e), that it be positive, voluntary and clear, and such that a
                             reasonable person would have understood what the consumer was
                             consenting to: see RG 38.63–RG 38.78.

              RG 38.83       A consumer may raise a second or additional product of their own accord in
                             the course of a contact. Provided this is done entirely of their own initiative,
                             and the consent meets the criteria of being positive, voluntary, clear, and
                             capable of being reasonably understood, then the offeror is able to make
                             offers in respect of the second or additional product. We consider this to be
                             consistent with the object of the regime which is to give consumers greater
                             control over their decisions to purchase financial products: see paragraph 5.4
                             of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.84       However, offerors must not elicit a consumer’s consent in any way, such as
                             by asking leading questions: see paragraph 5.74 of the Explanatory
                             Memorandum. As a breach of the hawking prohibition is an offence of strict
                             liability, breaches may occur even where an offeror does not intend to elicit
                             consent: see s992A(9).

                              Example 21: Subsequent product request

                              Olga calls her bank, Blue Sky Bank. She asks the customer service
                              representative, Brendan, if Blue Sky Bank can issue her a credit card.
                              Brendan offers her some different credit card options. Olga says she will
                              consider the options Brendan presented to her.

                              Olga then remarks that she wants the credit card for her forthcoming
                              holiday and that she would also like to organise some travel insurance.
                              Brendan then discusses the bank’s travel insurance offerings, and Olga
                              provides him with the relevant information to generate a quote, which
                              Brendan proceeds to do.

                              Brendan is unlikely to have breached the hawking prohibition as Olga
                              raised the travel insurance of her own accord, in a manner that was
                              positive, clear and voluntary.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 28
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




Determining the scope of consent

              RG 38.85       Under s992A(5)(a) and (b), the consent must be to contact for the purpose of
                             offering, or requesting or inviting a consumer to ask or apply for either:
                             (a)   the particular financial product that is the subject of the offer, request,
                                   or invitation; or
                             (b)   a financial product reasonably within the scope of the consumer’s
                                   consent.

              RG 38.86       It is possible that a consumer’s consent may be broad enough so as to
                             reasonably apply to more than one product: see paragraph 5.67 of the
                             Explanatory Memorandum.


                             General meaning of ‘reasonably within scope’

              RG 38.87       While each situation will depend upon its facts, certain products will be
                             considered to be reasonably within the scope of the consumer’s consent if:
                             (a)   the consumer has consented to the contact for products of a particular
                                   type or with particular features, and the product is of that type or has
                                   those features;
                             (b)   the consumer asks for a product that has a particular purpose or function
                                   and the financial product that is offered has that purpose or function; or
                             (c)   a reasonable person would consider the financial product to be within
                                   the scope of the consumer’s consent—for example when the product:
                                   (i)     covers the risks that the consumer consented to being contacted
                                           about;
                                   (ii)    has the same purpose or function as the product that the consumer
                                           consented to being contacted about (see Example 22); or
                                   (iii)   is so closely related to the product that the consumer consented to
                                           being contacted about that the consumer would reasonably expect
                                           to be offered that product.

                                   Note: See s992A(5)(a)(ii) and s992A(5)(b)(ii), as well as paragraphs 5.65 and 5.66 of
                                   the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.88       Establishing if a financial product is ‘so closely related to an [initial] product
                             that a consumer would reasonably expect to be offered it’, may involve
                             considering factors such as:
                             (a)   whether acquisition of the additional product is appropriately mandated
                                   by the terms of the initial product;
                             (b)   the degree to which the utilisation of the features of the initial product
                                   requires acquisition of the additional product;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                 Page 29
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                             (c)   whether the use for which the initial product or service is commonly
                                   supplied gives rise to the need for the product;
                             (d)   whether and to what extent the product manages financial risk arising
                                   from acquiring the initial product; and
                             (e)   how prevalent it is for consumers who acquire the initial product to
                                   acquire the additional financial product (regardless of whether it is
                                   acquired from the same offeror as that initial product).

              RG 38.89       The relative weight of these and other factors in determining whether the
                             financial product was reasonably within scope of the consumer’s consent
                             will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.

              RG 38.90       A worked example of how some of these factors may be applied to a given
                             situation is provided in Example 23.

                              Example 22: Products not reasonably within the scope of consent

                              Kathleen meets with a sales representative of Gold Standard Bank to
                              enquire about setting up a fixed-term deposit account. During the meeting,
                              the sales representative tells her that if she wants long-term financial
                              security, she should consider applying for Gold Standard Bank’s income
                              protection insurance.
                              The offer of the income protection insurance breaches the hawking
                              prohibition because it was not reasonably within the scope of Kathleen’s
                              consent, which was in relation to a term deposit. This is because a
                              reasonable person would not consider income protection insurance to be a
                              financial product with the same purpose or function as the fixed-term
                              deposit account. The deposit account has the purpose and function of
                              generating return on capital investment, which income protection insurance
                              does not.
                              The sales representative could instead offer Kathleen a pamphlet with
                              information regarding income protection insurance and explain to Kathleen
                              the coverage and protection it provides.


                              Example 23: Reasonable expectation of being offered a product

                              Vassiliki visits a mortgage broker, Corinne, to organise a home loan so that
                              she can buy a new home.

                              During the discussion, Corinne reminds Vassiliki that she will require home
                              building insurance over the property as a term of the loan. Corinne asks
                              Vassiliki if she has organised home building insurance yet and says she
                              can organise some quotes and email them to Vassiliki, if she would like.
                              Vassiliki agrees that this would be helpful. Following the meeting, Corinne
                              emails Vassiliki a table containing a comparative list of insurance quotes.

                              In providing these quotes, Corinne made an offer of the insurance ‘because
                              of’ the contact Vassiliki made. However, the contact in relation to the home
                              building insurance was not unsolicited, as the offer was reasonably within
                              the scope of Vassiliki’s consent to discuss financing the purchase of the



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 30
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              home. Home building insurance is so closely related to the product Vassiliki
                              consented to being contacted about, the mortgage, that a reasonable
                              person would have expected to be offered it. This is because, in this case,
                              the home building insurance was required by a contractual term of the
                              mortgage, and the home building insurance helps manage the financial risk
                              arising from the entry into the mortgage. It is also prevalent for borrowers to
                              acquire home building insurance on the property securing the home loan.


                             Consent in the context of bundling or cross-selling

              RG 38.91       Offerors sometimes sell or issue multiple products together in practices
                             known as cross-selling and bundling. This can involve the offer of a discount
                             on the usual price of a product or products (e.g. multi-policy discounts).

              RG 38.92       A consumer may be offered more than one financial product during a contact
                             if the consumer consented to being contacted about multiple products before
                             the contact, or the consumer’s consent is sufficiently broad so as to
                             reasonably apply to more than one product: see paragraph 5.67 of the
                             Explanatory Memorandum and Example 24.

                              Example 24: Offer of a cross-sold or bundled product reasonably
                              within scope

                              Liam walks into the local branch of his bank and asks Ahmed, a customer
                              services representative, about the bank’s home loan offerings. They
                              discuss the options. At the conclusion of the meeting, Ahmed provides
                              Liam with information about—and offers him the opportunity to open—a
                              transaction account that could be linked to the home loan as an ‘off-set
                              account’.
                              The offer of the transaction account is not unsolicited. Liam’s consent to be
                              contacted about home loans is sufficiently broad as to reasonably cover an
                              off-set transaction account.


              RG 38.93       A second or additional product will be within the scope of a consumer’s
                             consent if, for example, it covers the same risk, has the same purpose or
                             function, or is so closely related to the product that the consumer consented
                             to being contacted about that the consumer would reasonably expect to be
                             offered the second product: see RG 38.87. Understanding the breadth of a
                             consumer’s consent in each case will depend on its circumstances, in
                             particular, the words used by the consumer.

              RG 38.94       The fact that two products could be offered or often are offered together at
                             the point of sale does not in and of itself mean that those products are
                             reasonably within the scope of a consumer’s consent.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 31
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.95       Example 5.5 of the Explanatory Memorandum provides an example on how
                             to assess the scope of a consumer’s consent, and establish whether it is
                             appropriate to offer multiple products:

                                   Example 5.5: Products outside the scope of consent
                                   Kayla calls Big Insurance Co and asks the sales representative, Tom, to
                                   give her a quote for third party property damage insurance for her car. Tom
                                   tells Kayla that Big Insurance Co is currently offering a discount to clients
                                   who take out car and home insurance policies as part of a package and
                                   asked Kayla if she would like a quote for home insurance as well. The offer
                                   of the insurance package is outside the scope of Kayla’s request because
                                   she did not consent to contact involving offers about any product other than
                                   third party property damage insurance. Tom has therefore contravened the
                                   hawking prohibition.

              RG 38.96       Where an offeror wishes to provide a discount to a consumer for acquiring or
                             holding multiple products, or the consumer enquires about the availability of
                             such discounts, the offeror needs to consider whether any products raised in
                             the context of the discount conversation are within the scope of the
                             consumer’s consent. If they are not, the offeror will not be able to make an
                             offer, request, or invitation in respect of those products.

              RG 38.97       Offerors cannot rely on consent that they may have elicited in the course of
                             explaining the discount as a basis for making offers, requests or invitations
                             in relation to any additional products. This does not prevent an offeror from
                             providing information about those products, so long as no offer, request or
                             invitation in relation to additional products is made, and the consumer is left
                             to consider whether they wish to recontact the offeror.

                              Example 25: Multi-policy discount

                              Frankie calls an insurance company, Insurance Assistance, to get a quote
                              for comprehensive car insurance and speaks with an agent, Emma.
                              After receiving her quote, Frankie tells Emma that she was hoping for
                              something cheaper and asks about the best price that Insurance
                              Assistance can offer.
                              Emma asks if Frankie might be interested in a multi-policy discount and
                              explains that if Frankie has three eligible Insurance Assistance policies, she
                              will receive 15% off each policy.
                              Frankie is interested in the multi-policy discount and provides her email
                              address.
                              Emma sends Frankie an email after the phone call that includes information
                              on comprehensive car insurance, eligible Insurance Assistance policies
                              and a brochure explaining the multi-policy discount. The email also
                              includes Emma’s contact details. Frankie ultimately decides only to take out
                              comprehensive car insurance. Frankie may still be eligible for the multi-
                              policy discount if she applies for additional products later.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 32
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              By only providing Frankie with information, as well as time to consider her
                              options and the freedom to re-initiate contact, Emma has not breached the
                              hawking prohibition. If Frankie opts to contact Emma and purchase further
                              insurance products, this contact would not be ‘because of’ the prior
                              discussion of the discount.

              RG 38.98       Some products offered may only be obtained together as a bundle, for
                             example small business insurance packages (where sold to a retail consumer).

              RG 38.99       We note that, in relation to the product design and distribution obligations
                             (Part 7.8A of the Corporations Act), it is possible for an issuer to prepare a
                             single target market determination (TMD) for a bundle of products. For
                             example, as a result of s764(1A) and (1B), home building insurance and
                             home contents insurance will be two separate products but may have a single
                             TMD where they are offered as part of bundle.

              RG 38.100      Whether or not bundled products are independently obtainable, or are
                             contained in a single TMD or separate TMDs, the relevant test remains that the
                             consumer’s consent must be sufficiently broad as to reasonably apply to each
                             of the products offered: see paragraph 5.67 of the Explanatory Memorandum.
                             This means that the consent given by a consumer for the purposes of the
                             hawking prohibition does not automatically extend to the whole bundle of
                             products, even where that bundle is dealt with in a single TMD.
                                   Note: What constitutes a distinct financial product will be for product issuers to
                                   determine based on the law relevant to their product. More information on bundling in
                                   the context of product issuers’ design and distribution obligations can be found in
                                   Regulatory Guide 274 Product design and distribution obligations (RG 274) at
                                   RG 274.119–RG 274.123.


                             Required consent for products with multiple features

              RG 38.101      Some products offered for issue or sale may have multiple material features.
                             In such cases, the consumer’s consent must cover all of the product’s
                             features. If a feature of the product is not within the scope of the consumer’s
                             consent, the consumer must not be offered that product: see Example 26.

                              Example 26: Products with multiple features

                              Niamh meets with Velko, a sales representative at Live Long & Prosper
                              Investments, and enquires about investment options involving shares.
                              Velko offers Niamh a range of options, including an investment facility that
                              provides exposure to both shares and debentures.
                              On the basis of Niamh’s consent, Velko’s offer would be reasonably within
                              the scope of the consent and therefore not unsolicited. However, had
                              Niamh asked about investment options that involved only shares, then the
                              offer of the facility with exposure to both shares and debentures would not
                              have been reasonably within the scope of the consent, being excluded on
                              the basis of the consent provided. An offer in such a context would have
                              been unsolicited, and a breach of the hawking prohibition.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                 Page 33
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                             Required consent for different classes of superannuation
                             interests

              RG 38.102      Under s992A(8), each class of beneficial interest in a regulated
                             superannuation fund is considered to be a separate financial product.

              RG 38.103      This means that when a consumer is offered, or invited or requested to ask or
                             apply for, a new beneficial interest in a fund in which they already hold a
                             different beneficial interest, we will consider the contact to have been
                             unsolicited unless consent was given in relation to the offer or invitation for
                             that new beneficial interest: see Example 27.

              RG 38.104      If a consumer has consented to a contact about the issue or sale of
                             superannuation generally, a superannuation trustee can discuss both
                             MySuper and choice products: see s992A(8) and paragraph 5.69 of the
                             Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.105      Consumers are unlikely to use terms like ‘MySuper’ or ‘choice product’
                             when consenting to contact. However, if the consumer’s consent only
                             reasonably applies to certain products, the trustee cannot make an offer,
                             request, or invitation in relation to other products: see paragraphs 5.68 and
                             5.69 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

                              Example 27: Hawking of superannuation products

                              Aparna makes a call to GG Super and is put through to Lili, a customer
                              service representative.
                              Aparna tells Lili that she is interested in a ‘simple, low-cost’ superannuation
                              product. Of the 19 different products that GG Super offers, only two of them
                              could reasonably be considered simple and low cost: GG MySuper and GG
                              Growth.
                              While both products have similarly low administration and investment fees,
                              the GG Growth (a choice product) has a different investment strategy.
                              Lili tells Aparna about both products and then asks Aparna if she would like
                              to complete an application. Aparna agrees and ultimately decides to
                              purchase the GG Growth offering.
                              Lili has not breached the hawking prohibition because she only offered
                              Aparna products that fell within the scope of Aparna’s request. If, however,
                              Aparna had asked for the ‘default’ or ‘standard’ or ‘most common’
                              superannuation product, it is likely that Lili would have breached the
                              hawking prohibition by offering Aparna the GG Growth option, since choice
                              offerings cannot reasonably be considered default, standard or most
                              common.


              RG 38.106      The hawking prohibition does not prevent a superannuation trustee from
                             using real-time communication to contact a member who is approaching
                             retirement with information about different retirement income products,
                             provided that the trustee does not make an offer, request or invitation to the



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 34
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                             member: see paragraph 5.48 of the Explanatory Memorandum.
                             Superannuation trustees are also not prevented from making offers, requests
                             or invitation by letter or email, so long as those are not made as a result of an
                             unsolicited real-time interaction.


                             Required consent for the financing of another financial
                             product

              RG 38.107      In some instances, a credit product may be offered in order to finance the
                             consumer to purchase some other financial product. The hawking prohibition
                             contained in s992A does not apply to credit products (except when they are
                             also financial products).


Method of contact

              RG 38.108      Under s992A(5)(f), if the consent indicated the form of contact that the
                             consumer wants, the contact must be in that form.

              RG 38.109      Contact through means other than those specified will not be covered by the
                             consumer’s consent and therefore such contact will be unsolicited. As part of
                             ensuring that consumer consent is positive and clear, we expect an offeror to
                             ask or clarify the form or forms of communication that the consumer wishes
                             to receive.

              RG 38.110      If a consumer wishes to be contacted through a medium not used by the
                             offeror, the offeror may inform the consumer that they do not communicate
                             through that medium and advise them of other media used by the offeror.
                             This advice must not be coercive or use inducement: see RG 38.68. If the
                             consumer does not consent to those other media, then future contact will be
                             unsolicited: see Example 28.

                              Example 28: Consumer specifying forms of contact not used by offeror

                              Zara starts an online chat with a customer service representative at her
                              bank about the company’s investment-related product offerings. During the
                              chat, Zara asks to be contacted about Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs)
                              through a particular messaging app.
                              If the bank uses that app, then future contacts through this medium over
                              the next six weeks about ETFs would not be unsolicited.
                              However, if the bank does not use the particular app as a means of official
                              communication, it could instead advise Zara that its only outbound form of
                              real-time communication is through a telephone call. If Zara agrees to
                              receive the telephone call, then the subsequent telephone call would not be
                              unsolicited.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 35
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




Tracking consumer consent

              RG 38.111      Under s992A(5)(g), an offeror may only rely on the consent provided by a
                             consumer for the six-week period after the consent is given. If there is a need
                             for a medical examination before a product is issued or sold, the consumer
                             may agree to a longer period of consent not exceeding 12 weeks.

              RG 38.112      These set time periods balance the need to allow adequate time to discuss a
                             financial product and reach an agreement for its sale or issue, against the need
                             to protect consumers from being contacted about products when they are no
                             longer front of mind: see paragraph 5.89 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.113      A consumer cannot consent to the time period being extended but can
                             provide a new consent to be contacted. In this case, the new consent must
                             meet all of the criteria of the original consent in order to be valid: see
                             paragraph 5.90 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.114      Some business models or practices involve offerors maintaining regular or
                             ongoing contact with consumers, including to make proactive offers of
                             products or services tailored to the consumer (for example relationship
                             managers and insurance brokers). The time limits imposed by s992A(5)(g)
                             apply equally to these roles.


                             Variation or withdrawal of consumer consent

              RG 38.115      Under s992A(6), a consumer may vary or withdraw consent at any time
                             leading up to or during a meeting, telephone call or other interaction. The
                             variation or withdrawal may take any form, regardless of the form of
                             consent: see also paragraph 5.84 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.116      Any communication to the offeror or its representative that expresses a clear
                             intention to vary or withdraw consent should be sufficient. Offerors must comply
                             with the variation or withdrawal of consent when the identity of the person
                             seeking the withdrawal or variation is reasonably ascertainable: see Example 29.

              RG 38.117      Where a person or entity has obtained consumer consent on behalf of an
                             offeror, as a matter of best practice, that person or entity should make
                             available a process or system by which consumers can readily withdraw their
                             consent to be contacted by offerors.

                              Example 29: Communicating withdrawal of consent

                              Zhang contacts his superannuation fund, Big Super, by phone to ask about
                              their products. He gives consent to Aisha who works at Big Super to
                              contact him.

                              Zhang later withdraws this consent by email using an email address that is
                              linked to his member account with Big Super. In the email, he states that he
                              does not want to be contacted. Aisha is able to identify that Zhang is



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 36
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              withdrawing the consent, despite the withdrawal being made in a different
                              form to the form in which the consent was originally given. Big Super can
                              therefore accept Zhang’s withdrawal of consent.

                              If Zhang used a social media app (where his username did not assist in
                              clearly identifying him) to post on Big Super’s social media page that he did
                              not want to be contacted, it may be difficult for Big Super to match the
                              withdrawal to the original consent.

                              We would expect that Big Super would take reasonable steps in the
                              circumstances to ascertain the poster’s identity. This could include replying
                              to the post and providing an alternative method of communication by which
                              the consumer could provide the necessary information for Big Super to
                              identify the consumer and match the withdrawal to the original consent.

                              If Zhang does not respond or his identity cannot otherwise reasonably be
                              ascertained, it may not be possible for Big Super to determine that it is no
                              longer able to rely on Zhang’s consent.

              RG 38.118      Once withdrawn or materially varied, the offeror can no longer rely on the
                             original consent to contact the consumer: see Example 30.

                              Example 30: Varying consent

                              Prue fills out an online form on Harmony Insurance’s website requesting a
                              phone call to discuss life insurance. The following day, a Harmony
                              Insurance sales representative calls Prue to discuss their range of
                              products. The sales representative offers to provide a quote, but Prue
                              declines, telling the sales representative that she is no longer interested in
                              receiving calls, but is happy to receive offers by email. A few days later,
                              another sales representative makes a follow-up phone call to Prue to see if
                              she has changed her mind and offers to sell her life insurance.

                              Harmony Insurance should not contact Prue via telephone after she has
                              withdrawn her consent to be contacted by this means. Harmony Insurance
                              should ensure the withdrawal is recorded by the sales representative. Harmony
                              Insurance may contact Prue via email as she indicated on the phone call.

              RG 38.119      A variation does not restart the six-week consent period unless it amounts to
                             a new consent.

              RG 38.120      An offeror should not rely on consent if it becomes evident during the
                             contact that the ongoing consent relied on is no longer positive, voluntary
                             and clear. For example, the offeror should cease contact and no longer rely
                             on the consent if it becomes evident that a consumer:
                             (a)   has no recollection of providing consent;
                             (b)   alleges that they did not provide consent; or
                             (c)   expected the contact to be about a different type of product or a
                                   different topic.

                                   Note: The contact should cease on the basis that the consent has been, in effect,
                                   withdrawn: see paragraphs 5.85 and 5.86 of the Explanatory Memorandum.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                      Page 37
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.121      When a consumer has sought to vary their consent, an offeror may wish to
                             confirm that the consumer’s consent, as varied, remains positive, voluntary
                             and clear prior to relying on it.


                             Keeping records of consumer consent

              RG 38.122      We expect that in practice, to comply with the hawking prohibition an
                             offeror will need to keep records, including information regarding when, in
                             what form, and to what extent an offeror has received consent from a
                             consumer to contact them about the issue or sale of products. This will be
                             true regardless of whether or not the contact was initiated by the offeror.

              RG 38.123      Given that consumers can withdraw or vary their consent at any time, the
                             maintenance of records will be necessary for offerors to demonstrate
                             compliance with the hawking prohibition. We expect offerors to check their
                             records where there is doubt as to whether a consent is in place, or has been
                             withdrawn or varied: see paragraph 5.86 of the Explanatory Memorandum.

              RG 38.124      Examples of records offerors may need to keep include:
                             (a)   the date on which the consent was obtained;
                             (b)   the methods of contact allowed by the consent;
                             (c)   the product or range of products within the scope of the consent;
                             (d)   the circumstances in which the consent was obtained—for example, by
                                   what means the consent was obtained and any information provided to
                                   the consumer before they gave their consent;
                             (e)   any variations to the consent made by the consumer, and the
                                   circumstances and date of the variations;
                             (f)   any withdrawals of consent, and the date of the withdrawals;
                             (g)   any communication made with the consumer before the consent; and
                             (h)   any products issued or sold to the consumer during or in the course of
                                   any communication pursuant to their consent.

                                   Note: For AFS licensees, these records would form part of the risk management systems
                                   and compliance arrangements required by s912A. For more information on AFS
                                   licensee obligations, see Regulatory Guide 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general
                                   obligations (RG 104).

              RG 38.125      How long these records may need to be kept will vary depending on factors
                             such as the product term. Offerors should use their judgement to consider the
                             nature of the product and determine whether documents should be kept for a
                             longer period. If an offeror keeps records only for a short period of time,
                             they may place themselves at risk of being unable to demonstrate
                             compliance with their obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                               Page 38
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




E          Consequences of breaching the hawking
           prohibition

                              Key points

                              A breach of the hawking prohibition is a strict liability offence. The
                              maximum applicable penalty for a breach is:
                              • in the case of an individual, 60 penalty units or six months imprisonment
                                (or both); or
                              • in the case of a body corporate, 600 penalty units (see RG 38.127–
                                RG 38.128).

                              If an offeror breaches the prohibition, a consumer has the right to return the
                              product that was acquired and receive a refund.

                              The way in which a product may be returned and refunded will depend on
                              the type of financial product. However, in each case, the aim will be to
                              compensate the consumer for amounts they paid in the acquisition and
                              maintenance of the product: see RG 38.129–RG 38.147.




Conduct that breaches the hawking prohibition
              RG 38.126      An offeror breaches the hawking prohibition if:
                             (a)   the offeror makes an offer of, or request or invitation to apply for a
                                   financial product;
                             (b)   the offer is made in the course of, or because of, contact with a
                                   consumer;
                             (c)   the contact is a telephone call, meeting, or any other real-time
                                   interaction in the nature of a conversation or discussion; and
                             (d)   the contact is made in the absence of a valid consumer consent.

                                   Note: For general guidance on our approach to the meaning of ‘because of’, see
                                   RG 38.48–RG 38.56. For the meaning of ‘unsolicited’, see RG 38.57–RG 38.62.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                               Page 39
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




General consequences of a breach

              RG 38.127      Under s992A(1) and (9), a breach of the hawking prohibition is a criminal
                             offence, and one of strict liability. The maximum penalties are:
                             (a)   for an individual:
                                   (i)     a fine of 60 penalty units;
                                   (ii)    six months imprisonment; or
                                   (iii)   both; and
                             (b)   for a body corporate, 600 penalty units.

                                   Note: See www.asic.gov.au/penalties for more information about penalties, including
                                   the value of a penalty unit.

              RG 38.128      When a breach occurs, the affected consumer may also have a right to:
                             (a)   return the product (see s992AA); or
                             (b)   undertake civil proceedings against the offeror (see s1324).



Return of a product

              RG 38.129      Under s992AA, if the hawking prohibition has been breached, a consumer
                             has a right to return any financial product issued or sold to them and to
                             receive a refund.

              RG 38.130      We consider it good practice for offerors to include information about the
                             right of return in their communication with consumers.

              RG 38.131      It may be difficult for a consumer to identify that they have been sold or
                             issued a product in breach of the hawking prohibition. Where a consumer
                             makes contact to return a product, the offeror should consult their records to
                             ascertain whether or not any offer, request or invitation was made subject to
                             a valid consent.


                             When the product may be returned

              RG 38.132      Under s992AA(1)(b), a consumer may exercise the right of return within one
                             month and 14 days from the date that the product was issued or sold.

              RG 38.133      However, where a statutory cooling-off period applies to a product under
                             s1019B, then under s992AA(1)(a), the consumer can return the product and
                             obtain a refund within one month after the expiry of the cooling-off period.

              RG 38.134      The right of return does not apply to all financial products subject to the
                             hawking prohibition: see regulation 7.8.24.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                Page 40
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                             Effect of returning a product

              RG 38.135      Under s992AA(2), if a financial product is returned because it was sold or
                             issued in breach of the hawking prohibition, any legal relationship between
                             the consumer and the issuer for that financial product will be terminated with
                             effect from the time of return without penalty to the consumer. This does not
                             affect any legal relationship the consumer may have with the same offeror
                             for other products.

              RG 38.136      Under s992AA(5), where a consumer exercises their right of return, and an
                             offeror accepts the return and issues a refund, a penalty may still apply for
                             the breach of the hawking prohibition.


                             Consumer contact to return products

              RG 38.137      Contact by a consumer to return a product may also give rise to obligations
                             under internal dispute resolution systems that AFS licensees are required to
                             have under s912A. This is because that contact will likely constitute a
                             ‘complaint’ because the consumer expresses dissatisfaction with the
                             financial product and expects a response from the financial product issuer:
                             see Regulatory Guide 271 Internal dispute resolution (RG 271).

              RG 38.138      If a consumer seeks to return a product after the expiration of the statutory
                             period under s992AA, the product issuer may still have obligations under
                             their internal dispute resolution processes in respect of the handling of that
                             contact with the consumer: see s912A and RG 271.



Refunds to consumers

                             Statutory refund

              RG 38.139      Where a consumer returns a product under s992AA, the issuer must provide
                             the consumer with a refund of any amounts paid for the financial product:
                             see paragraph 5.96 of the Explanatory Memorandum. Different
                             considerations might affect how this is done, depending on the product.

              RG 38.140      We expect, consistent with offerors’ approaches more broadly to
                             remediation, that refunds made under s992AA are made in a timely manner.

                             Products with an investment component

              RG 38.141      For products involving invested funds, such as superannuation accounts or
                             interests in managed investment schemes, the amount to be refunded is the
                             amount of initial and subsequent contributions or investments made into the
                             account (excluding any withdrawals or distributions): see reg 7.8.25 of the
                             Corporations Regulations. Offerors of such products will be responsible for



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 41
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                             any shortfall that accrues during the refund period because of a reduction in
                             the value of the interest.

              RG 38.142      As set out in reg 7.8.23 of the Corporations Regulations, in order to exercise
                             the right of return for a superannuation or retirement savings account, the
                             consumer must nominate a superannuation fund, approved deposit fund or
                             retirement savings account into which the refund money is to be paid if the
                             money includes restricted non-preserved benefits or preserved benefits. This
                             means that, in most cases, the consumer must hold or open another
                             superannuation account into which the refund can be paid before the
                             consumer can exercise their right of return. The refund may be paid into the
                             previous superannuation fund if the member still has an account and the
                             member nominates it. The refund may also be paid into another product in
                             the offeror’s fund if the consumer nominates that product.

                             Banking products

              RG 38.143      For banking products, the refund should include any amounts deposited, and
                             any fees charged by the offeror for that account for its establishment or
                             maintenance.

                             Insurance products

              RG 38.144      For insurance products, the consumer’s right to a refund entitles them to a
                             refund of all premiums paid.

                             Market-based products

              RG 38.145      In the case of markets-based products, including but not limited to securities
                             or derivatives, the consumer’s right of refund entitles them to have repaid the
                             amount initially paid for the product. Offerors of such products will be
                             responsible for any shortfall that accrues between the date of acquisition and
                             date of refund.


                             Other remediation obligations

              RG 38.146      The obligation to provide consumer refunds under s992AA must be
                             considered in the context of offerors’ broader legal and equitable obligations
                             to remediate. For example, all AFS licensees have an obligation to ensure
                             that their financial services are provided efficiently, honestly, and fairly: see
                             s912A(1)(a). Complying with this obligation includes AFS licensees taking
                             responsibility for the consequences of their actions if things go wrong when
                             financial products are sold or issued and consumers suffer loss or detriment.
                             This may mean that AFS licensees have to remediate consumers who have
                             suffered loss or detriment as a result of a breach of the hawking prohibition
                             beyond merely refunding any amounts paid.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 42
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




              RG 38.147      In addition, where an offeror identifies that a breach of the hawking
                             prohibition has occurred with respect to one consumer, we expect the offeror
                             to consider whether there may be further breaches relating to the same or
                             similar conduct or compliance failure.

                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 277 Consumer remediation (RG 277).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                        Page 43
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




Appendix: Products exempt from the hawking
provision as a result of ASIC legislative instrument
or class order

Table 1 below sets out all products currently exempt by legislative instruments and class orders in
force under the hawking regime.

Table 1:    Financial products exempt from the hawking prohibition

 Financial product or entity                           Legislative instrument

 Investor directed portfolio service (IDPS)            ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services)
                                                       Instrument 2023/669

 IDPS-like schemes                                     ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services
                                                       Provided Through a Registered Managed Investment
                                                       Scheme) Instrument 2023/668

 Conditional cost schemes                              ASIC Corporations (Conditional Costs Schemes) Instrument
                                                       2020/38

 Employee incentive schemes                            Class Order [CO 14/1001] Employee incentive schemes:
                                                       Unlisted bodies

                                                       Class Order [CO 14/1000] Employee incentive schemes:
                                                       Listed bodies
                                                         Note: See also Regulatory Guide 49 Employee incentive
                                                         schemes (RG 49).

 Employee redundancy schemes                           ASIC Corporations (Employee Redundancy Funds Relief)
                                                       Instrument 2015/1150

 Low value non-cash payment facilities, gift           ASIC Corporations (Non-cash Payment Facilities)
 facilities, prepaid mobile facilities                 Instrument 2016/211

 Private horse breeding schemes                        ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790

 School enrolment deposit schemes and school           ASIC Corporations (School Enrolment Deposits) Instrument
 enrolment debentures                                  2016/812

 Charitable investment fundraisers                     ASIC Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising)
                                                       Instrument 2016/813

 Serviced apartment and like schemes                   ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes)
                                                       Instrument 2016/869

 Property rental schemes                               ASIC Corporations (Property Rental Schemes) Instrument
                                                       2016/870




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                Page 44
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




 Financial product or entity                           Legislative instrument

 Managed discretionary account (MDA) providers         ASIC Corporations (Managed Discretionary Account
 and external MDA custodians                           Services) Instrument 2016/968
 Securities that if acquired would become client
 portfolio assets in relation to MDA services
 provided by a person that was and remains an
 MDA provider

 Market participants who provide MDA services to
 family members only

 Managed investment schemes: Interests not for         ASIC Corporations (Managed Investment Schemes:
 money                                                 Interests Not For Money) Instrument 2016/1107

 Factoring arrangements                                ASIC Corporations (Factoring Arrangements) Instrument
                                                       2017/794

 Mortgage investment schemes with no more than         ASIC Corporations (Mortgage Investment Schemes)
 20 investors                                          Instrument 2017/857

 Nominee and custody services                          ASIC Corporations (Nominee and Custody Services)
                                                       Instrument 2016/1156




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                         Page 45
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




Key terms


                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              AFS licensee              A person who holds an Australian financial services
                                                        licence under s913B of the Corporations Act

                              ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                              ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                        2001

                              consumer                  An existing, potential, or prospective retail client

                              Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001

                              Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                              Regulations

                              Explanatory               Explanatory Memorandum to the Financial Sector Reform
                              Memorandum                (Hayne Royal Commission Response) Bill 2020

                              financial product         A facility through which, or through the acquisition of
                                                        which, a person does one or more of the following:
                                                         makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                         manages financial risk (see s763C); or
                                                         makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                          Note: This is a definition contained in s763A of the
                                                          Corporations Act (see also s763B–765A).

                              Financial Services        Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking,
                              Royal Commission          Superannuation and Financial Services Industry

                              life insurance            A life risk insurance product as described in s764A(1)(e)
                                                        of the Corporations Act

                              managed investment        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                              scheme

                              offer                     An offer of a financial product for sale or issue

                              offeror                   A person who offers, issues, or sells a financial product or
                                                        who invites or requests applications in relation to a
                                                        financial product

                              PDS                       A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that must
                                                        be given to a retail client for the offer or issue of a
                                                        financial product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                        Corporations Act
                                                          Note: See s9 for the exact definition.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                Page 46
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              personal advice           Financial product advice given or directed to a person
                                                        (including by electronic means) in circumstances where:
                                                         the person giving the advice has considered one or more
                                                          of the person’s objectives, financial situation and needs; or
                                                         a reasonable person might expect the person giving the
                                                          advice to have considered one or more of these
                                                          matters
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s766B(3) of the Corporations Act.

                              Pt 7.9 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                        7.9), unless otherwise specified

                              reg 7.8.21A (for          A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                              example)                  example numbered 7.8.22A), unless otherwise specified

                              representative            Means:
                                                         an authorised representative of the licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of the licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of a related body corporate of
                                                          the licensee; or
                                                         any other person acting on behalf of the licensee
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9 of the Corporations Act.

                              retail client             A client as defined in s761G and 761GA of the
                                                        Corporations Act and Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations
                                                        Regulations

                              RG 36 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 36)

                              right of return           A consumer remedy that is available under s992AA of the
                                                        Corporations Act that enables a consumer to return a
                                                        product and receive a refund if the hawking prohibition is
                                                        breached

                              RIS                       Regulation Impact Statement

                              s992A (for example)       A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                        numbered 992A), unless otherwise specified

                              SIS Act                   Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993

                              superannuation            A body corporate or group of individual trustees licenced
                              trustee                   by APRA under s29D of the SIS Act to operate a
                                                        registrable superannuation entity (e.g. superannuation
                                                        fund)

                              unsolicited contact       Contact between a consumer and an offeror that takes
                                                        the form described by s992A(4)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                                     Page 47
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             financial products, harassment or coercion, hawking, insurance, managed
                             investment schemes, misleading or deceptive conduct, Product Disclosure
                             Statement, right of return, securities, superannuation, unsolicited contact


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 36 Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing

                             RG 49 Employee incentive schemes

                             RG 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general obligations

                             RG 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—Conduct and disclosure

                             RG 234 Advertising financial products and services (including credit): Good
                             practice guidance

                             RG 254 Offering securities under a disclosure document

                             RG 271 Internal dispute resolution

                             RG 274 Product design and distribution obligations

                             RG 275 The deferred sales model for add-on insurance

                             RG 277 Consumer remediation


                             Legislative instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Employee Redundancy Funds Relief) Instrument
                             2015/1150

                             ASIC Corporations (Non-cash Payment Facilities) Instrument 2016/211

                             ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790

                             ASIC Corporations (School Enrolment Deposits) Instrument 2016/812

                             ASIC Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising) Instrument
                             2016/813

                             ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes) Instrument
                             2016/869

                             ASIC Corporations (Property Rental Schemes) Instrument 2016/870



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 48
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 38: The hawking prohibition




                             ASIC Corporations (Managed Discretionary Account Services) Instrument
                             2016/968

                             ASIC Corporations (Managed Investment Schemes: Interests Not For
                             Money) Instrument 2016/1107

                             ASIC Corporations (Nominee and Custody Services) Instrument 2016/1156

                             ASIC Corporations (Factoring Arrangements) Instrument 2017/794

                             ASIC Corporations (Mortgage Investment Schemes) Instrument 2017/857

                             ASIC Corporations (Conditional Costs Schemes) Instrument 2020/38

                             ASIC Corporations, Credit and Superannuation (Internal Dispute
                             Resolution) Instrument 2020/98

                             ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services Provided Through
                             a Registered Managed Investment Scheme) Instrument 2023/668

                             ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services) Instrument
                             2023/669

                             Class Order [CO 14/1000] Employee incentive schemes: Listed bodies

                             Class Order [CO 14/1001] Employee incentive schemes: Unlisted bodies


                             Legislation

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001, s12CA–12CC,
                             12DA–12DB, 12DJ

                             Corporations Act 2001, Pts 7.8A and 7.9, s734, 912A, 991A, 992A, 992AA,
                             1019B, 1012I, 1018A, 1041E–1041H, 1324

                             Corporations Regulations 2001, Pt 7.1, regs 7.8.21A, 7.8.23, 7.8.25, 7.8.26

                             Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993, s68A

                             Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021                                       Page 49
