REGULATORY GUIDE 22

Directors’ solvency
declaration

March 2023




About this guide
This guide is for directors and auditors, and their advisers. The objectives of
this guide are to:
    explain the requirements for the directors’ solvency declaration under
     s295(4)(c) and s303(4)(c) of the Corporations Act;
    outline the obligations of directors when making the declaration on the
     solvency of an entity; and
    outline the obligations of the auditor in relation to the directors’ solvency
     declaration.
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in March 2023 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             In February 2026, we made minor changes following the reissue of
                             Regulatory Guide 34 Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC (RG 34).

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Practice Note 22, issued 15 June 1992, rebadged as a
                                     regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act applies to you,
                             as it is your responsibility to determine your obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                                Page 2
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




Contents
                             A      The solvency declaration ................................................................ 4
                             B      Directors’ obligations ...................................................................... 5
                                    Debts to be taken into account .......................................................... 5
                                    Matters to be considered by directors ............................................... 6
                                    Qualified and negative solvency declarations ................................... 7
                             C      Auditor’s obligations ....................................................................... 9
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 11
                             Related information ............................................................................... 12




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                                                        Page 3
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




A          The solvency declaration

                               Key points

                               This section explains that:
                               • the directors’ declaration is part of the financial report and includes the
                                 solvency declaration;
                               • the solvency declaration is required for companies, registered schemes
                                 and sub-funds of corporate collective investment vehicles (CCIVs); and
                               • for registered schemes, the directors of a responsible entity are treated
                                 as the directors of the registered scheme and the directors of the
                                 corporate director of a CCIV are treated as directors of each sub-fund of
                                 the CCIV.


              RG 22.1        The directors’ declaration is part of the financial report under Ch 2M of the
                             Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act): s295(1). The directors’
                             declaration includes a solvency declaration which is a declaration by the
                             directors ‘whether, in the directors’ opinion, there are reasonable grounds to
                             believe that the company, registered scheme or disclosing entity will be able
                             to pay its debts as and when they become due and payable’: s295(4)(c). The
                             directors of the responsible entity must make the declaration for a registered
                             scheme: s285(3)(b).

                                   Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), chapters (Ch), divisions (Div) and parts (Pt)
                                   are to the Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.

              RG 22.2        A solvency declaration is also required in the directors’ declaration for each
                             sub-fund of a retail corporate collective investment vehicle (CCIV):
                             s1232C(2)(b). The directors of the corporate director must make the
                             declaration: s1232C(4)(b). The debts are only those referable to the sub-
                             fund: s1232D(1).

              RG 22.3        In this regulatory guide, ‘entity’ refers to a company, registered scheme,
                             disclosing entity or sub-fund of a CCIV.

              RG 22.4        The half-year financial report of a disclosing entity must also include a
                             directors’ declaration containing a solvency declaration: s303(1) and
                             s303(4)(c). The guidance in this regulatory guide for the annual solvency
                             declaration also applies to the half-year solvency declaration.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                                              Page 4
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




B          Directors’ obligations

                               Key points

                               This section explains the obligations of directors in making the solvency
                               declaration, including:
                               • which debts to take into account in assessing solvency;
                               • matters to be considered by the directors in making the solvency
                                 declaration; and
                               • when directors can give a qualified solvency declaration and when they
                                 should give a negative solvency declaration.




Debts to be taken into account
              RG 22.5        When forming their opinion on the solvency of the entity, the directors must
                             consider the entity’s capacity to pay debts it has incurred as at that date,
                             rather than as at the end of the financial year.

              RG 22.6        The Corporations Act does not directly specify whether, or to what extent,
                             directors should take into account debts which will be incurred in the
                             foreseeable future. We consider that the words, ‘will be able to pay its debts
                             as and when they become due and payable’ (s295(4)(c)) introduce a
                             prospective element into the declaration. Accordingly, in forming their
                             opinion, the directors should consider future debts to the extent that they will
                             compete for payment with the debts existing at the date of the declaration.
                             The prospective period to be considered by the directors is not limited to the
                             date of the subsequent directors’ declaration, but the period up to that
                             subsequent declaration will be of significance to the directors’ opinion.

              RG 22.7        Whether the directors have reasonable grounds for their opinion should be
                             decided on the basis of an objective test as stated by Mahoney JA in Dunn v
                             Shapowloff [1978] 2 NSWLR 235 at 238; (1978) 3 ACLR 775 at 783. It has
                             also been held that ‘unquenchable optimism’ is not a reasonable ground of
                             belief: see CCA v Daff (1971–76) ACLC 28, 756. Directors should also be
                             aware of the sanctions for false or misleading statements (s1308) and false
                             information (s1309).

              RG 22.8        While the solvency declaration is made at a point in time, the duty of
                             directors to prevent insolvent trading under s588G of the Corporations Act
                             applies on an ongoing basis. Directors should therefore review solvency as
                             frequently as the entity’s circumstances require.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                                Page 5
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




Matters to be considered by directors
              RG 22.9        Directors must have reasonable grounds for believing that the entity will be
                             able to pay its debts as and when they fall due. In meeting the reasonable
                             grounds requirement, directors should consider a wide range of information
                             such as:
                             (a)   cash balances or overdrafts, the amount and timing of operating cash
                                   inflows, access to credit lines and undrawn facilities, and the liquidity
                                   of non-core investments;
                             (b)   the timing and amount of payment obligations, supplier credit terms,
                                   debt repayment dates, and the end date for any loan repayment or rent
                                   holidays;
                             (c)   the ability of customers and borrowers (including related parties) to
                                   meet their obligations to the entity, including meeting credit and
                                   repayment terms;
                             (d)   known or likely changes in economic and market conditions, consumer
                                   behaviours and demand, inventory turnover, supply chains, production
                                   processes, and the ability to deliver goods and services;
                             (e)   the ability of the entity to comply with debt covenants and normal terms
                                   of credit, renegotiate debt arrangements, and refinance maturing debt;
                             (f)   the possibility of withdrawal of financial support by major lenders;
                             (g)   the possibility of debt factoring arrangements, customer supply chain
                                   financing or financial support by a parent entity not continuing;
                             (h)   the ability and willingness of a parent or shareholders/owners of the
                                   entity to meet any financial support arrangements;
                             (i)   the solvency of any entities to which the entity has given financial
                                   guarantees or offers of financial support; and
                             (j)   any uncertainties affecting the above.

              RG 22.10       In addition to recording the resolution required by s295(5) or s303(5), it is
                             desirable that the minutes record the basis on which the resolution was made.

              RG 22.11       When forming their opinion on the solvency of the entity, the directors must
                             consider the entity’s capacity to pay debts which it has incurred as at that
                             date, rather than as at the end of the financial year.

              RG 22.12       Directors should appropriately question the information they consider about
                             the entity’s solvency, the reasonableness of any key underlying assumptions,
                             and the reliability of processes used to produce the information. Directors
                             should ensure that the information is consistent with their understanding of
                             the business, the markets in which the entity operates and any other relevant
                             matters.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                                Page 6
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




Qualified and negative solvency declarations
              RG 22.13       Depending on the circumstances of each entity, the solvency declaration may
                             state that:
                             (a)   the directors have reasonable grounds to believe that the company will
                                   be able to pay its debts as and when they become due and payable;
                             (b)   there is a material uncertainty as to whether the company will be able to
                                   pay its debts as and when they become due and payable; or
                             (c)   the directors do not have reasonable grounds to believe that the
                                   company will be able to pay its debts as and when they become due and
                                   payable.

              RG 22.14       The obligation of the directors under s295(4)(c) is to form an opinion
                             whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the entity will be able to
                             pay its debts as and when they become due and payable. The solvency
                             declaration may be qualified if there are material uncertainties—for
                             example, there may be uncertainty as to whether the entity is able to
                             renegotiate borrowings due for repayment. However, directors should not
                             qualify their solvency declaration when the circumstances do not warrant it.
                             A qualified statement will not of itself operate to limit the liability of the
                             directors, nor operate as a substitute for the proper discharge of their
                             responsibilities.

              RG 22.15       Situations may arise when doubt over whether the entity can pay its debts as
                             and when they become due and payable is such that it is not appropriate for
                             directors to sign the directors’ declaration with a qualification. In these
                             situations, the directors should make a negative statement stating that the
                             entity is unable to pay its debts as and when they become due and payable.

              RG 22.16       It is not possible to state in precise terms when a qualification is no longer
                             appropriate. Nevertheless, a qualification should not be an expression of
                             hope or envisage an unlikely scenario. Commonly, the factor determining
                             whether an entity is solvent will be the existence of financial support from a
                             bank or shareholder. For a qualified directors’ declaration to be appropriate,
                             negotiations should at least be underway with a reasonable likelihood of
                             placing the entity in a position where it is able to pay its debts as and when
                             they become due and payable.

              RG 22.17       A qualified or negative statement must be clearly worded and in sufficient
                             detail for the reader to comprehend the statement fully. The statement should
                             identify the item which is the subject of qualification and disclose monetary
                             details where practicable. Where a qualified declaration impinges on the
                             ‘going concern’ assumption as the basis for preparing financial statements,
                             the directors should explain in the financial report their reasons for adopting
                             the assumption in light of the qualified declaration.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                                Page 7
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




              RG 22.18       Similarly, where directors state that there are reasonable grounds to believe
                             the entity will be able to pay its debts as and when they become due and
                             payable despite prima facie indications to the contrary from the financial
                             report, the directors should disclose the reasons for that opinion in order to
                             ensure that the financial report gives a true and fair view.

              RG 22.19       Irrespective of whether the solvency declaration is positive, negative or
                             qualified, a director contravenes the Corporations Act if they fail to prevent a
                             company from incurring a debt when, at the time, there are reasonable
                             grounds for suspecting that the company is insolvent or will become
                             insolvent by incurring the debt: s588G.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                                Page 8
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




C          Auditor’s obligations

                               Key points

                               This section outlines the auditor’s obligations in relation to the solvency
                               declaration, including:
                               • determining whether there is a defect or irregularity in the solvency
                                 declaration; and
                               • reporting suspected contraventions of the insolvent trading provisions of
                                 the Corporations Act to ASIC.


              RG 22.20       The solvency declaration is part of the financial report. The auditor must
                             form an opinion about whether the report complies with the requirements of
                             the Corporations Act. Auditing standards require the auditor to obtain
                             reasonable assurance as to whether the financial report as a whole is free
                             from material misstatement. Whether the entity is solvent could be expected
                             to be material in nature.

              RG 22.21       In this context, the auditor should perform relevant audit work on whether
                             the entity will be able to meet its debts as and when they fall due. The
                             auditor plans the nature, timing and extent of audit work based on their
                             understanding of the business and their assessment of risk, and reassesses the
                             planned audit work taking into account relevant matters identified during the
                             audit. The auditor considers possible indicators of solvency risks, considers
                             information such as that outlined in this regulatory guide, and performs
                             appropriate audit work on the reliability of the information. In performing
                             their work, the auditor should apply appropriate professional scepticism.

              RG 22.22       For financial reporting purposes, solvency is assessed at the time of the
                             directors’ declaration and auditor’s report. Audit work otherwise performed
                             on the income statement, balance sheet and subsequent events may not be
                             sufficient to cover solvency. Audit work on cash flows in a discounted cash
                             flow model for asset impairment testing may not be sufficient for solvency
                             purposes because, for example, the impairment model is unlikely to include
                             all cash flows of the entity and the timing of cash flows in an impairment
                             model may not be sufficiently precise.

              RG 22.23       The auditor has an obligation under s308(3)(a) to describe in the auditor’s
                             report any defect or irregularity in the financial report. The auditor is
                             therefore obliged to consider the solvency declaration and to provide such a
                             description where there is reason to believe that a defect or irregularity
                             exists. Auditing standards may also require a modified opinion or disclaimer
                             of opinion in the auditor’s report. The auditor should also consider the need
                             to include a key audit matter in the audit report for a listed entity.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                                Page 9
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




              RG 22.24       An auditor of an entity who at any time of the year suspects that the insolvent
                             trading provisions of the Corporations Act have been contravened should
                             report the matter to ASIC as required by s311: see RG 34.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                               Page 10
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




Key terms

                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               CCIV                      A corporate collective investment vehicle—a company
                                                         that is registered as a corporate collective investment
                                                         vehicle under the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s9 of the Corporations
                                                           Act.

                               corporate director        The company named in ASIC’s record of the CCIV’s
                                                         registration as the corporate director or temporary
                                                         corporate director of the CCIV
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s1224(3) of the
                                                           Corporations Act.

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               disclosing entity         Has the meaning given in s111AC of the Corporations
                                                         Act

                               entity                    A company, registered scheme, disclosing entity or CCIV

                               registered scheme         A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                         s601EB of the Corporations Act

                               responsible entity        A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined in
                                                         s9 of the Corporations Act

                               RG 34 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 34)

                               s295 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act 2001 (in this example
                                                         numbered 295)

                               solvency declaration      Declaration by the directors of an entity under s295(4)(c)
                                                         or s303(4)(c) of the Corporations Act as to whether, in
                                                         their opinion, there are reasonable grounds to believe
                                                         that the company, registered scheme or disclosing entity
                                                         will be able to pay its debts as and when they become
                                                         due and payable

                               sub-fund                  Has the meaning given in s1222Q of the Corporations Act
                               (CCIVs)                     Note: A sub-fund is established on the day on which it is
                                                           registered: see s1222T.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                                        Page 11
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 22: Directors' solvency declaration




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             auditor’s report, directors’ declaration, financial report, insolvent trading,
                             solvency


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 34 Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act 2001, s285(3)(b), 295(1), 295(4)(c), 295(5), 303(1),
                             s303(4)(c), 303(5), 308(3)(a), 311, 588G, 1232C(2)(b), 1232C(4)(b),
                             1232D(1), 1308, 1309


                             Cases

                             CCA v Daff (1971–76) ACLC 28, 756

                             Dunn v Shapowloff [1978] 2 NSWLR 235; (1978) 3 ACLR 775




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2023                                               Page 12
