REGULATORY GUIDE 29


Financial reporting by
Australian entities in dual-
listed company arrangements
Chapter 2M — Financial reporting and audit

Reissued 26/3/2007
Previous version: Superseded Practice Note 71 [SPN 71] (issued
3/10/2001 and amended 7/5/2003).

From 5 July 2007, this document may be referred to as Regulatory
Guide 29 (RG 29) or Practice Note 71 (PN 71). Paragraphs in this
document may be referred to by their regulatory guide number
(e.g. RG 29.1) or their practice note number (e.g. PN 71.1).


              Contents
              Introduction ............................................................................2
              Financial reporting requirements ........................................2
              Information reported overseas.............................................2
              Attachment to RG 29 .............................................................4




                © Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2007
                                                                       Page 1
REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Financial reporting by Australian entities in dual-listed company arrangements




                  Introduction
                  RG 29.1 This guide refers to reporting requirements for Australian
                  companies that enter into “dual-listed company” (“DLC”)
                  arrangements.

                  RG 29.2 The key features of the DLC structure proposals put to ASIC
                  are summarised in the attachment to this guide. ASIC has considered the
                  features described in the attachment in preparing this guide.


                  Financial reporting requirements
                  RG 29.3 Entities in DLC arrangements reporting under Chapter 2M
                  must prepare financial statements in accordance with Australian
                  accounting standards and other financial reporting requirements of the
                  Corporations Act (“Australian financial reporting requirements”),
                  including Australian equivalents of International Financial Reporting
                  Standards. ASIC would not envisage granting relief to allow the
                  Australian entity to report in accordance with a foreign GAAP.

                  RG 29.4 Given the unique nature of DLC arrangements that involve
                  listed companies in two different jurisdictions, ASIC will consider
                  applications from the Australian listed entity for case-by-case relief
                  from the requirement to distribute single entity financial statements
                  for the listed Australian entity. Conditions of relief would include
                  providing certain summarised single entity financial information in the
                  full financial report, and making the full single entity financial
                  statements available on the entity’s website, and to members free of
                  charge on request (including a standing request).

                  RG 29.5 Any applications for relief in relation to single entity
                  financial statements should be prepared with regard to the
                  requirements of s340 and 342 of the Corporations Act 2001, as well as
                  Regulatory Guide 43 Accounts and audit relief (RG 43) and
                  Regulatory Guide 51 Applications for relief (RG 51).


                  Information reported overseas
                  RG 29.6 The Australian entity in a DLC structure must distribute or
                  make available single entity, consolidated and, where applicable,
                  combined information to all of its members in the manner described in
                  s314–316 of the Corporations Act. The full financial report would
                  include the full single entity information and full consolidated
                  information. Any concise financial report would include concise

                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2007
                                                                                            Page 2
REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Financial reporting by Australian entities in dual-listed company arrangements




                  consolidated information but need not include single entity
                  information. This information would be in accordance with Australian
                  reporting requirements.

                  RG 29.7 In addition, the full financial report and concise financial
                  report should contain a prominent note stating that members of the
                  Australian entity may request that any financial report or other
                  financial statement information (including a reconciliation to foreign
                  GAAP) lodged or distributed in another jurisdiction by either of the
                  two listed entities in the DLC structure (eg a US Form 20F) be sent to
                  them at no charge.

                  RG 29.8 That annual information should be presented in English
                  and should be lodged with the ASX on the next business day after it is
                  disclosed in the other country (see also s323DA of the Corporations
                  Act and, for an exempt foreign entity listed in Australia, rule 1.15.2 of
                  the ASX Listing Rules). The information should also be made freely
                  available on the company’s internet site no later than the next business
                  day after being lodged with the ASX.

                  RG 29.9 The information detailed in RG 29.7] should be sent to
                  members who request that information by the later of:

                  (a) 7 days after the request is made; and
                  (b) 7 days after the information is first lodged with the ASX.
                  RG 29.10 Half-year financial statement information lodged or
                  distributed by either of the DLC companies in countries other than
                  Australia should also be lodged with the ASX (see also s323DA of the
                  Corporations Act and, for an exempt foreign entity listed in Australia,
                  rule 1.15.2 of the ASX Listing Rules). The Australian entity should
                  make this information available on its internet site if the entity’s own
                  half-year financial report is made available either on its own internet
                  site or on the internet site of the other listed entity in the DLC
                  structure. The information should be made freely available no later
                  than the next business day after being lodged with the ASX.

                  RG 29.11 Having regard to the requirements of s295(2) of the
                  Corporations Act, the financial report of the Australian entity in a
                  DLC structure must only include financial statements prepared in
                  accordance with Australian financial reporting requirements and may
                  not include financial statements prepared in accordance with foreign
                  GAAP. Some information may be included in accordance with foreign
                  accounting standards (eg a GAAP reconciliation) provided that it is
                  not in the form of financial statements and is not given undue
                  prominence relative to the information prepared in accordance with
                  Australian financial reporting requirements.

                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2007
                                                                                            Page 3
REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Financial reporting by Australian entities in dual-listed company arrangements




                  Attachment to RG 29

                  Features of DLC structures considered by ASIC
                  1. DLC structures are formed by way of agreements between two
                  entities and amendments to their constitutions. The arrangement does
                  not involve any agreements between shareholders but the shareholders
                  of each company will approve DLC arrangements between the
                  companies and the changes to the constitutions of the companies.

                  2.   The key features of the DLC structures put to ASIC are:

                  (a) Each company retains its legal identity and, except for transfers
                      necessary for dividend equalisation purposes, assets and businesses
                      are only transferred between the two companies for fair values.
                  (b) The votes of the shareholders of one company are taken into account
                      for resolutions of the second company through a mechanism involving
                      the use of special purpose entities, except for certain matters involving
                      “class rights”. The effect is that the shareholder groups of the
                      companies vote on resolutions of both companies as if they were a
                      single group. The votes exercisable by each group of shareholders are
                      in proportion to an “Equalisation Ratio” that is determined on a basis
                      agreed at the commencement of the DLC arrangements. Subsequent to
                      commencement of the DLC arrangements, the Equalisation Ratio may
                      be adjusted for the effects of share capital changes for either entity (eg
                      certain new issues or buy-backs).
                  (c) There is no change in the respective shareholders of each company
                      as a result of entering into the DLC arrangement, although there is a
                      sharing of rights between the shareholders’ groups.
                  (d) The companies have separate boards appointed at separate general
                      meetings, but these boards have common directors.
                  (e) The entities seek to declare equalised dividends and other
                      distributions, on the basis of the Equalisation Ratio.
                  (f) There are arrangements for equalisation payments between the
                      two companies to enable a company that is unable to pay a
                      dividend to do so.
                  (g) The shareholders of each company retain the right to terminate
                      the DLC structure at any time without any significant penalty at a
                      meeting at which the shareholders of the other company have no
                      voting rights on any resolution to effect such a termination,
                      subject to such termination also being separately agreed by the


                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2007
                                                                                            Page 4
REGULATORY GUIDE 71: Financial reporting by Australian entities in dual-listed company arrangements




                       shareholders of the other company in a similar manner at a
                       meeting of the other company.
                  (h) The two companies may enter into deeds of cross guarantee.
                  (i) The constitutions of the companies allow shareholders of the two
                      companies to participate on winding up of both companies by
                      reference to Equalisation Ratio.




                                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2007
                                                                                            Page 5
