REGULATORY GUIDE 91

Horse breeding schemes and
horse racing syndicates

August 2016




About this guide
This guide sets out our approach to regulating horse breeding schemes and
horse racing syndicates under the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act).

It explains:
    our general approach to regulating certain small-scale horse breeding
     schemes and horse racing syndicates;
    the relief we give for certain types of horse breeding schemes and
     horse racing syndicates from the managed investment, Australian
     financial services (AFS) licensing and product disclosure provisions of
     the Corporations Act; and
    our approach to the co-regulatory arrangements between ASIC and
     lead regulators for certain types of horse racing syndicates.
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in August 2016 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 91, issued July 2007, reissued June
                                     2012
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 20 Horse racing schemes, issued
                                     26 February 1996 and Superseded Policy Statement 91 Horse breeding
                                     schemes, issued September 1997


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                              Page 2
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Corporations Act requirements ................................................................4
                                    Our approach to relief ..............................................................................5
                             B      Relief for horse breeding schemes ......................................................6
                                    Our approach ...........................................................................................6
                                    Private broodmare schemes ....................................................................7
                                    Private stallion schemes ..........................................................................8
                             C      Relief for horse racing syndicates .....................................................11
                                    Our approach .........................................................................................11
                                    Co-regulatory arrangements between ASIC and lead regulators..........12
                                    PDS content requirements and approval by lead regulator ...................14
                                    Registration of promoter by lead regulator ............................................15
                                    Limit on the total amount raised ............................................................15
                                    Limit on the number of members ...........................................................16
                                    Other requirements of relief ...................................................................16
                                    Transitional arrangements .....................................................................18
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................21
                             Related information .....................................................................................23




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                                        Page 3
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




Overview
                               Key points

                               ASIC may or may not have a direct regulatory role for any particular horse
                               breeding scheme or horse racing syndicate. If a horse breeding scheme or
                               a horse racing syndicate is a managed investment scheme, ASIC has a
                               regulatory role.

                               This guide sets out our approach to the regulation of certain small-scale horse
                               breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates. In particular, it sets out the relief
                               that may available from the managed investment, Australian financial services
                               (AFS) licensing and product disclosure provisions of the Corporations Act 2001
                               (Corporations Act).




Corporations Act requirements
              RG 91.1        ASIC is Australia’s corporate, financial markets and financial services
                             regulator. Whether we have a direct regulatory role for a horse breeding
                             scheme or horse racing syndicate generally depends on whether the scheme or
                             syndicate is a managed investment scheme.

              RG 91.2        A person who offers to sell, or invites people to buy, interests in a managed
                             investment scheme (promoter) is subject to the Corporations Act—in
                             particular, to various provisions of Chs 5C and 7. Generally, these provisions
                             require the promoter to:
                             (a)   be a public company;
                             (b)   register the managed investment scheme with ASIC;
                             (c)   hold an AFS licence; and
                             (d)   comply with disclosure obligations, including issuing a Product
                                   Disclosure Statement (PDS) or shorter PDS.

                                   Note: See RG 91.17 for information on how the shorter PDS regime applies to horse
                                   breeding schemes.


                             Small-scale offerings

              RG 91.3        The Corporations Act provides some exclusions for small-scale offerings of
                             managed investment schemes. The scheme registration, AFS licensing and
                             PDS disclosure requirements generally do not apply if a managed investment
                             scheme:
                             (a)   has no more than 20 members in total; and
                             (b)   is not promoted by a person who is in the business of promoting
                                   managed investment schemes.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                   Page 4
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




              RG 91.4        In addition, if all offers of interests in the scheme are ‘small-scale personal
                             offers’ (as set out in s1012E), the requirements in RG 91.2(a)–RG 91.2(c) do
                             not apply, but the promoter generally needs to hold an AFS licence.



Our approach to relief
              RG 91.5        Given the nature of horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates, we
                             have granted further exemptions from some of the requirements of the
                             Corporations Act, depending on the activities of the promoter.


                             Relief for horse breeding schemes

              RG 91.6        We have provided conditional relief in ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes)
                             Instrument 2016/790 to the operators of certain broodmare and stallion
                             schemes from the requirements to:
                             (a)   register a managed investment scheme;
                             (b)   hold an AFS licence; and
                             (c)   give PDS disclosure.

              RG 91.7        The relief is limited to small-scale private schemes, and offers to join these
                             schemes generally must be personal offers, as defined in s1012E(5).
                             Section B sets out our approach to the regulation of horse breeding schemes.


                             Relief for horse racing syndicates

              RG 91.8        Certain types of horse racing syndicates are subject to co-regulatory
                             arrangements between ASIC and lead regulators. Lead regulators must be
                             approved by ASIC and we oversee their activities.

              RG 91.9        We have provided conditional relief in ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes)
                             Instrument 2016/790 to promoters of horse racing syndicates from the
                             requirement to register a managed investment scheme. Section C sets out our
                             approach to the regulation of horse racing syndicates.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                             Page 5
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




A          Relief for horse breeding schemes
                               Key points

                               ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790 provides
                               conditional relief to the operators of certain broodmare and stallion
                               breeding schemes from the Corporations Act requirements to register a
                               managed investment scheme, hold an AFS licence and give PDS
                               disclosure.

                               The relief is limited to small-scale private schemes, and offers to join these
                               schemes generally must be personal offers, as defined in s1012E(5).



Our approach
              RG 91.10       In the horse breeding industry it is common practice to syndicate horses for
                             breeding in a way that involves a managed investment scheme in which
                             members in the scheme share the cost of buying or leasing breeding stock.

              RG 91.11       We provide a number of exemptions from the provisions of the Corporations
                             Act that would otherwise apply. We give conditional relief so that the
                             operator of certain broodmare and stallion schemes need not:
                             (a)   register the managed investment scheme with us;
                             (b)   hold an AFS licence; or
                             (c)   give point-of-sale disclosure in a PDS.
                                   Note: Certain obligations still need to be met for offers under this relief (e.g. the
                                   obligations in s1017E and 1017F).

              RG 91.12       Horse breeding is a specialised activity that involves different competencies
                             from those that apply to providers of financial services for other managed
                             investment schemes. In giving this relief, we recognise that small-scale
                             private arrangements to breed horses will not generally warrant regulation as
                             managed investment schemes under the Corporations Act. The relief is not
                             intended to apply to horse breeding schemes operated by professional
                             commercial promoters.

              RG 91.13       For the relief to apply, offers to join these schemes must be personal offers,
                             as defined in s1012E(5) or otherwise permitted to be made without a PDS
                             being given. An offer will be a personal offer where it can only be accepted
                             by the person to whom it is made, and is made to a person likely to be
                             interested in the offer having regard to previous contact, some professional
                             or other connection to the person making the offer, or statements or actions
                             that indicate that they are interested in offers of that kind.

              RG 91.14       The relief is limited to small-scale private horse breeding schemes and the
                             requirement that offers generally be personal offers means that it would not



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                             Page 6
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




                             usually be available for publicly advertised schemes. A limit is applied on
                             the aggregate number of interests that may be issued or sold in any horse
                             breeding scheme by the operator of a private horse breeding scheme
                             (together with any associates) over a 12-month period. This is consistent
                             with relief not applying to persons who could be considered to be conducting
                             a business of significant scale of promoting horse breeding schemes and also
                             excludes those who regularly deal in horse breeding scheme interests: see
                             RG 91.20(b) and RG 91.25(b).
                                   Note: This position is consistent with existing provisions in the Corporations Act
                                   dealing with small-scale offers. For example, see 1012E(2), which applies to 20 issues
                                   based on personal offers made on the basis of the exemption in s1012E within a
                                   12-month period.

              RG 91.15       If the operator of a managed investment scheme is not required to register
                             the scheme because of an exemption under this policy, we have given
                             conditional relief from the requirement to hold an AFS licence which
                             generally applies to any person whose only financial services business is
                             dealing in or advising about interests in that scheme, or who only provides
                             other financial services that do not require an AFS licence.
              RG 91.16       The promoter of a stallion scheme needs to hold an AFS licence for the relief
                             to apply in certain circumstances.

                             Shorter PDS regime

              RG 91.17       Issuers of simple managed investment schemes must comply with shorter,
                             simpler PDS disclosure (shorter PDS regime) from 22 June 2012: see
                             Schs 10A and 10E of the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations
                             Regulations). However, broodmare and stallion schemes are unlikely to fall
                             within the definition of a ‘simple managed investment scheme’ in
                             reg 1.0.02(1) of the Corporations Regulations. Accordingly, the shorter PDS
                             regime does not apply to broodmare or stallion schemes.



Private broodmare schemes
              RG 91.18       Broodmare schemes buy broodmares. The foals of the broodmares are
                             owned by the scheme and generally sold through commercial yearling sale
                             markets. Scheme funds are normally used to buy a number of broodmares,
                             which may be sold later and others purchased.

              RG 91.19       The life of the broodmare scheme is not restricted to the breeding life of a
                             specific mare, unlike stallion schemes where the life of the scheme is
                             restricted to the functional life of a particular stallion. However, some
                             broodmare schemes do provide for the scheme to be wound up at a particular
                             time.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                      Page 7
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




              RG 91.20       Relief for private broodmare schemes is set out in ASIC Corporations (Horse
                             Schemes) Instrument 2016/790. The key features of a private broodmare
                             scheme that is eligible for relief are:
                             (a)   each interest in the scheme must be issued as the result of:
                                   (i)    acceptance of a personal offer, as defined in s1012E(5); or
                                   (ii)   an offer made that does not need a PDS; and
                             (b)   none of the offers of interests in the scheme results in the operator of
                                   the scheme (together with any associates of the operator) having issued
                                   or sold in a 12-month period more than 20 interests in aggregate in a
                                   horse breeding scheme.

              RG 91.21       Below is an example of how the limit on the number of interests that may be
                             issued or sold over a 12-month period in a private broodmare scheme
                             applies.

                               Example: Private broodmare scheme limit

                               A person issues 12 interests in a new horse breeding scheme and, eight
                               months later, issues eight interests in that scheme, or in a different horse
                               breeding scheme. The person could not, in the remaining four months,
                               issue any more interests in a private broodmare scheme in reliance on the
                               relief in ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790.




Private stallion schemes
              RG 91.22       In a stallion scheme, the asset is a specific stallion whose identity is known.
                             The operator usually buys or leases the stallion before the scheme’s
                             fundraising, with the intention of managing the scheme and having the
                             stallion stand either at the operator’s stud or at another nominated stud. The
                             operator is usually the standing stud or owner of the stallion being
                             syndicated. The life of a stallion scheme is limited to the functional life of
                             the stallion, although the scheme may be wound up sooner.

              RG 91.23       Members of stallion schemes are normally experienced in horse breeding
                             practices. They may own broodmares and want to use the stallion’s stud
                             services for their broodmares.

              RG 91.24       In light of this generally being so and also the difficulty in syndicating
                             stallion schemes with a maximum of 20 members, relief applies when
                             interests are issued or sold by an operator who, together with their
                             associates, has not issued or sold more than 40 interests in any horse
                             breeding scheme in the previous 12 months. This limit operates in the same
                             way as the limit for private broodmare schemes: see RG 91.20–RG 91.21.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                             Page 8
                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




                RG 91.25     Relief for private stallion schemes is set out in ASIC Corporations (Horse
                             Schemes) Instrument 2016/790. The key features of a private stallion scheme
                             that is eligible for relief are:
                             (a)   each interest in the scheme must be issued as the result of:
                                   (i)    acceptance of a personal offer, as defined in s1012E(5); or
                                   (ii)   an offer made that does not need a PDS;
                             (b)   none of the offers of interests in the scheme results in the operator of the
                                   scheme (together with any associates of the operator) having issued or sold
                                   in a 12-month period more than 40 interests in aggregate in a horse
                                   breeding scheme;
                             (c)   each promoter of the scheme must at all times hold either:
                                   (i)    an AFS licence; or
                                   (ii)   fully paid interests that are at least 10% of all interests in the
                                          scheme; and
                             (d)   the offer must be made through a stallion scheme agreement that meets
                                   the requirements in ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument
                                   2016/790 (see Table 1 for examples of the provisions that must be
                                   included in the agreement).

Table 1:     Examples of provisions that must be included in the stallion scheme agreement

 Provision                  Description

 One stallion               The agreement must require that the scheme relates to one stallion and no other
                            horse or investment.

 Jurisdiction               The agreement must require that the stallion stand at stud only in Australia for the
                            first three full stud seasons from the date the scheme acquires the stallion (this is to
                            ensure that members can maintain a degree of control).

 Title                      The agreement must provide that members will, as tenants in common, own the
                            whole of the legal and equitable title to the stallion free of encumbrances (this does
                            not preclude giving contractual rights to stud services).

 Financing                  The agreement must prohibit the financing of the purchase of the stallion other than
                            from the proceeds of the issue of interests in the scheme.

 Refunds                    The agreement must provide that persons offered an interest in the scheme receive
                            a full refund of their application money on written request received by the person
                            responsible for accepting payment of the money within three days after the day of the
                            payment of the money.

 Reporting                  The agreement must detail the reporting requirements to members for the financial
                            performance of the scheme for each reporting period.

 Statement of risks         The agreement must include a statement of risks associated with the scheme and
                            the speculative nature of investment in horse breeding schemes.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                  Page 9
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




 Provision                  Description

 Fees and expenses          The agreement must give details of fees and expenses payable to the manager of
 disclosure                 the scheme, the basis of their calculation and disclosures in the financial statements.

 Insurance and              The agreement must give details of insurance, and the veterinary examination
 veterinary                 schedule, of the stallion.
 examination
 schedule

 Stud obligations           The agreement must give details of the obligations of the stud.

 Relief being relied on     The agreement must include a statement that ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes)
                            Instrument 2016/790 is being relied on by the operator or, if relief under Class Order
                            [CO 02/178] Horse breeding schemes: private stallion syndication was being relied
                            on before the commencement of ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument
                            2016/790, a statement to the effect that [CO 02/178] was being relied on.

                            This statement should not be provided in a manner that is likely to mislead. For
                            example, it should not be implied that ASIC has reviewed the agreement or approved
                            the scheme and we encourage operators to explain that the relief is based on the
                            participants’ assumed knowledge of or familiarity with horse breeding arrangements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                               Page 10
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




B          Relief for horse racing syndicates
                               Key points

                               ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790 provides
                               conditional relief to small-scale horse racing syndicates from the
                               requirement to register a syndicate as a managed investment scheme
                               under Ch 5C of the Corporations Act.

                               The relief is based on co-regulatory arrangements between ASIC and lead
                               regulators, who must enter into a memorandum of understanding with ASIC
                               and be approved by ASIC.

                               A lead regulator must approve a PDS for a horse racing syndicate. The
                               PDS must satisfy specific content requirements.

                               The relief is subject to limits on the total amount raised and the number of
                               members in the horse racing syndicate.

                               ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790 includes
                               transitional arrangements for horse racing syndicates for which the relief
                               under Class Order [CO 02/319] Horse racing syndicates was relied on.


Our approach
              RG 91.26       A horse racing syndicate is an arrangement under which a group of people
                             agree to contribute money in return for a share of prizemoney won by a
                             racehorse. The syndicate members may contribute money to obtain a
                             percentage ownership stake in the racehorse, or the owner of the racehorse
                             may lease the racehorse to the operator of the syndicate. Sometimes, other
                             benefits are available to members of a syndicate, such as an entitlement to
                             attend social events.

              RG 91.27       Generally, a horse racing syndicate will be a managed investment scheme
                             under s9 of the Corporations Act. ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes)
                             Instrument 2016/790 provides conditional relief to the promoter and
                             manager of a small-scale horse racing syndicate from the requirement to
                             register the syndicate under the managed investment provisions in Ch 5C of
                             the Corporations Act.

              RG 91.28       The relief is based on:
                             (a)   co-regulatory arrangements between ASIC and ‘lead regulators’, who
                                   must enter into a memorandum of understanding with ASIC and be
                                   approved by ASIC (see RG 91.31–RG 91.37);
                             (b)   a PDS, which satisfies specific content requirements, being approved by
                                   a lead regulator (see RG 91.38–RG 91.42);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                            Page 11
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




                             (c)   the promoter of a horse racing syndicate being registered by a lead
                                   regulator in an Australian state or territory as the promoter of a horse
                                   racing syndicate (see RG 91.43);
                             (d)   the total amount raised from the issue of interests in the horse racing
                                   syndicate not exceeding $500,000 (see RG 91.44–RG 91.45); and
                             (e)   a limit of 50 members in the horse racing syndicate (see RG 91.46).

              RG 91.29       There are various other requirements that must also be satisfied for the relief
                             to be available: see RG 91.47–RG 91.49. For example, a syndicate
                             agreement for the horse racing syndicate must include particular terms.

              RG 91.30       Transitional arrangements apply, including arrangements for a horse racing
                             syndicate that was registered by a body that was a lead regulator under
                             [CO 02/319] and is approved by ASIC under ASIC Corporations (Horse
                             Schemes) Instrument 2016/790: see RG 91.50–RG 91.55.



Co-regulatory arrangements between ASIC and lead regulators
              RG 91.31       Co-regulatory arrangements between ASIC and lead regulators are
                             fundamental to the relief for horse racing syndicates. Co-regulatory
                             arrangements are a more appropriate form of regulation for small-scale horse
                             racing syndicates than regulation under the Corporations Act. The co-
                             regulatory arrangements ensure that the interests of investors in these
                             syndicates continue to be protected, while due recognition is given to the
                             regulatory role played by the lead regulators (generally principal racing
                             clubs) and to their particular expertise.

              RG 91.32       Regulation under the co-regulatory arrangements, subject to appropriate
                             conditions about the content of the agreements, should promote informed
                             and confident investment in the relevant horse racing syndicates, which are
                             small in scale. We have also taken into account that participation in horse
                             racing syndicates often occurs for the pleasure of following horse racing and
                             having a stake in the performance of a racehorse, rather than primarily to
                             produce financial benefits.

              RG 91.33       In ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790, a lead
                             regulator is a body that:
                             (a)   is responsible for the administration of horse racing in an Australian
                                   state of territory;
                             (b)   has entered into a memorandum of understanding with ASIC that
                                   satisfies minimum content requirements; and
                             (c)   has been notified by ASIC in writing that it is approved as a lead
                                   regulator.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                            Page 12
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




              RG 91.34       A lead regulator is a horse racing governing body in an Australian state or
                             territory, with particular expertise in horse racing matters. Under the co-
                             regulatory arrangements, the lead regulators have responsibility for
                             supervising the activities of small-scale horse racing syndicates on a day-to-
                             day basis, while ASIC’s regulatory functions include:
                             (a)   ensuring that the promoter of a horse racing syndicate continues to
                                   satisfy the conditions of its AFS licence; and
                             (b)   supervising the performance of the lead regulators.

              RG 91.35       It is vital to ensure that lead regulators are performing their roles adequately
                             and that ASIC has suitable arrangements in place to monitor and ensure that
                             the lead regulators are doing so.

                             ASIC approval

              RG 91.36       ASIC supervises the activities of lead regulators. We have a general
                             discretion about whether to approve a body as a lead regulator. In broad
                             terms, we may approve a lead regulator if it establishes it is prepared, and
                             has the necessary expertise, to perform a monitoring function for horse
                             racing syndicates.

                             Memorandum of understanding

              RG 91.37       ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790 sets out the
                             minimum content requirements for a memorandum of understanding
                             between ASIC and a lead regulator. The minimum terms include that a lead
                             regulator must perform the functions set out in Table 2.

Table 2:     Minimum terms of memorandum of understanding

 Term                        Description of requirement

 Maintaining a register      The lead regulator must maintain a register of all promoters of horse racing
                             syndicates for which there is reliance on our relief.

 Registration                The lead regulator must register the horse racing syndicates it has agreed to
                             regulate.

 Removal for non-            The lead regulator must remove any promoter who fails to comply with its rules on
 compliance                  the promotion and operation of horse racing syndicates.

 Notifying ASIC              The lead regulator must advise ASIC of the name of any promoter who has been
                             removed from the register.

 Adequate                    The lead regulator must have in place adequate arrangements for approving
 arrangements for            disclosure documents for a syndicate where the lead regulator is satisfied that the
 approving disclosure        disclosure document is accurate and contains the information items required by
                             ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790 and any other
                             information to allow prospective syndicate members to make an informed decision
                             as to whether to acquire an interest in the syndicate. This approval function extends
                             to supplementary PDSs and replacement PDSs.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                               Page 13
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




 Term                        Description of requirement

 Adequate                    The lead regulator must have in place adequate arrangements for reviewing
 arrangements for            disclosure documents within a reasonable timeframe after they are submitted to the
 reasonable timeframe        lead regulator for approval.
 for approval

 Adequate                    The lead regulator must have in place adequate arrangements for ensuring that the
 arrangements for            promoter of a syndicate provides to the lead regulator all documents that are
 receipt of documents        required by ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790.

 Adequate                    The lead regulator must have in place adequate arrangements for dealing with
 arrangements for            complaints and disputes received by the lead regulator about the conduct of
 dealing with disputes       promoters, managers or the operation of horse racing syndicates.

 Adequate                    The lead regulator must have in place adequate arrangements for regularly
 arrangements for            monitoring compliance by promoters and managers with the applicable conditions of
 monitoring                  the instrument, the promoter’s AFS licence and the manager’s AFS licence (if any).
 compliance

 Breach notification         The lead regulator must notify ASIC if the lead regulator identifies conduct by a
                             promoter or manager of a horse racing syndicate that may involve breaches of Ch 7
                             of the Corporations Act, the conditions of the instrument, the conditions of the
                             promoter’s AFS licence or the conditions of the manager’s AFS licence (if any), in
                             addition to taking any appropriate action against the promoter or manager in relation
                             to that conduct.

 Employees and               To ensure that the memorandum of understanding operates effectively, the
 associates to be            memorandum must require the lead regulator to make arrangements under which
 bound by the                the employees and associates of a promoter of a horse racing syndicate that is
 requirements                registered with the lead regulator agree to be bound by the rules and requirements
                             of the lead regulator.

 Lodgement of annual         The lead regulator must lodge with ASIC an annual report of the lead regulator’s
 report                      performance of the functions described in this table.
                                   Note: The timeframe for the lodgement of the annual report is set out in each
                                   memorandum of understanding.




PDS content requirements and approval by lead regulator
              RG 91.38       A PDS for a horse racing syndicate must satisfy the general content
                             requirements for a PDS under Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act. In addition, the
                             PDS for a horse racing syndicate must include specific items of information.

              RG 91.39       The rationale for requiring a PDS for a horse racing syndicate to detail
                             specific items of information is to improve the usefulness of the information
                             and to improve consistency and comparability between PDSs of different
                             syndicates.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                     Page 14
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




              RG 91.40       The specific items of information are listed in section 5(4) of ASIC
                             Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790. The following are
                             examples of the required disclosure items:
                             (a)   the name of each horse to which the horse racing syndicate relates;
                             (b)   the name of the promoter of the horse racing syndicate;
                             (c)   the name of the manager of the horse racing syndicate;
                             (d)   for each horse, the name and contact details of each owner of the
                                   horse’s sire and dam;
                             (e)   for each horse, the purchase price and, where applicable, the passed-in
                                   price;
                             (f)   disclosure of any actual or perceived conflict of interest; and
                             (g)   details of any fees in relation to the syndicate.

              RG 91.41       A PDS for a horse racing syndicate includes any supplementary PDS or
                             replacement PDS for the horse racing syndicate.

                             Approval by lead regulator

              RG 91.42       The PDS for a horse racing syndicate must be approved by the lead
                             regulator. The promoter cannot provide a PDS to a prospective member
                             unless the promoter has received the prior approval of the disclosure
                             document from the lead regulator.


Registration of promoter by lead regulator
              RG 91.43       The promoter of a horse racing syndicate must be registered by a lead
                             regulator in an Australian state or territory as the promoter of a horse racing
                             syndicate. For the relief to be available, the promoter must register the
                             syndicate with the lead regulator within 45 days of being fully subscribed.


Limit on the total amount raised
              RG 91.44       The relief is subject to a limit of $500,000 on the total amount raised by the
                             issue of interests in a horse racing syndicate to members.

              RG 91.45       We consider that an investment limit of $500,000 achieves a suitable balance
                             between:
                             (a)   allowing promoters to offer members of the public an opportunity to
                                   participate in horse racing syndicates free from the Ch 5C requirements;
                                   and
                             (b)   not exposing syndicate members to an unreasonable risk of financial
                                   loss.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                            Page 15
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




Limit on the number of members
              RG 91.46       A horse racing syndicate must have no more than 50 members to be eligible
                             to rely on the relief.


Other requirements of relief
              RG 91.47       There are other requirements that must be satisfied for the relief to be
                             available for a horse racing syndicate: see section 5(2) of ASIC Corporations
                             (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790. In addition to the limits on the
                             amount raised by a horse racing syndicate and the number of members of a
                             syndicate, the following matters must be satisfied for the relief to be
                             available:
                             (a)   the promoter must hold an AFS licence that authorises the promoter to
                                   provide financial services in relation to the horse racing syndicate;
                             (b)   the promoter must be registered by a lead regulator as the promoter of
                                   the horse racing syndicate;
                             (c)   the PDS for the horse racing syndicate must contain the required
                                   information (see RG 91.38–RG 91.41) and be approved by the lead
                                   regulator;
                             (d)   the horse racing syndicate must be registered with the lead regulator;
                             (e)   the registration of the horse racing syndicate must occur within 45 days
                                   of being fully subscribed and must remain registered with the lead
                                   regulator;
                             (f)   where applications for the minimum number of interests in the
                                   syndicate are not received and the minimum amount for the syndicate
                                   has not been raised within six months after the date the PDS for the
                                   syndicate is approved by the lead regulator—all subscription money
                                   received, plus any accrued interest, must be repaid within 10 business
                                   days after the expiry of that six-month period; and
                             (g)   within six months after the date on which the PDS in respect of the
                                   syndicate is approved by the lead regulator, all money received from
                                   any person who applied to participate in the syndicate, together with
                                   interest (if any) which accrued in respect of that money, is repaid within
                                   10 business days after the end of that six-month period; and
                             (h)   a syndicate agreement for the horse racing syndicate must:
                                   (i)    include particular terms, unless those terms are excluded or
                                          changed with the written agreement of all members of the horse
                                          racing syndicate; and
                                   (ii)   set out the obligations of the manager of the horse racing syndicate.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                            Page 16
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




              RG 91.48       A promoter or manager must also satisfy various conditions on an ongoing
                             basis under the terms of the relief. These requirements are in addition to the
                             essential elements, or prerequisites, of the relief. The conditions are set out
                             in sections 5(6)–(14), inclusive, of ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes)
                             Instrument 2016/790.

              RG 91.49       Table 3 and Table 4 summarise the conditions of the relief that are relevant
                             to managers and promoters.

Table 3:     Conditions of relief—Managers of a horse racing syndicate

 Condition                   Description of condition

 Maintaining records         The manager must:
                              keep certain accounting records;
                              lodge the accounts for the syndicate with the lead regulator within 90 days after
                               the end of each financial year;
                              lodge a copy of the accounts for the syndicate with ASIC within 14 days after
                               receiving a written request from ASIC; and
                              have a separate account for depositing and paying all money relating to the
                               operation of the syndicate.

 Managing established        The manager must manage the scheme in accordance with the syndicate
 schemes                     agreement.


Table 4:     Conditions of relief—Promoters of a horse racing syndicate

 Condition                   Description of condition

 Licensing and               The promoter must comply with the conditions on its AFS licence.
 registration

 Setting up new              Before or on registration of the syndicate with the lead regulator, the promoter must
 schemes                     ensure that either:
                              the members of the syndicate have unencumbered title to the whole of the
                               syndicate horses; or
                              the members of the syndicate lease the whole of the syndicate horses under a
                               finance lease agreement in standard form approved by the lead regulator.

                             The promoter must not advertise horse racing syndicate interests or publish any
                             statement that is reasonably likely to induce people to acquire syndicate interests
                             without the prior approval of the lead regulator.

                             The promoter must:
                              give a PDS only if it has been approved by the lead regulator; and
                              if it is not the manager of the syndicate, state in any PDS that the manager will be
                               required to manage the syndicate in accordance with the terms of any agreement
                               governing the syndicate approved by the lead regulator and any rules, regulations
                               or guidelines made by the lead regulator in respect of such manager or
                               management.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                               Page 17
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




 Condition                   Description of condition

 Maintaining records         The promoter must promptly provide the lead regulator with a copy of each of the
                             following:
                              the syndicate agreement and any changes to the syndicate agreement;
                              any finance lease agreement and any changes to the finance lease agreement;
                              any other agreement, and any changes to such an agreement, establishing or
                               affecting the syndicate;
                              any other agreement, and any changes to such an agreement, that relates to the
                               syndicate and to which a member of the syndicate is a party;
                              each PDS for a syndicate;
                              any other information to be provided by the promoter to an offeree in relation to
                               the syndicate, before providing the information to the offeree;
                              any advertisement for interests in the syndicate; and
                              any finance lease agreement and any changes to the finance lease agreement.
                             Within 45 days of the syndicate being fully subscribed, the promoter must register
                             the syndicate with the lead regulator.

 Managing established        The promoter must:
 schemes                      provide any assistance or information reasonably required by the lead regulator;
                              not engage in acts or omissions in relation to the horse racing syndicate unless
                               the promoter reasonably believes those acts or omissions are in compliance with
                               any rules, regulations or guidelines made by the lead regulator that apply to the
                               promoter in relation to the horse racing syndicate;
                              comply with any rules, regulations or guidelines made by the lead regulator to
                               ensure the syndicate is honestly, efficiently and fairly operated;
                              provide any assistance or information reasonably required by ASIC; and
                              comply with the requirement to give periodic reports to members of a syndicate
                               under s1017D as if interests in the syndicate were a managed investment
                               product.




Transitional arrangements
              RG 91.50       As a transitional arrangement, the relief under [CO 02/319] will continue to
                             operate, despite the repeal of [CO 02/319], until 31 December 2016. This
                             recognises that, in relation to a horse racing syndicate for which the
                             promoter or manager was entitled to rely on the relief under [CO 02/319],
                             the relief should be continued on a temporary basis. The continuation of the
                             relief will allow ASIC a reasonable opportunity to consider an application by
                             the body, which was the lead regulator under [CO 02/319] in respect of the
                             syndicate, for approval as a lead regulator under ASIC Corporations (Horse
                             Schemes) Instrument 2016/790.

              RG 91.51       A body that was a lead regulator under [CO 02/319] will not automatically
                             be a lead regulator under ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument
                             2016/790. For a body to continue its status as a lead regulator, it must be
                             approved by ASIC as a lead regulator for the purposes of the new



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                              Page 18
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




                             instrument. For the co-regulatory arrangements between ASIC and horse
                             racing governing bodies to operate effectively, it is vital that all lead
                             regulators, including bodies that were lead regulators under [CO 02/319], be
                             approved by ASIC. In the situation where a body that was a lead regulator
                             under [CO 02/319] is approved as a lead regulator under the new instrument,
                             the transitional provisions of the new instrument will be relevant.

              RG 91.52       Transitional arrangements apply to a horse racing syndicate that was
                             registered by a body that was a lead regulator under [CO 02/319] and is
                             approved by ASIC under ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument
                             2016/790. Certain requirements that the promoter or manager, as the case
                             may be, satisfied under [CO 02/319] will be recognised to ensure:
                             (a)   the transition from [CO 02/319] to the new instrument is as smooth as
                                   possible; and
                             (b)   unnecessary burdens are not imposed on promoters and managers.

              RG 91.53       Table 5 sets out the adaptations to the requirements that are available to a
                             horse racing syndicate that was registered by a body that was a lead regulator
                             under [CO 02/319] and is approved by ASIC under ASIC Corporations
                             (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790.

Table 5:     Transitional arrangements

 Condition                   Transitional arrangement

 PDS                         The PDS for the syndicate does not have to be updated to include the items
                             specified in ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790. This is
                             based on the PDS for the syndicate satisfying the content requirements that applied
                             under [CO 02/319] at the time the PDS was issued.

                             Where a lead regulator has already approved a PDS for the purposes of
                             [CO 02/319], the promoter does not have to have the PDS reapproved.

                             The usual prohibition on a promoter giving a PDS to a prospective member without
                             the lead regulator having first approved the PDS does not apply.

 Refunds                     The requirement to return all application money for a syndicate that is not fully
                             subscribed within six months of the date the PDS was approved by the lead
                             regulator does not apply.
                                   Note: In this situation, [CO 02/319] imposed a requirement that the promoter return
                                   application money and any interest accrued within 10 business days of the end of that
                                   six-month period. This exclusion is based on the promoter having complied with the
                                   refund requirements of [CO 02/319] for any syndicate that failed under [CO 02/319].

 Registration with lead      The requirement that the syndicate is registered with the lead regulator within
 regulator                   45 days of being fully subscribed does not apply.

                             The promoter will need to have originally registered the horse racing syndicate with
                             the existing lead regulator within 45 business days of the scheme being fully
                             subscribed.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                      Page 19
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




 Condition                   Transitional arrangement

 Provision of                To the extent that [CO 02/319] required a promoter to provide specific documents to
 documents                   the lead regulator, these documents do not have to be provided to the lead
                             regulator again. These documents are:
                              the syndicate agreement;
                              any changes to the syndicate agreement;
                              any finance lease agreement;
                              any changes to the finance lease agreement; and
                              any other agreement that establishes or affects the syndicate and any changes to
                               such an agreement.

                             This exemption is based on the documents or information, which the promoter
                             provided to the lead regulator, having satisfied the requirements that applied under
                             [CO 02/319].

                             However, the promoter must give the lead regulator any updates to these
                             documents.

  Advertising approval       Where a lead regulator has already given a promoter approval to advertise interests
                             in a syndicate or to publish any statement that is reasonably likely to induce people
                             to acquire interests in the syndicate, the promoter does not have to obtain approval
                             again.

                             The promoter must have obtained approval from the existing lead regulator for any
                             advertisements or publications previously issued.

 Title                       Where the promoter ensured for the purposes of [CO 02/319] that the members of
                             the syndicate have unencumbered title to the whole of the syndicate horses, or that
                             the members of the syndicate lease the whole of the syndicate horses under a
                             compliant finance lease agreement, the promoter does not have to ensure
                             themselves of these matters again.


              RG 91.54       The transitional arrangements also cover the situation where [CO 02/319]
                             was relied on for a horse racing syndicate registered by a body that:
                             (a)   was a lead regulator under [CO 02/319]; and
                             (b)   when the new instrument takes effect, was not approved by ASIC as a
                                   lead regulator for the purposes of ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes)
                                   Instrument 2016/790.

              RG 91.55       In this situation, the promoter of the syndicate must ensure that both the
                             promoter and the syndicate are registered with a lead regulator approved
                             under ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790 within six
                             months of the instrument taking effect. A lead regulator may, in registering a
                             syndicate for which the promoter and manager were entitled to rely on the
                             relief under [CO 02/319], take into account the operation of the transitional
                             arrangements for the syndicate. This allows the new lead regulator to rely on
                             things done by the previous lead regulator under [CO 02/319], if appropriate.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                              Page 20
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




Key terms

                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                         the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                         on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                         services
                                                                 Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                               AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                         Corporations Act
                                                                 Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               broodmare scheme          A managed investment scheme where a broodmare or
                                                         broodmares are bought and maintained and their
                                                         offspring sold for the benefit of members

                               [CO 02/178] (for          An ASIC class order (in this example numbered 02/178)
                               example)                          Note: Legislative instruments made from 2015 are referred
                                                                 to as ASIC instruments.

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                               Regulations

                               horse breeding            A managed investment scheme that has a principal
                               scheme                    purpose of breeding horses

                               horse racing              A managed investment scheme that has a principal
                               syndicate                 purpose of racing one or more horses and distributing
                                                         prizemoney won by the horse or horses to the members
                                                         of the scheme

                               lead regulator            A body that:
                                                          is responsible for the administration of horse racing in
                                                           an Australian state or territory;
                                                          has entered into a memorandum of understanding with
                                                           ASIC that satisfies the mandatory content requirements
                                                           for a memorandum of understanding under ASIC
                                                           Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790;
                                                           and
                                                          has been notified by ASIC in writing is approved as a
                                                           lead regulator for the purposes of ASIC Corporations
                                                           (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790

                               managed investment        A scheme that is a managed investment scheme as
                               scheme                    defined in s9 of the Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                     Page 21
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               manager                   For a horse racing syndicate, means the person:
                                                          appointed as manager from time to time in accordance
                                                           with the syndicate agreement; or
                                                          otherwise appointed as manager of the syndicate from
                                                           time to time with the approval of the lead regulator.
                                                         For a private stallion scheme, means the person named
                                                         as manager in the stallion scheme agreement

                               member                    A person who contributes money to a managed
                                                         investment scheme or who acquires an interest in the
                                                         scheme from a member

                               Product Disclosure        A document that must be given to a retail client in relation
                               Statement (PDS)           to the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance
                                                         with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                                 Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                               promoter                  A person who offers to sell, or invites people to buy,
                                                         interests in a managed investment scheme

                               s1012E (for example)      A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 1012E), unless otherwise specified

                               shorter PDS               A PDS that is required to comply with the shorter PDS
                                                         regime

                               shorter PDS regime        The requirements set out in Div 3A of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                         Corporations Act as modified by Subdivs 4.2 to 4.2C and
                                                         Schs 10B, 10C, 10D and 10E of the Corporations
                                                         Regulations, which prescribe the content and length of
                                                         the PDS for first home saver accounts, margin loans,
                                                         superannuation products and simple managed
                                                         investment schemes

                               stallion scheme           A managed investment scheme where a stallion or
                                                         stallions are bought and stud services by the stallion(s)
                                                         provided for the benefit of each of the members of the
                                                         scheme

                               syndicate agreement       An agreement governing the horse racing syndicate that
                                                         is approved by the lead regulator and that is legally
                                                         enforceable as between the manager of the syndicate
                                                         and the members of the syndicate




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                                    Page 22
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 91: Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             AFS licence, Australian financial services (AFS) licence, horse breeding
                             schemes, horse racing syndicates, lead regulator, managed investment
                             schemes, promoters, small-scale offerings


                             Legislative instruments

                             [CO 02/178] Horse breeding schemes: private stallion syndication

                             [CO 02/319] Horse racing syndicates

                             ASIC Corporations (Horse Schemes) Instrument 2016/790


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Pt 7.9, Chs 5C and 7, s9, 708(1), 1012E, 1012E(2),
                             1012E(5), 1017D, 1017E, 1017F and 1020D

                             Corporations Regulations, Schs 10A and 10E, reg 1.0.02(1)


                             Consultation paper

                             CP 242 Remaking ASIC class orders on horse racing syndicates and horse
                             breeding schemes


                             Report

                             REP 491 Response to submissions on CP 242 Remaking ASIC class orders
                             on horse racing syndicates and horse breeding schemes




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2016                                            Page 23
