REGULATORY GUIDE 8

Administrative hearings:
Principles and conduct

November 2022




About this guide
This guide is for persons who are the subject of ASIC’s administrative
hearings.

This guide sets out the principles and procedures adopted in the conduct of
ASIC’s administrative hearings.
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in November 2022 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded guide Hearings practice manual: The principles of, and
                                     how we conduct, administrative hearings, issued 14 May 1998, reissued
                                     22 October 2000 and 7 March 2002, and rebranded as Regulatory
                                     Guide 8 on 5 July 2007.


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act, the National
                             Credit Act and other applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility
                             to determine your obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                             Page 2
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Scope of this guide ............................................................................ 4
                                    Our obligation to hold hearings .......................................................... 5
                                    ASIC’s powers when conducting our hearings .................................. 6
                                    Guiding principles for conducting administrative hearings ................ 7
                             B      Conducting administrative hearings ............................................. 9
                                    Our approach to administrative hearings ........................................... 9
                                    Notice of hearing ................................................................................ 9
                                    Serving the notice of hearing or notice to demonstrate ................... 11
                                    Time to prepare ............................................................................... 11
                                    Joint and concurrent hearings ......................................................... 12
                                    Who can attend a hearing................................................................ 12
                                    Stop order hearings ......................................................................... 13
                                    Assistant to the delegate ................................................................. 15
                                    The hearing may be held in public or in private ............................... 15
                                    Privacy notice .................................................................................. 16
                                    Giving false evidence ....................................................................... 16
                                    Witnesses ........................................................................................ 16
                                    Summoning a person to attend ....................................................... 16
                                    Taking an oath or affirmation ........................................................... 17
                                    Impartial decision makers must be free from bias ........................... 17
                                    The rules of evidence do not apply .................................................. 18
                                    The material and evidence you need for the hearing ...................... 18
                                    There is no ‘burden of proof’ ............................................................ 20
                                    When a hearing should be adjourned .............................................. 20
                                    Written reasons ................................................................................ 21
                                    Publication of our decisions ............................................................. 21
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 23
                             Related information ............................................................................... 25




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                                      Page 3
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




A          Overview


                              Key points

                              Persons who may be affected by the exercise of certain of ASIC’s
                              administrative powers must be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard
                              by a delegate of ASIC before a decision is made.

                              The delegate conducting the hearing is an impartial decision maker who
                              exercises an administrative, and not a quasi-judicial, function.

                              The rules of evidence and court rules do not apply to our administrative
                              hearings and there is no burden of proof in this type of proceeding.




Scope of this guide
              RG 8.1         This guide sets out the principles and procedures we adopt in conducting
                             administrative hearings held for the purpose of giving a person their
                             statutory right to be heard.

              RG 8.2         The Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) and the National Consumer
                             Credit Protection Act 2009 (National Credit Act) specifically give to certain
                             persons a statutory right to a hearing. This guide deals only with hearings
                             conducted in accordance with that statutory right to be heard.

              RG 8.3         Where in this guide we refer to ‘you’, we are referring to the reader on the
                             assumption that the reader is the person potentially affected by a decision
                             and has a statutory right to a hearing.


                             What this guide does not deal with

              RG 8.4         This guide does not deal with administrative decisions that do not require a
                             hearing. For example, decisions:
                             (a)   under the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993; or
                             (b)   excluding a body from relying on the transaction-specific prospectus
                                   disclosure rules that apply to continuously quoted securities under s713
                                   of the Corporations Act.

              RG 8.5         This guide also does not deal with:
                             (a)   ASIC’s power to accept court enforceable undertakings; or
                             (b)   the conduct of matters referred to the Markets Disciplinary Panel, the
                                   Financial Services and Credit Panel or committees convened under Pt 2
                                   of Sch 2 (Insolvency Practice Schedule (Corporations)) to the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                             Page 4
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                                   Corporations Act to consider liquidator registration and disciplinary
                                   matters.

                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 100 Court enforceable undertakings (RG 100), Regulatory
                                   Guide 216 Markets Disciplinary Panel (RG 216), Regulatory Guide 263 Financial
                                   Services and Credit Panel (RG 263), and Regulatory Guide 258 Registered liquidators:
                                   Registration, disciplinary actions and insurance requirements (RG 258).


                             How this guide refers to laws

              RG 8.6         This guide refers to some sections of laws. Sometimes their content is stated
                             briefly. You should refer to the actual terms of the statute. You should not
                             rely on the short summary in this guide to accurately or fully state the effect
                             of a section.



Our obligation to hold hearings
              RG 8.7         ASIC has various powers under the Corporations Act and the National
                             Credit Act. Some of these powers can only be exercised after the person
                             potentially affected by the exercise of the power has been given an
                             opportunity to be heard.

              RG 8.8         There are two broad circumstances where we conduct administrative
                             hearings:
                             (a)   protective order hearings—which we hold when we are contemplating
                                   using ASIC’s administrative powers to make orders that protect the
                                   public generally, and investors and consumers in particular; and
                             (b)   licensing and registration application hearings—which we hold before
                                   we decide whether it is appropriate to refuse to grant a licence (see, for
                                   example, s913B(5) of the Corporations Act and s41 of the National
                                   Credit Act) or to register a person as an auditor (see s1280(8) of the
                                   Corporations Act).

              RG 8.9         There are a number of specific provisions of the Corporations Act and
                             National Credit Act that require ASIC to offer a person an opportunity to be
                             heard. This guide does not set out all of those provisions, but the most
                             common provisions that provide a statutory right to be heard are:
                             (a)   protective order hearing provisions, which cover:
                                   (i)     orders to disqualify a person from managing corporations (s206F
                                           and 206GAA of the Corporations Act);
                                   (ii)    orders to suspend or cancel an Australian financial services (AFS)
                                           licence (s915C of the Corporations Act);
                                   (iii)   financial services banning orders (s920A of the Corporations Act);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                 Page 5
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                                   (iv)    orders to suspend or cancel an Australian credit licence (credit
                                           licence) (s55 of the National Credit Act);
                                   (v)     credit services industry banning orders (s80 of the National Credit
                                           Act);
                                   (vi)    stop orders relating to securities and financial products (s739,
                                           s994J and 1020E of the Corporations Act); and
                                   (vii) infringement notices for alleged contraventions of continuous
                                           disclosure provisions (s1317DAC of the Corporations Act).

                                   Note: Also see Regulatory Guide 73 Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement
                                   notices (RG 73).

                             (b)   licensing and registration application hearing provisions, which cover:
                                   (i)     AFS licensing decisions (s913B and 914A of the Corporations
                                           Act);
                                   (ii)    credit licensing decisions (s41 and 45 of the National Credit Act);
                                           and
                                   (iii)   registration of auditors (s1280 of the Corporations Act).



ASIC’s powers when conducting our hearings
              RG 8.10        The powers ASIC has in conducting our hearings are set out in Div 6 of Pt 3
                             of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC
                             Act) and Div 2 of Pt 6-5 of the National Credit Act.

              RG 8.11        We must conduct our administrative hearings with as little technicality and
                             formality, and as expeditiously, as possible. However, we must balance this
                             with the need for a proper consideration of the issues in question.

              RG 8.12        When conducting administrative hearings we must comply with the
                             requirements of procedural fairness: s59(2)(c) of the ASIC Act and
                             s285(2)(c) of the National Credit Act. These are not a fixed body of rules.
                             Procedural fairness may be provided in a variety of ways, depending on the
                             nature of the power and the particular circumstances. To ensure our hearings
                             are fair, we must adopt flexible procedures and not apply them rigidly
                             without regard to the issues under consideration: see Kioa v West (1985) 159
                             CLR 550 and Salemi v Mackellar [No 2] (1977) 137 CLR 396 at 444.

              RG 8.13        The purpose of administrative hearings is, as stated by Lee J in Nam Bee
                             (Australia) Pty Ltd v Corporate Affairs Commission (NSW) (1987) 12 ACLR
                             391, to:
                                   … enable the Commission to see and hear the applicant and to receive
                                   whatever evidence relevant to the application he chooses to put forward.
                                   The Commission can then, on the information which it has collected, and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                 Page 6
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                                  on the information provided and submissions made by the applicant, make
                                  a proper and just decision …

              RG 8.14        Hearings are conducted by an ASIC staff member who has been delegated
                             the power to hold hearings (the delegate). The delegate has all the powers
                             given to ASIC under Div 6 of Pt 3 of the ASIC Act and Div 2 of Pt 6-5 of
                             the National Credit Act. The delegate decides whether to exercise ASIC’s
                             powers after considering the evidence and submissions put by you, or on
                             your behalf, and other relevant matters.

              RG 8.15        In conducting a hearing the delegate exercises a true administrative function
                             and not a quasi-judicial function: Boucher v ASC (1996) 44 ALD 499. It
                             follows that the traditional rules of procedure of courts or quasi-judicial
                             bodies do not apply to our administrative hearings.



Guiding principles for conducting administrative hearings
              RG 8.16        ASIC delegates conducting administrative hearings are guided by the
                             principles set out in Table 1.

Table 1:     Principles for administrative hearings

 Principle                    Explanation

 1   The opportunity to       Generally you must have the opportunity to be heard before we make a decision
     be heard                 that may be adverse to your interests. This opportunity includes your right to
                              appear before ASIC and present your:
                               submissions, either in writing or orally; and
                               evidence that addresses the issues of significance or of concern to ASIC.

 2   Your entitlement to      You are entitled to:
     a notice                  know the subject matter of the hearing and, in particular, the issues that are of
                                concern to ASIC and for which there is a risk of ASIC making an adverse
                                finding;
                               know the circumstances that may cause ASIC to make a decision against you;
                                and
                               have reasonable time to prepare your response.

 3   Your right to an         You have the right to have the decision made by a person who has an open mind
     impartial decision       on the decision that should be made.
     maker

 4   Findings of fact are     Any findings of fact that we are required to make in a hearing must be based on
     made on a sound          material that is relevant, credible and probative, but the rules of evidence do not
     basis                    apply: see s59(2)(a) of the ASIC Act and s285(2)(a) of the National Credit Act.

 5   There is no burden       In administrative hearings there is no burden of proof. It is simply a matter of the
     of proof                 facts that the delegate finds established on all the material before them. As a
                              practical matter, however, sometimes you may need to present material that
                              supports you.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                               Page 7
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




 Principle                    Explanation

 6   Court practice does      The rules of evidence and the usual court rules of procedure and practice do not
     not apply                apply to our administrative hearings: see s59(2)(a) of the ASIC Act and s285(2)(a)
                              of the National Credit Act. The procedures we use, however, give you the
                              opportunity to present evidence and to make submissions.

 7   Applying ASIC            We will determine each matter on its merits. But, in making a decision, we are
     policy                   entitled to consider ASIC policy.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                               Page 8
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




B          Conducting administrative hearings


                              Key points

                              Administrative hearings are not court hearings. They are conducted
                              informally and as quickly as possible. Generally, ASIC considers that
                              28 days is sufficient time to prepare for an administrative hearing in most
                              matters.

                              They are not adversarial proceedings; rather, they are inquisitorial hearings.

                              This section describes our usual practices and procedures. However, we
                              may vary or adapt our practices and procedures to deal with particular
                              cases if that is appropriate.




Our approach to administrative hearings
              RG 8.17        Our administrative hearings are conducted informally and as quickly as
                             possible. They should not be compared to a court or other judicial process.
                             They are a critical part of our decision-making process. They are used both
                             in finding the facts about a matter and in considering the significance of
                             those facts to the law. A hearing should not be approached on the basis of a
                             contest between you, as the affected person, and ASIC (i.e. they are not
                             ‘adversarial’ proceedings). Nor should a hearing be treated as an appeal.

              RG 8.18        As Lee J in Nam Bee (Australia) Pty Ltd v Corporate Affairs Commission
                             (NSW) (1987) 12 ACLR 391 stated:
                                  The hearing … is not to be conducted with formality as in a court or even
                                  as in tribunal, its purpose being to ensure that the applicant has the
                                  opportunity to put before the Commission submissions and evidence on the
                                  matters that he chooses, which are relevant to the application. The hearing
                                  is not to be conducted as an appeal against a contemplated refusal by the
                                  Commission of the application. It is not to be conducted as if it were
                                  a contest between the Commission and the applicant. (Emphasis added)

              RG 8.19        Our procedures aim to ensure that our administrative hearings are conducted
                             effectively and fairly.



Notice of hearing

                             Notices for matters other than director disqualifications

              RG 8.20        When we are considering whether we should exercise ASIC’s protective
                             powers (other than ASIC’s powers under s206F and s206GAA of the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                             Page 9
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             Corporations Act to disqualify directors) or ASIC’s licensing powers (which
                             require a hearing to be held before we make a decision), we will send you a
                             notice about the hearing. Generally, the notice will tell you:
                             (a)   under what provisions of the Corporations Act or National Credit Act
                                   we are conducting the hearing;
                             (b)   the purpose of the hearing;
                             (c)   the date, time and place of the hearing (see s57 of the ASIC Act and
                                   s283 of the National Credit Act);
                             (d)   that, if you do not want to appear, you may write a submission which
                                   we will take into account (see s57(3) of the ASIC Act and s283(3) of
                                   the National Credit Act);
                             (e)   what happens if you do not respond to the notice (i.e. we will make a
                                   decision on the basis of the information available);
                             (f)   the issues of concern to ASIC and the documents on which those
                                   concerns are based;
                             (g)   who can give you further information about the hearing and their
                                   contact details (this will usually be the delegate); and
                             (h)   whether the hearing will be held in public or private.

              RG 8.21        We will tell you how you can ask for a copy of the documents on which we
                             will rely.

              RG 8.22        We will also send you a copy of Information Sheet 1 Administrative hearings
                             (INFO 1), which briefly explains how we conduct administrative hearings.


                             Notices about disqualifying directors

              RG 8.23        When we are considering whether you should be disqualified from managing
                             corporations under s206F or s206GAA of the Corporations Act, we will give
                             you a notice to demonstrate why you should not be disqualified from
                             managing corporations (notice to demonstrate). The notice to demonstrate
                             must be in the prescribed form: see s206F(1)(b) and s206GAA(1)(b) of the
                             Corporations Act.

              RG 8.24        If you wish to demonstrate why you should not be disqualified and would
                             like a hearing, you will need to notify us. You have 14 days from the date of
                             being served with the notice to demonstrate to advise the delegate that you
                             want to be heard. We will then arrange a hearing before a delegate.


                             Declining the opportunity to appear at a hearing

              RG 8.25        If you do not want to appear at a hearing there are two other options:
                             (a)   you may make written submissions, including any material you want
                                   ASIC to consider; or


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 10
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             (b)   you may do nothing, and we will make a decision on the basis of the
                                   information available.

              RG 8.26        We do not envisage any case when the delegate would compel you to attend
                             the hearing. This is because the hearing is to give you an opportunity to give
                             ASIC information or an explanation of events that may influence the
                             decision the delegate will make. If you do not wish to attend, the delegate is
                             entitled to make a decision based on the information they have. This
                             information may include statements you have previously given to ASIC.
                             Evidence that you gave during an examination under s19 of the ASIC Act
                             may also be considered: see s1349 of the Corporations Act. However,
                             statements made in an examination under s253 of the National Credit Act
                             that are the subject of a claim of privilege against self-incrimination are
                             inadmissible in an administrative proceeding against you.



Serving the notice of hearing or notice to demonstrate
              RG 8.27        If you are an individual, generally we will serve the notice of hearing or
                             notice to demonstrate either by delivering it to you personally or by leaving
                             it at, or posting it to, your last known residential address: see s28A of the
                             Acts Interpretation Act 1901.

              RG 8.28        If the notice of hearing is to be served on a company, we may serve it by either:
                             (a)   leaving it at, or posting it to, the company’s registered office (see
                                   s109X(1)(a) of the Corporations Act); or
                             (b)   delivering a copy of the document personally to a director of the
                                   company who resides in Australia or in an external Territory (see
                                   s109X(1)(b) of the Corporations Act).

              RG 8.29        If a liquidator or administrator has been appointed to the company, we may
                             serve the notice by leaving it at, or posting it to, the address of the
                             liquidator’s office or administrator’s office in the most recent notice of that
                             address lodged with ASIC: see s109X(1)(c) and (d) of the Corporations Act.



Time to prepare
              RG 8.30        Generally, we will nominate a hearing date in the notice of hearing advising
                             you of your right to be heard. However, in the case of a notice to
                             demonstrate, a hearing date will be arranged after you advise us that you
                             want to be heard.

              RG 8.31        In most cases, we consider that 28 days from service of the notice is a
                             reasonable time for you to send ASIC written submissions and/or to appear
                             in person and to arrange representation if you want it. However, see our
                             discussion of stop order hearings at RG 8.40–RG 8.50.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 11
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




Joint and concurrent hearings
              RG 8.32        On occasion, we may take administrative action against more than one
                             person for conduct arising out of the same or substantially similar
                             circumstances (e.g. action under s206F of the Corporations Act against co-
                             directors). In such cases, if requested (e.g. by both directors), we would
                             ordinarily agree to conduct a joint hearing in these matters. We may also
                             decide to take administrative action against the same person while exercising
                             more than one power, such as taking action under both the Corporations Act
                             and the National Credit Act. Where requested by the affected person, we
                             would ordinarily agree to conduct such matters concurrently.



Who can attend a hearing

                             Your right to be represented

              RG 8.33        You have a right to be legally represented at a hearing: see s59(8) of the
                             ASIC Act and s285(8) of the National Credit Act. You may be represented
                             by a barrister or solicitor of the Supreme Court of a State or Territory or of
                             the High Court.

              RG 8.34        Other persons may appear as your representative, provided the delegate has
                             given their approval: see s59 of the ASIC Act and s285 of the National
                             Credit Act. If you are:
                             (a)   a natural person, you are entitled to appear in person or be represented
                                   by an employee approved by ASIC;
                             (b)   a body corporate, you may be represented by one of your officers or
                                   employees approved by ASIC; or
                             (c)   an unincorporated association, or a person appearing in your capacity as
                                   a member of an unincorporated association, you may be represented by
                                   a member, officer or employee of the association approved by ASIC.

              RG 8.35        If you want to be represented by someone other than a lawyer, you should
                             contact the delegate as soon as possible after receiving the notice of hearing,
                             or after you elect to attend a director disqualification hearing in a s206F or
                             s206GAA matter.


                             Other people who may attend

              RG 8.36        The delegate has discretion to allow, in addition to you and your legal or
                             approved representative, other persons to attend a private hearing: see s56(1)
                             of the ASIC Act and s282 of the National Credit Act. It may, for example, be
                             appropriate for the delegate to allow you to have a friend or a relative to give
                             you practical or moral support. Central to the delegate’s decision of whether



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 12
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             to allow others to attend is the question of fairness to you and whether the
                             other person’s presence will assist in the conduct of the hearing.

              RG 8.37        If you want to have a person attend the private hearing, you should contact
                             the delegate as soon as possible after receiving the notice of hearing, or after
                             you elect to attend a director disqualification hearing in a s206F or
                             s206GAA matter.

              RG 8.38        We may, subject to any appropriate conditions, also allow a person to
                             intervene in the hearing: see s59(2)(b) of the ASIC Act and s285(2)(b) of the
                             National Credit Act. A person who intervenes may be allowed to present
                             additional material to the delegate or to make submissions on the matter or
                             both. Generally, you will be invited to comment on whether another person
                             should be allowed to intervene.

              RG 8.39        Witnesses you have called to give oral evidence will generally be allowed to
                             stay only while they give their evidence. Ordinarily they will not be allowed
                             to be present during other parts of the hearing.



Stop order hearings

                             Prospectus and product disclosure statement related stop
                             order hearings

              RG 8.40        ASIC has the power to make ‘stop orders’, which may require that:
                             (a)   no offers, issues, sales or transfers of securities be made in some
                                   circumstances (see s739(1)(a), (b), (d), (e) and (g) of the Corporations
                                   Act); or
                             (b)   specified conduct regarding the securities to which a defective
                                   advertisement or publication relates must not be engaged in (see
                                   s739(1)(c) and (f) of the Corporations Act).

              RG 8.41        We may also make orders about your conduct where:
                             (a)   disclosure documents, statements or advertisements that relate to
                                   financial products are defective or do not comply with Pt 7.9 of the
                                   Corporations Act;
                             (b)   the issuer of the financial product has breached s1017G of the
                                   Corporations Act; or
                             (c)   information made publicly available under s1017BA or 1017BB of the
                                   Corporations Act is defective (see s1020E(2) of the Corporations Act).

              RG 8.42        Stop order hearings conducted under s739(2) and 1020E(4) of the
                             Corporations Act differ from hearings conducted under other provisions of
                             the Corporations Act. We must give any ‘interested people’ a reasonable



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 13
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             opportunity to make oral or written submissions at the hearing on whether a
                             stop order should be made: s739(2)(b) and 1020E(4)(b) of the Corporations
                             Act.

              RG 8.43        ‘Interested people’ are those whose interests would be affected by the
                             making of a stop order. They may include:
                             (a)   people with a direct financial interest in the securities or financial
                                   products the subject of the disclosure documents;
                             (b)   people who may be exposed to civil liability under Pts 6D.3, 6D.3A and
                                   7.9 of the Corporations Act;
                             (c)   the corporation issuing the securities or the financial product; and
                             (d)   the author of the statements under consideration.

              RG 8.44        Due to the nature of the circumstances in which we commonly make an
                             order under s739(1A) and 1020E(2), the time allowed for preparing for a
                             hearing will usually be much less than 28 days.

              RG 8.45        When a stop order is required before a hearing is convened, ASIC has the
                             power to make pre-hearing interim orders: see s739(3) and 1020E(5) of the
                             Corporations Act. These interim orders have effect for 21 days commencing
                             from the day after the interim order is made. These orders may, of course, be
                             revoked before the expiration of the 21 days. We are also able to make
                             interim orders at any time during a hearing: see s739(4) and 1020E(6).


                             Stop orders under Pt 7.8A—design and distribution
                             obligations

              RG 8.46        ASIC has the power to make stop orders where it is satisfied that a provision
                             of Div.2 of Pt 7.8A (see s994B, 994C and 994D) or s994E has been
                             breached: see s994J. ASIC may order, in writing, that specified conduct in
                             respect of the financial product (except excluded conduct) must not be
                             engaged in while the order is in force.

                                   Note: ‘Financial product’ has a meaning for Pt 7.8A set out in s994AA(1). This includes
                                   financial products regulated by Div 2 of Pt 2 of the ASIC Act.

              RG 8.47        We must give any ‘interested person’ a reasonable opportunity to make oral
                             or written submissions at a hearing on whether a stop order should be made
                             (s994J(3)).

              RG 8.48        When a stop order is required before a hearing is convened, ASIC has the
                             power to make pre-hearing interim orders: see s994J(4). These interim
                             orders have effect for 21 days commencing from the day after the interim
                             order is made. These orders may, of course, be revoked before the expiration
                             of the 21 days. We are also able to make interim orders at any time during a
                             hearing: see s994J(5).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                 Page 14
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




              RG 8.49        The person on whom the order is served must take all reasonable steps to
                             ensure that other people who undertake conduct to which the order applies
                             are aware of the order: see s994J(7).

              RG 8.50        Regulatory Guide 274 Product design and distribution obligations (RG 274)
                             provides more information about stop orders under the design and
                             distribution obligations: see RG 274.227–RG 274.236.



Assistant to the delegate
              RG 8.51        The delegate may permit another member or members of ASIC staff to be
                             present at the hearing.

              RG 8.52        The precise role the ASIC staff member takes in a particular hearing is a
                             matter for the delegate to decide. The ASIC staff member is subject at all
                             times to the direction of the delegate, who is the person responsible for
                             conducting the hearing.



The hearing may be held in public or in private
              RG 8.53        In some cases the legislation specifies whether a hearing is to be conducted
                             in private. For example, s913B(5)(a) and 915C(4)(a) of the Corporations Act
                             and s55(4)(a) and 80(4)(a) of the National Credit Act state that the hearing
                             must take place in private. In such instances we have no discretion and the
                             hearing will be held in private.

              RG 8.54        When the legislation is silent (e.g. s206F of the Corporations Act), we must
                             decide whether to conduct the hearing in public: see also s52 of the ASIC
                             Act and s278 of the National Credit Act.

              RG 8.55        The notice of hearing will specify whether the delegate proposes to hold the
                             hearing in public or in private. If you disagree with the delegate’s proposal,
                             you should let the delegate know as soon as practical. If you ask for the
                             hearing to be in public, we would generally agree to that request: see s53(1)
                             of the ASIC Act and s279(1)(b) of the National Credit Act. However, we
                             must consider the issues identified in s52 of the ASIC Act and s278 of the
                             National Credit Act. If, taking those issues into account, we consider that the
                             hearing should be in private, we may hold all or part of the hearing in
                             private: s53(2) of the ASIC Act and s279(2) of the National Credit Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 15
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




Privacy notice
              RG 8.56        Material provided by you at the hearing may contain personal information
                             including sensitive information about you or about other individuals. The
                             purposes for which we will use the personal information include to enable us
                             to conduct the hearing, make the decision and write the reasons for decision.

              RG 8.57        ASIC’s Privacy policy sets out how we handle and use personal information,
                             including:
                             (a)   when we may disclose personal information;
                             (b)   how to obtain access to and seek correction of your personal
                                   information; and
                             (c)   how to complain about breaches of privacy by ASIC.

              RG 8.58        If you provide a statement from a witness, you should inform the witness
                             about our privacy policy. We will assume that you have made the witness
                             aware of our privacy policy and that the witness consents to you disclosing
                             their personal information to ASIC.



Giving false evidence
              RG 8.59        It is an offence to give evidence at a hearing that is false or misleading in a
                             material particular: see s64(2) of the ASIC Act and s291 of the National
                             Credit Act.



Witnesses
              RG 8.60        As a matter of general principle, we consider that it will not be necessary for
                             us to call any witnesses on which we rely. Generally, the delegate will rely
                             on written statements that a witness provides to them.

              RG 8.61        If you want someone to give evidence on your behalf, a written statement of
                             the witness will usually be sufficient. On occasion, the delegate may ask you
                             to have the witness available to attend the hearing in person.



Summoning a person to attend
              RG 8.62        The delegate has the power of a member of the Commission to compel a
                             person to attend and give evidence, to produce specified documents, or both:
                             see s58(1) of the ASIC Act and s284(1) of the National Credit Act. We do
                             not envisage that there will be many instances when the delegate would
                             summon a witness to attend. We know that requiring a person to attend to



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 16
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             give evidence or to produce documents is disruptive of their life and may
                             involve substantial cost and inconvenience. The delegate will only exercise
                             the power to summon a witness when there is a demonstrated need for it.

              RG 8.63        Before issuing a summons, the delegate would need to be satisfied that:
                             (a)   the person can give relevant evidence or produce relevant documents;
                                   and
                             (b)   there is a need to do so.

              RG 8.64        For example, it may be necessary if a written statement cannot be obtained
                             or would be insufficient, or the documentary evidence is not available.
                             Another example is where a person may have information that may assist the
                             delegate, but is under a duty of confidentiality that prevents them from
                             disclosing it. In that case, a summons is needed to override that duty of
                             confidentiality.

              RG 8.65        The delegate will not automatically issue a summons if asked to do so. If you
                             want a summons to be issued you should inform the delegate why the
                             summons is needed—that is, indicate what the evidence the person is able to
                             give and why they need to be summoned. The delegate will then decide
                             whether to issue the summons.

              RG 8.66        The person requesting the issue of the summons must pay the fees and
                             allowances for the witness’s expenses: see Sch 2 of the Australian Securities
                             and Investments Commission Regulations 2001 and reg 35 of the National
                             Consumer Credit Protection Regulations 2010.



Taking an oath or affirmation
              RG 8.67        A person may be summoned to appear at a hearing as a witness under s58(1)
                             of the ASIC Act or s284(1) of the National Credit Act. In these cases, the
                             delegate may require them to take an oath or make an affirmation: see s58(2)
                             of the ASIC Act and s284(2) of the National Credit Act. It is an offence to
                             fail to comply with a requirement made under s58(2) of the ASIC Act or
                             s284(2) of the National Credit Act: see s63(3) of the ASIC Act and s290(2)
                             of the National Credit Act.



Impartial decision makers must be free from bias
              RG 8.68        To be impartial, a decision maker must be free from bias. This does not
                             mean that the delegate is not allowed to have any knowledge or view about
                             particular issues in question. Rather, it means that they must approach the
                             hearing with an open mind so that they can be persuaded to change any




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 17
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             tentative opinion they may have formed: Winter v ASC (1995) 56 FCR 107;
                             (1995) 13 ACLC 422.

              RG 8.69        The mere fact that the delegate who gives the notice of hearing also proposes
                             to make the final decision does not give rise to a reasonable apprehension of
                             bias. This is because the state of mind needed when giving a notice of
                             hearing does not mean that the delegate already has a fixed view on the
                             matters: Story v NCSC (1988) 13 ACLR 225; see too the comments of Finn J
                             in McLachlan v ASC (1998) 28 ACSR 473; affirmed on appeal in
                             McLachlan v ASIC (1999) 85 FCR 286.



The rules of evidence do not apply
              RG 8.70        The ASIC Act and the National Credit Act state that the rules of evidence do
                             not apply in our administrative hearings: see s59(2)(a) of the ASIC Act and
                             s285(2)(a) of the National Credit Act. Our hearings cannot, and should not,
                             be compared with proceedings in a court of law. Their purpose and nature
                             are quite different. Many of our administrative hearings are protective in
                             nature (e.g. ASIC v Adler (2002) 42 ACSR 80 at [56]), while others are held
                             to determine whether a person is qualified for an occupation. Our hearings
                             are not a contest between you and ASIC. They are an inquiry to determine
                             the facts and any other aspect of the matter on which the particular power
                             should be exercised. The hearings are not run in an adversarial manner. They
                             are run in an ‘inquisitorial manner’—that is, as an inquiry to find the true
                             position.

                                   Note: See comments of the Full Federal Court in Boucher v ASC (1996) 44 ALD 499,
                                   where the court observed in relation to a hearing conducted under the now repealed
                                   s837 of the Corporations Law that: ‘[t]he proceeding was conducted by the
                                   Commission’s delegate in the exercise of an administrative function which enabled an
                                   inquisitorial, rather than an adversarial inquiry’.

              RG 8.71        The use of terms such as ‘examination’ and ‘cross-examination’,
                             ‘particulars’ and ‘onus of proof’ is not appropriate and is misleading in the
                             context of our administrative hearings. The delegate must be satisfied that:
                             (a)   all the issues relevant to the subject matter of the hearing have been
                                   clearly identified;
                             (b)   you have been given the opportunity to address them; and
                             (c)   statutory requirements for our having the power are met.



The material and evidence you need for the hearing
              RG 8.72        You need to decide:
                             (a)   what material you want to present to the hearing;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                 Page 18
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             (b)   the form in which you want to present it;
                             (c)   how much evidence you want to present;
                             (d)   if you want to dispute the accuracy or adequacy of the factual material
                                   on which we are contemplating acting;
                             (e)   if you want to make submissions to the delegate about the scope of any
                                   orders that might be made against you—for example, a banning order
                                   under s920B of the Corporations Act may specify that a person is
                                   prohibited from doing one or more of the activities listed in that section;
                                   and
                             (f)   if you want the delegate to consider including a provision in any order
                                   that may be made that permits you to do specified acts that you would
                                   otherwise be prohibited from doing and what, if any, conditions may be
                                   imposed (e.g. s206GAB, 915H and 920B(3) of the Corporations Act
                                   and s62 and 81(3) of the National Credit Act).

              RG 8.73        You may wish to rely entirely on the material we have identified in the
                             notice of hearing or notice to demonstrate. You may wish to give evidence
                             yourself. You may also wish to provide the delegate with material in the
                             form of documents. These documents could, for example, include written
                             statements by people about the facts or copies of records that are relevant to
                             the hearing. Of course, you may also make submissions, either in writing or
                             orally. You may wish to do a number or all of these things. You should
                             consider very carefully how you present information you consider to be
                             relevant to the delegate.

              RG 8.74        The delegate conducting the hearing is an impartial decision maker who
                             exercises an administrative function. It is not the role of the delegate to settle
                             or negotiate an outcome in an administrative law proceeding. As such, the
                             delegate will not accept any evidence or submissions given to them on a
                             without prejudice basis. Rather, any evidence or submissions you give to the
                             delegate will be understood by the delegate to be capable of being used by
                             them to ascertain the facts of the matter and make a decision.

              RG 8.75        We consider that, generally, it is the role of the delegate to allow you (or the
                             witness) a reasonable opportunity to explain or to give your own version of
                             events. The delegate may ask questions to clarify any matters on which you
                             (or the witness) have made submissions or given evidence.

              RG 8.76        There may be a person or a document that is easily available to you that
                             supports the conclusion that you consider the delegate should reach. You
                             may wish to provide that material to the delegate.

              RG 8.77        In deciding the form of your evidence, you should remember that the
                             delegate is not bound by the rules of evidence and that you may present any
                             material that is relevant and credible. For example, often written statements
                             from persons with knowledge of relevant events and other circumstances



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 19
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             will be sufficient, without the need for you to call them as witnesses to give
                             evidence in person: see RG 8.56—RG 8.57.

              RG 8.78        The delegate will not provide a preliminary view as to whether the material
                             you present is sufficient to address our concerns. They will also generally
                             not invite you to provide more evidence if they are minded to make an
                             adverse decision. However, during the course of a hearing, evidence you
                             give and submissions you make may give rise to additional concern(s) that
                             were not otherwise set out in the notice. If the delegate intends to take such a
                             concern into consideration when making their decision, you will be given an
                             opportunity to respond to the additional concern by providing more material
                             and/or providing additional written submissions.



There is no ‘burden of proof’
              RG 8.79        ‘Burden of proof’ is a concept that arises in court processes, but has no place
                             in our administrative hearings. Our administrative hearings give you an
                             opportunity to give us information that may affect our decision. Generally,
                             you do not have to prove or disprove anything. Rather, you are given the
                             opportunity to present information to assist us in our decision making. As the
                             High Court has stated in Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu
                             Shan Liang (1996) 185 CLR 259 at 282:
                                  Where facts are in dispute in civil litigation conducted under common law
                                  procedures, the court has to decide where, on the balance of probabilities,
                                  the truth lies as between the evidence the parties to the litigation have
                                  thought it in their respective interests to adduce at the trial. Administrative
                                  decision-making is of a different nature [Mahon v Air New Zealand [1984]
                                  AC 808 at 814]. A whole range of possible approaches to decision-making
                                  in the particular circumstances of the case may be correct in the sense that
                                  their adoption by the delegate would not be an error of law. The term
                                  ‘balance of probabilities’ … as with the term ‘evidence’ as used to describe
                                  the material before the delegates, … seems to be borrowed from the
                                  universe of discourse which has civil litigation as its subject. The present
                                  context of administrative decision-making is very different and the use of
                                  such terms provides little assistance.

              RG 8.80        We must be persuaded about the matters with which we are concerned or
                             which we must be satisfied about before we can make a decision. The
                             hearing is the opportunity for you to persuade us to make a decision in your
                             favour.



When a hearing should be adjourned
              RG 8.81        Circumstances often arise when the delegate must consider whether to grant
                             an adjournment. When the delegate is deciding whether to grant an
                             adjournment, they must decide what is fair in light of the circumstances of



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 20
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             the case (e.g. if new material information has come to light that may be
                             adverse to the affected person, and they have not been given an opportunity
                             to comment, it may be appropriate to adjourn the hearing—Boucher v ASC
                             (1996) 44 ALD 499).

              RG 8.82        If you require an adjournment, you should notify the delegate as soon as
                             possible. We consider that it is usually desirable to complete hearings as
                             soon as practicable.



Written reasons
              RG 8.83        The delegate will usually give you the reasons for their decision when they
                             tell you what their final decision is. We must give you a statement of reasons
                             when we issue a notice of suspension or cancellation of your credit licence
                             or make a banning order: see s61 and 85 of the National Credit Act.
                             Similarly, we must give you a statement of reasons when we issue a notice
                             of suspension or cancellation of your AFS licence or make a banning order:
                             see s915G and 920F(1) of the Corporations Act.

              RG 8.84        If we vary a banning order against you, we will give you a statement of
                             reasons if you request it: see s920F(2) of the Corporations Act. If we refuse
                             your application for registration as an auditor, we will send you the written
                             decision and reasons within 14 days of our telling you of our decision: see
                             s1280(9) of the Corporations Act.

              RG 8.85        If the delegate does not give you the reasons, you may ask for a written copy
                             of them. The request should be in writing and made within 28 days of being
                             notified of the final decision.



Publication of our decisions
              RG 8.86        We are obliged to strive to maintain, facilitate and improve the performance
                             of the financial system, and to promote the confident and informed
                             participation of investors and consumers in the financial system: see s1(2)(a)
                             and (b) of the ASIC Act.

              RG 8.87        Publishing the results of our hearings where an order is made against you is
                             an important aspect of our regulatory strategy. It helps ASIC educate those
                             who have been the subject of the hearing, and also others in the relevant
                             industry, about what the Corporations Act and National Credit Act require
                             and the consequences of failing to comply with the law.

              RG 8.88        We do not consider it appropriate to publicise when you have been given an
                             opportunity to be heard, because the substance of the issues leading to the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 21
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             hearing have not been discussed and determined. It is the outcome of the
                             hearing that may have regulatory impact.

              RG 8.89        If we make an interim order to stop the trading of securities under s739 or, in
                             respect of financial products, under s1020E of the Corporations Act, we will
                             usually need to publicise our action. This is necessary to keep the market
                             informed about what is happening. In that instance, we would usually also
                             state when any hearing would commence.

              RG 8.90        In some instances we have an obligation to publish our orders in the ASIC
                             Gazette. For example, we must publish a notice in the ASIC Gazette as soon
                             as practicable after we:
                             (a)   notify an AFS licensee of our decision to cancel or suspend their licence
                                   (see s915F(2) of the Corporations Act); or
                             (b)   make or vary a banning order (see s920E(2) of the Corporations Act).

              RG 8.91        We must publish a notice on our website if we:
                             (a)   make an order cancelling or suspending your credit licence (see s60(3)
                                   of the National Credit Act); or
                             (b)   make or vary a banning order against you (see s84(3) of the National
                                   Credit Act).

                             The notice must state when the action took effect.

              RG 8.92        We publish these notices on the ASIC registers: see the banned and
                             disqualified persons search and the professional registers search.

              RG 8.93        In addition to publishing the orders in the ASIC Gazette or on our website,
                             we are likely to publish a media release.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 22
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




Key terms


                              Term                        Meaning in this document

                              AFS licence                 An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                          the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                          on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                          services
                                                            Note: This is the definition in s761A.

                              AFS licensee                A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                          Corporations Act
                                                            Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                              ASIC                        Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                              ASIC Act                    Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                          2001

                              Corporations Act            Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                              credit activity (or         Has the meaning given by s6 of the National Credit Act
                              credit activities)

                              credit licence              An Australian credit licence under s35 of the National
                                                          Credit Act that authorises a licensee to engage in
                                                          particular credit activities

                              delegate                    ASIC staff member delegated the power to hold hearings
                                                          and make decisions under Div 6 of Pt 3 of the ASIC Act
                                                          or Div 2 of Pt 6-5 of the National Credit Act

                              financial product           Generally, a facility through which, or through the
                                                          acquisition of which, a person does one or more of the
                                                          following:
                                                           makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                           manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                           makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                            Note: See Div 3 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                            definition. In addition to the general categories above, this
                                                            specifies certain things as being included or excluded from the
                                                            definition.

                              National Credit Act         National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009

                              notice of hearing           A notice that ASIC issues under the Corporations Act or
                                                          the National Credit Act, notifying the recipient of their right
                                                          to be heard in relation to whether ASIC should take action
                                                          against them




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                                    Page 23
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              notice to demonstrate     A notice that ASIC issues under s206F or s206GAA of
                                                        the Corporations Act, notifying the recipient of their right
                                                        to be heard in relation to whether they should be
                                                        disqualified from managing corporations

                              Pt 6-5 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act, the ASIC Act or National
                                                        Credit Act, as specified (in this example numbered 6-5)

                              RG 100 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example, numbered
                                                        100)

                              s35 (for example)         A section of the Corporations Act, the ASIC Act or
                                                        National Credit Act, as specified (in this example
                                                        numbered 35)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                               Page 24
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




Related information


                             Headnotes

                             adjournment, adversarial and inquisitorial hearings, AFS licence, attendance
                             at hearing, auditors, Australian credit licence, Australian financial services
                             licensee, burden of proof, court enforceable undertakings, credit licensee,
                             delegate, disqualification of directors, financial products, impartial decision
                             maker, licensing, licensing hearings, notice to demonstrate, notice of
                             hearing, oath or affirmation, opportunity to be heard, private and public
                             hearings, procedural fairness, protective order hearings, publication or media
                             releases, registration application hearings, right to be represented, rules of
                             evidence, service, stop orders, stop order hearings, summons, time to
                             prepare, witnesses, written reasons


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 73 Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices

                             RG 98 ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make
                             banning orders

                             RG 100 Court enforceable undertakings

                             RG 216 Markets Disciplinary Panel

                             RG 218 Licensing: Administrative action against persons engaging in credit
                             activities

                             RG 258 Registered liquidators: Registration, disciplinary actions and
                             insurance requirements

                             RG 263 Financial Services and Credit Panel

                             RG 274 Product design and distribution obligations


                             Legislation

                             Acts Interpretation Act 1901, s28A

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001, Pt 2 Div 2; Pt 3
                             Div 6; s1, 19, 52, 53, 56, 57, 58, 59, 63, 64

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations 2001, Sch 2




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 25
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 8: Administrative hearings: Principles and conduct




                             Corporations Act 2001, Pts 6D.3, 6D.3A, 7.9; Pt 7.8A Div 2; s109X, 206F,
                             206GAA, 206GAB, 713, 739, 913B, 914A, 915C, 915F, 915G, 915H, 920A,
                             920B, 920E, 920F, 994AA, 994B, 994C, 994D, 994E, 994J, 1017BA,
                             1017BB, 1017G, 1020E, 1280, 1317DAC, 1349

                             National Credit Act, Pt 6-5 Div 2; s41, 45, 55, 60, 61, 62, 80, 81, 84, 85,
                             253, 278, 279, 282, 283, 284, 285, 290, 291

                             National Consumer Credit Protection Regulations 2010, reg 35

                             Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993


                             Cases

                             ASIC v Adler (2002) 42 ACSR 80

                             Boucher v ASC (1996) 44 ALD 499

                             Kioa v West (1985) 159 CLR 550

                             Mahon v Air New Zealand Ltd [1984] AC 808

                             McLachlan v ASC (1998) 28 ACSR 473

                             McLachlan v ASIC (1999) 85 FCR 286

                             Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang (1996) 185
                             CLR 259

                             Nam Bee (Australia) Pty Ltd v Corporate Affairs Commission (NSW) (1987)
                             12 ACLR 391

                             Salemi v Mackellar [No 2] (1977) 137 CLR 396

                             Story v NCSC (1988) 13 ACLR 225

                             Winter v ASC (1995) 56 FCR 107, (1995) 13 ACLC 422




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2022                                            Page 26
