REGULATORY GUIDE 79

Research report providers:
Improving the quality of
investment research

December 2012




About this guide
This guide is for Australian financial services (AFS) licensees who are
research report providers. It is directed towards providers of research on
investment products—known variously as research analysts, securities
analysts or research houses—and the research reports they provide.

It provides guidance on certain licensing and conduct obligations in Pt 7.7 of
the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) as they apply to general
advice prepared by research report providers for retail and wholesale clients.
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This version was issued in December 2012 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 79 Managing conflicts of interest: An
                                     ASIC guide for research report providers, issued November 2004 and
                                     known in the ASIC Digest as [GD 200]. Rebadged as a regulatory guide
                                     5 July 2007.


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                               Page 2
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    The role of research .................................................................................4
                                    Background to our guidance ....................................................................4
                                    Relevant law ............................................................................................6
                                    Updating our guidance.............................................................................7
                                    Scope of this guide ..................................................................................7
                             B      Research reports and research report providers ...............................9
                                    What is a ‘research report’? .....................................................................9
                                    What is a research report provider? ......................................................11
                                    Distributing research prepared by another licensee ..............................11
                             C      Research quality, methodology and transparency ............................14
                                    The role of quality research ...................................................................14
                                    Improving transparency and methodology ............................................15
                                    Allocating appropriate resources ...........................................................21
                                    Preparing the research report ................................................................23
                                    Compliance reporting .............................................................................28
                             D      Avoiding, controlling and disclosing conflicts of interest ..............29
                                    Conflicts and the research industry .......................................................29
                                    Business model and organisational structure ........................................32
                                    Controls..................................................................................................36
                                    Disclosure of conflicts of interest ...........................................................40
                                    Additional disclosure issues...................................................................43
                             E      Users of research ................................................................................44
                                    FOFA reforms ........................................................................................44
                                    Due diligence .........................................................................................45
                                    Personal advice .....................................................................................46
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................47
                             Related information .....................................................................................50
                             Appendix: Sample compliance review ......................................................52




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                                       Page 3
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              Research report providers are important gatekeepers, preparing investment
                              research for retail and wholesale investors. The quality of this research has
                              a significant impact on the quality of advice retail investors receive.

                              This guide focuses on key phases of the research process to improve:
                              • the quality, methodology and transparency of research report production
                                and distribution (see Section C);
                              • the management of conflicts by research report providers, including
                                avoiding, controlling and disclosing these conflicts (see Section D); and
                              • the ability of users of research to understand and compare the research
                                services of different research report providers (see Section E).



The role of research
              RG 79.1        The timely and accurate flow of information about issuers, securities and
                             other financial products is vital to the fair, efficient and transparent operation
                             of financial markets. Research report providers are fundamental in the
                             transmission of this information, and the integrity of their research directly
                             affects the integrity of our financial markets.
                                   Note: For the definition of ‘research report’ and ‘research report provider’, see
                                   Section B of this guide.

              RG 79.2        Research report providers also perform an important ‘gatekeeping’ function
                             in the financial advice industry by:
                             (a)   identifying products to consider for inclusion on approved product lists;
                             (b)   assisting financial advisers to formulate financial advice for retail
                                   investors; and
                             (c)   providing research for use directly by retail investors in making
                                   investment decisions.


Background to our guidance
              RG 79.3        In a number of recent corporate collapses in Australia, the investment products
                             that failed were either highly rated or the subject of very recent positive
                             recommendations by research report providers just before the product failure.
                             This has been a feature of collapses across investment classes including:
                             (a)   agribusiness schemes;
                             (b)   debenture issuers;
                             (c)   hedge funds investing in structured products;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                       Page 4
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             (d)   other managed or superannuation funds, with the most recent example
                                   being Trio Capital; and
                             (e)   property investment schemes.
              RG 79.4        Poor quality research or research that is not reliable, credible or current
                             damages confidence in the research sector itself and in the financial services
                             industry more broadly. Risks for the investment community are amplified
                             where there is undue reliance on research reports and a lack of awareness of
                             real and potential conflicts of interest which may adversely impact on the
                             independence and therefore the reliability of those reports.
              RG 79.5        After the global financial crisis, concerns about the impact of conflicts of
                             interest and the regulation of credit rating agencies and research report
                             providers prompted the then Minister for Superannuation and Corporate
                             Law, Nick Sherry, to announce a review of the regulation of credit rating
                             agencies and research houses with a report to the Australian Government.
              RG 79.6        The report by the Treasury and ASIC, Review of credit rating agencies and
                             research houses: A joint report (REP 143) was published in October 2008
                             and led to reforms to the regulation of credit rating agencies in Australia.
              RG 79.7        In November 2011, ASIC released Consultation Paper 171 Strengthening the
                             regulation of research report providers (including research houses) (CP 171).
                             In CP 171, we consulted on a range of measures to improve research quality,
                             transparency and the appropriate management of conflicts of interest for
                             research report providers.
                                   Note: For details of the consultation process, see CP 171 at www.asic.gov.au/cp and
                                   Report 318 Response to submissions on CP 171 Strengthening the regulation of
                                   research report providers (REP 318) at www.asic.gov.au/reports.


                             Future of Financial Advice reforms and Trio Inquiry
              RG 79.8        The Future of Financial Advice (FOFA) reforms introduce a number of
                             measures to improve the quality of personal advice to retail clients. These
                             reforms include a statutory best interests duty for providers of personal
                             financial advice and a ban on certain forms of conflicted remuneration in
                             recognition of the fact that conflicts of interest can have a significant,
                             negative impact on the quality of advice that retail investors receive.

              RG 79.9        The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services
                             Inquiry into the collapse of Trio Capital (Trio Inquiry) also considered the role
                             of research in its inquiries. In its final report, the Trio Inquiry noted the
                             ‘expectations gap’ that exists between what is expected of research by users and
                             the limitations of the research on offer.

              RG 79.10       This guide and changes to other related ASIC guidance (e.g. Regulatory Guide
                             175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—Conduct and disclosure (RG 175))
                             aim to improve the quality of research and user’s understanding of the role
                             research plays in the preparation of personal financial advice.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                   Page 5
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Relevant law
              RG 79.11       Under the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act), Australian financial
                             services (AFS) licensees who are research report providers for the purposes
                             of this guide must comply with the general licensing obligations as set out in
                             s912A. This includes:
                             (a)   the obligation to do all things necessary to ensure that their financial
                                   services are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly (s912A(1)(a));
                             (b)   the obligation to comply with financial services laws and to take
                                   reasonable steps to ensure their representatives do likewise
                                   (s912A(1)(c) and (ca));
                             (c)   the obligation to have adequate compliance arrangements (reg 7.6.03(g)
                                   and Pro Forma 209 Australian financial services licence conditions
                                   (PF 209));
                             (d)   the obligation to have adequate resources, be competent, and ensure that
                                   representatives are adequately trained and supervised (s912A(1));
                             (e)   where retail clients are involved—the obligation to give clients a
                                   Financial Services Guide (FSG);
                             (f)   where general advice is given—the obligation to warn clients that the
                                   advice does not take into account a client’s objectives, financial
                                   situation or needs (s949A); and
                             (g)   a range of prohibitions, including those for misleading or deceptive
                                   conduct in the provision of financial services, dishonest conduct,
                                   unconscionable conduct and insider trading.

              RG 79.12       Licensees are also obliged to have adequate arrangements for the management
                             of conflicts of interest that may arise wholly, or partially, in relation to the
                             provision of financial services by the licensee, or a representative of the
                             licensee, as part of the financial services business of the licensee or the
                             representative (conflicts management obligation): s912A(1)(aa).

              RG 79.13       The conflicts management obligation and Regulatory Guide 181 Licensing:
                             Managing conflicts of interest (RG 181) apply to all licensees, including
                             research report providers. What an individual licensee needs to do to comply
                             with the obligation varies according to the nature, scale and complexity of its
                             financial services business.

                                   Note: We are revising RG 181 in light of the FOFA reforms.

              RG 79.14       The conflicts management obligation and the obligation to operate efficiently,
                             honesty and fairly are interconnected. A licensee is unlikely to comply with the
                             obligation to operate efficiently, honestly and fairly if it has inadequate conflicts
                             management procedures. Conversely, having adequate conflicts management
                             arrangements will help licensees to comply with their other obligations,
                             including the obligation to operate efficiently, honestly and fairly.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                               Page 6
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Updating our guidance
              RG 79.15       Our review of practices among research report providers found some areas
                             where our existing guidance and expectations should be revised or
                             supplemented.

              RG 79.16       We are updating our guidance to help research report providers comply with their
                             legal obligations including their management of conflicts of interest to improve
                             the quality and reliability of investment research. A key focus of our updated
                             guidance is on how conflicts of interest are managed, and where necessary,
                             avoided, so as to ensure the resultant research has credibility and integrity and
                             can reasonably be relied upon directly or indirectly by Australian investors.

              RG 79.17       We will conduct targeted surveillance of research report providers to ensure
                             compliance with our guidance and, if necessary, we will revisit our
                             regulation of this sector if we find evidence that standards are not improving.

              RG 79.18       In CP 171, we specifically consulted about whether research report providers
                             should accept payment from product issuers to produce research about the
                             issuer’s own products. We asked whether this conflict of interest can be
                             effectively and robustly managed or should be avoided entirely. Our updated
                             guidance does not require avoidance of this conflict at this time. However,
                             if an outcome of our surveillance activity is that this conflict is not being
                             robustly and effectively managed, we will revisit the need for avoidance.

              RG 79.19       Research reports are not a proxy for due diligence on the part of wholesale
                             investors such as the financial planning industry. We expect AFS licensees
                             (including financial advisers) to conduct appropriate due diligence in choosing a
                             research report provider. Our guidance is designed to assist and support
                             licensees and advisers in that process: see Section E.


Scope of this guide
              RG 79.20       This guide focuses on providers of research on investment products—known
                             variously as research analysts, securities analysts or research houses—and
                             the research they provide.

              RG 79.21       This guide was first published in 2004 under the title, Managing conflicts of
                             interest: A guide for research report providers. In 2011, we reviewed
                             practices in the research sector and this guide reflects our guidance as
                             updated by that consultation process.

              RG 79.22       This guide does not summarise all legal obligations relating to research
                             report providers. Rather, it focuses on certain licensing and conduct
                             obligations in Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act as they apply to general advice
                             by research report providers to retail and wholesale clients.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                               Page 7
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.23       This guide supplements RG 181 on managing conflicts of interest, and
                             should be read together with that regulatory guide. RG 181 focuses on broad
                             principles and guidance for licensees generally in managing conflicts of
                             interest, and sets out expectations that licensees should meet in order to
                             comply with the conflicts management obligation: see RG 181.16. Building
                             on RG 181, this guide covers various issues that research report providers
                             should take into account in the design, implementation and maintenance of
                             their conflicts management arrangements: see Section D.

              RG 79.24       This guide should also be read in conjunction with relevant sections of the
                             Corporations Act and other related ASIC guidance, including RG 175, RG
                             181 and the following regulatory guides:
                             (a)   Regulatory Guide 104 Licensing: Meeting the general obligations
                                   (RG 104);
                             (b)   Regulatory Guide 105 Licensing: Organisational competence (RG 105);
                             (c)   Regulatory Guide 111 Content of expert reports (RG 111);
                             (d)   Regulatory Guide 112 Independence of experts (RG 112); and
                             (e)   Regulatory Guide 146 Licensing: Training of financial product advisers
                                   (RG 146).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                               Page 8
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




B          Research reports and research report providers

                              Key points

                              Research is ‘general advice’ that is prepared and distributed to inform the
                              investment decisions of both retail and wholesale clients.
                              Research produced by investment banks, stockbrokers and research
                              houses for retail or wholesale clients is considered to be a ‘research report’
                              within the meaning of this guide.


What is a ‘research report’?
              RG 79.25       For the purposes of this guide, a research report is general advice that:
                             (a)   is in writing;
                             (b)   includes an express or implicit opinion or recommendation about a
                                   named or readily identifiable investment product; and
                             (c)   is intended to be, or could reasonably be regarded as being intended to
                                   be, broadly distributed (whether directly or indirectly) to clients
                                   (whether wholesale or retail) in Australia.
                                   Note 1: Investment products include securities, warrants traded on a financial market,
                                   managed investment products, superannuation products and investment life insurance
                                   products. Reports about whether to buy, sell or hold these products prepared by research
                                   analysts, securities analysts or research houses are typical examples of ‘research reports’.

                                   Note 2: The expression ‘broadly distributed’ includes, but is not limited to, publication.

              RG 79.26       It does not include any of the following:
                             (a)   personal advice;
                             (b)   general advice that is provided only to an individual or small number of
                                   related clients (e.g. a family);
                             (c)   general advice that is provided only to related bodies corporate of the licensee;
                             (d)   general advice that is only about products issued by the licensee or its
                                   related bodies corporate;
                             (e)   a communication or piece of information that does not constitute
                                   general advice;
                             (f)   advice that is merely a restatement, summary or extract of another
                                   research report that has already been broadly distributed (whether in
                                   Australia or elsewhere and whether by the licensee or another person),
                                   provided it is clear that:
                                   (i)    the advice is a restatement, summary or extract of another report; and
                                   (ii)   readers are directed to who prepared the original research and, if
                                          available, how readers may obtain it (see RG 79.29–RG 79.34); and
                             (g)   advice that is not provided in Australia.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                       Page 9
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Table 1:    Examples of a ‘research report’ for the purposes of this guide

 Type of investment research                     Explanation

  General advice produced by a research         This is a research report for the purposes of this guide.
 report provider on a subscription basis or
 on a fee for service basis.

  General advice (often called ‘sell side’      All ‘sell side’ research is a research report for the purposes of
 research) prepared for advising on or           RG 79, regardless of whether it is for retail or wholesale clients.
 dealing in financial products.

 × General advice given to related bodies        This is not a research report for the purposes of this guide. Such
 corporate of the licensee. An example           in-house advice which is not intended for broader distribution is
 would be ‘buy side’ advice or analysis          not a research report. See RG 79.26(c).
 produced by an investment bank or fund
                                                 Where such advice is intended to be, or could reasonably be
 manager for its own internal use.
                                                 regarded as being intended to be, broadly distributed, it is advice
                                                 to which this guide applies. See RG 79.25(c).

 × General advice about products issued by       General advice produced by a research report provider’s
 the licensee or its related bodies corporate    analysts about the provider’s own products or those of a related
 (own products).                                 body corporate is not a research report for the purposes of this
                                                 guide. See RG 79.26(d).

                                                 For example, although a licensee’s analysts may produce such
                                                 general advice for promotional purposes, it is not advice to which
                                                 this guide applies. Because such general advice is not a
                                                 research report, it should not hold itself out as such, as it does
                                                 not have the requisite objectivity, rigor or independence that
                                                 typically characterises a ‘research report’.

                                                 Where a licensee wishes to broadly distribute research about its
                                                 own products a clear conflict of interest arises. In such cases
                                                 and consistent with industry practice, we expect licensees to
                                                 avoid the conflict by obtaining research from an external source.
                                                 See RG 79.135–RG 79.136RG 79.126.

 × General advice that is a restatement,         This is not a research report for the purposes of this guide.
 summary or extract of another research
                                                 However, where such material is re-distributed, it should be clear
 report.
                                                 that:
 Such a process may require permissions           the advice is a restatement, summary or extract of another
 from the original provider.                       report; and
                                                  readers are directed to who prepared the original research
                                                   and, if available, how readers may obtain it.

                                                 See RG 79.26(f).

 ×Client directed (‘bespoke’ research)           Such client directed research is not a ‘research report’ to which
 prepared for a particular client and not for    this guide applies. See RG 79.25(c).
 broader distribution.

 ×Economic research or credit research           Such advice does not include an express or implicit opinion or
 prepared by a licensee’s research analysts.     recommendation about a named or readily identifiable
                                                 investment product and therefore is not a research report to
                                                 which this guide applies. See RG 79.25(b).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                 Page 10
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




What is a research report provider?
              RG 79.27       For the purposes of this guide, and subject to RG 79.25–RG 79.26,
                             a research report provider is a licensee that provides research reports to
                             other persons (clients). This includes situations where the licensee causes
                             or authorises another person (e.g. an authorised representative of the
                             licensee) to provide research reports to other persons (clients).

              RG 79.28       This guidance is designed to apply flexibly to different types of research
                             report provider to improve the quality, transparency, integrity and
                             comparability of research for the end users of the research, regardless
                             of whether they are retail or wholesale clients.



Distributing research prepared by another licensee
              RG 79.29       For users of research to have confidence in the integrity of the research and
                             decide how much reliance they should place on it, it is important that they
                             can see:
                             (a)   the identity of the licensee who prepared the research;
                             (b)   the complete research report (not an extract or summary), unless the
                                   advice is an extract or summary that has already been widely distributed
                                   in accordance with RG 79.26(f); and
                             (c)   any conflicts of interest disclosures that apply to that research report.

              RG 79.30       We do not consider that research report providers can effectively meet their
                             obligations to manage and disclose their conflicts of interest where research
                             is ‘white labelled’ (i.e. prepared by one entity and rebranded and distributed
                             by another), without attribution to the research report provider who originally
                             prepared it. Distributing research in this way makes it difficult for users to
                             assess the value of the research and the impact of any conflicts of interest on
                             the quality and integrity of the research. Licensees preparing research reports
                             can meet their obligations where a research report is co-branded with the
                             licensee distributing the report.

              RG 79.31       If a research report prepared by one licensee (A) is provided to other persons
                             (clients) by another licensee (B) then, for the purposes of this guide,
                             Licensee A is the research report provider, and not Licensee B (regardless of
                             whether Licensee B also puts its own name on the research report).
                             However, this is only the case where:
                             (a)   Licensee A causes or authorises Licensee B to provide the advice
                                   contained in the research report to other persons; and
                             (b)   Licensee B makes no material changes to the advice contained in the
                                   research report.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 11
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.32       As Licensee A is the research report provider, we expect that:
                             (a)   Licensee A’s licence covers preparation of the research report;
                             (b)   it is clear to a reader that Licensee A prepared the research report where
                                   the report is co-branded; and
                             (c)   Licensee A’s conflicts of interests disclosures are attached to the
                                   research report: see RG 79.35–RG 79.36.

              RG 79.33       Where Licensee B makes material changes to the research prepared by
                             Licensee A, Licensee B assumes the obligations of the research report provider
                             as set out in this guide. Any recommendations in the report must be those of
                             Licensee B based on its own assessment of the product in compliance with the
                             quality, conflicts, transparency and disclosure requirements of this guide.

              RG 79.34       The general advice contained in research reports forms part of the advice chain
                             by which retail and wholesale clients make investment decisions. Each licensee
                             should consider its compliance obligations in the preparation and distribution of
                             research reports. This includes whether the licensee preparing the advice permits
                             other licensees to pass on its research to retail clients and in what circumstances.
                             Our expectations of users of research reports such as financial advisory firms that
                             rely on research in the preparation of approved product lists or personal advice
                             for retail clients are set out in Section E of this guide and in RG 175.


                             Access to conflicts of interests disclosures
              RG 79.35       Sometimes the advice contained in a research report (or a summary or extract
                             of the advice) is broadly distributed to a wide range of end-users (e.g. through
                             the media or a public announcement). Research report providers should take
                             reasonable steps to ensure that end-users have access to the relevant conflicts
                             of interests disclosures. The most appropriate way to make this information
                             available will depend on all of the facts and circumstances.
                                   Note: For example, research report providers should take reasonable steps to ensure that:

                                   (a)   research reports are disseminated together with conflicts of interest disclosures (or
                                         made available by reference); and

                                   (b)   where the advice contained in a research report (or a summary or extract of the
                                         advice) has been (or is likely to be) broadly distributed to a wide range of end-
                                         users (e.g. through the media or a public announcement), the relevant conflicts of
                                         interest disclosures are made available by reference (e.g. on a website).

              RG 79.36       In summary, the licensee that prepares the report is the research report provider
                             for the purposes of this guide. If the research is on-distributed by another
                             licensee and no material change is made to the report, the original licensee
                             who prepared the report remains the licensee responsible for compliance with
                             this guide and their conflicts of interests disclosures as relevant to the specific
                             report should follow the report. Disclosures should be relevant to the activity
                             of the respective licensee (e.g. the licensee that prepared the research as
                             distinct from the licensee that distributes the research).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                     Page 12
                           REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Table 2:     Examples of a licensee distributing research prepared by another licensee

Example                                         Explanation

Licensee A prepares research. Licensee B        Licensee A is the research report provider for the purposes of this
distributes the research. Licensee A is         guide. The research distributed by Licensee B must be complete
attributed as the preparer of the research      and unchanged and include Licensee A’s conflicts of interests
and their conflicts of interests disclosures    disclosures as they relate to that research report.
are attached to the report.
                                                Licensee B can be contractually obliged by Licensee A to attribute
                                                and ensure there is no alteration to the report and include conflicts
                                                of interests disclosures.

                                                The research may be co-branded by Licensees A and B.

Licensee A produces institutional research      Licensee A is the research report provider for the purposes of this
and distributes that research to brokerage      guide and there is no further distribution of the research.
houses (Licensees B, C and D). Licensee
                                                Personal advice prepared by Licensees B, C or D in reliance on
A does not authorise further distribution of
                                                Licensee A’s general advice is the responsibility of Licensees B, C
its branded research.
                                                or D.

Licensee A gives permission to Licensees        Licensee A is the research report provider for the purposes of this
B, C and D to distribute its research to        guide and its conflicts of interests disclosures must be attached to
retail clients directly (e.g. on a website or   the research as further distributed.
via a client portal).
                                                Licensee A may decide to co-brand the research with Licensees B,
                                                C or D or review the research before distribution to retail clients.

Research is sourced from Licensees A, B         For the purposes of this guide, Licensees A, B and C are the
and C by a dealer group (Licensee D).           research report providers as they are the authors of the research.
Licensee D has permission from Licensees
                                                The research distributed by Licensee D must include clear
A, B and C to redistribute their research.
                                                statements that the general advice was prepared by Licensees A, B
Licensee D does not make any material           and C and their conflicts of interests disclosures should be attached
change to the research beyond                   to each report.
amalgamating and distributing it to its
advisers who may also pass it on (un-
modified) to their retail clients.

Licensee D makes material changes to the        Licensee D is the research report provider and should make its own
research prepared by A, B and C and             assessment of the product and comply with the quality,
distributes the research under its own          transparency and conflicts management obligations in RG 79 for
brand.                                          any research it produces.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                               Page 13
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




C          Research quality, methodology and transparency

                              Key points

                              Delivering a quality research report requires:
                              • clearly articulating the research approach, its scope and any strengths
                                and limitations that apply;
                              • maintaining and following a robust methodology; and
                              • allocating appropriate human and other resources.




The role of quality research
              RG 79.37       Research is relied upon by both retail clients and wholesale clients (e.g.
                             licensees and institutional investors). Across the spectrum of research report
                             providers, there are differences in business models, products researched and
                             client groups. Regardless of the business model adopted by a provider, the
                             quality of the resultant research is important to the integrity of our financial
                             markets and to the quality of financial advice provided to Australian investors.

              RG 79.38       The constituent parts of a high-quality research service are the human and
                             other resources applied to the research task, quality internal processes
                             (including robust conflicts management processes) and good disclosure.

              RG 79.39       Research is promoted as an expert service to assist intermediaries and clients
                             in making decisions about investment products. It is important that research
                             does (and is seen to) demonstrate the professional expertise and judgement
                             of the research report provider. Users of research should be able to see and
                             assess the expertise that different research report providers bring to the task
                             of preparing research.

                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 112 Independence of experts (RG 112) on principles for the
                                   preparation of expert opinions in an analogous context. These principles relate to
                                   independence, conflicts management and the conduct of the expert in preparing the report.

              RG 79.40       Ensuring that research is of a reliable and robust quality will reduce the risk
                             that licensees breach:
                             (a)   their general AFS licence obligations (s912A(1)); and
                             (b)   the prohibition on misleading or deceptive conduct.

              RG 79.41       In the context of expert or professional opinions, cases decided under the
                             false, misleading or deceptive conduct provisions in the Australian
                             Securities and Investments Act 2001 (ASIC Act) and the (then) Trade
                             Practices Act 1974 (Trade Practices Act) have held that a statement of
                             opinion by a person in their professional capacity involves an implied



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                  Page 14
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             assertion that the opinion has a reasonable basis, is the result of the exercise
                             of due care and skill, and is able to be relied upon:
                                   An opinion given in circumstances that suggest that the opinion was based
                                   on the exercise of certain expertise … carries with it the implication that it
                                   is based on rational grounds and accordingly will breach the prohibition if
                                   it has no reasonable basis. This is especially true where the person giving
                                   the opinion holds themselves out as having special skill in relation to the …
                                   subject of the opinion.

                                   Note: See s52 of the (then) Trade Practices Act, MGIGA (1992) Ltd v Kenny & Good Pty Ltd
                                   (1996) 70 FCR 236, RAIA Insurance Brokers Ltd v FAI General Insurance Co Ltd (1993) 41
                                   FCR 164, Chiarabaglio v Westpac Banking Corporation (1989) ATPR 40–971 and Bathurst
                                   Regional Council v Local Government Financial Services Pty Ltd (No 5) [2012] FCA 1200.



Improving transparency and methodology
              RG 79.42       To improve the quality and reliability of investment research in Australia, it
                             is important that users (and prospective users) of research, be they retail or
                             wholesale clients, have clear, comparable and meaningful information about:
                             (a)   the different research report providers in the market;
                             (b)   the strengths and limitations of different research approaches; and
                             (c)   a clear understanding of how research recommendations or ratings are
                                   produced and what they mean.

              RG 79.43       Factual and relevant information about the research service gives important
                             context to the research, improves users’ ability to understand the research
                             and decide whether to use and rely on it, and to what extent.

              RG 79.44       Our guidance gives providers flexibility in how they communicate this
                             information to users and prospective users of their research services. Some
                             disclosures are appropriate for the broader market while others are specific to
                             the research report. Consistent with international regulators, our objective with
                             this guidance is to create ‘an environment where the research produced by
                             analysts for clients is objective, clear, fair and not misleading’.

                                   Note: See IOSCO Statement of principles for addressing sell-side securities analyst
                                   conflicts of interest: A statement of the Technical Committee of the International
                                   Organisation of Securities Commissions, 25 September 2003, p. 2, at www.iosco.org.

              RG 79.45       We expect AFS licensees that prepare research reports to give the following
                             information about their research products and services:
                             (a)   scope and expertise of the research service;
                             (b)   process by which products are selected for coverage and filters applied;
                             (c)   research methodology applied;
                             (d)   spread of ratings; and
                             (e)   conflicts management policy.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                Page 15
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.46       We expect AFS licensees preparing research reports to give this information
                             in a relevant and meaningful way so that users can understand and compare
                             research services. Giving meaningful information about product coverage
                             and filters, methodology and ratings spreads in particular, is critical for users
                             of research to conduct a proper assessment of the research service and any
                             limitations that apply to it.

              RG 79.47       Providers can make this information available in a number of ways and as
                             appropriate to their business model or client group. For example, summary
                             information may be publicly available on a website or in a separate document
                             such as a Financial Services Guide (FSG) as appropriate to the provider’s
                             business model. More detailed information may be made available to clients,
                             subscribers and end users through direct communications or in the research
                             report. We expect providers to direct users to this information in each research
                             report. Where research is on-distributed to other licensees, we expect the
                             research report to direct end users to these disclosures.

              RG 79.48       We will monitor compliance with our guidance in the course of future
                             surveillance activities. Where these disclosures are not achieving the policy
                             objective of improving the transparency and comparability of investment
                             research, we will consider the need to impose licence conditions on AFS
                             licensees providing research reports.


                             Scope and expertise of research service

              RG 79.49       Research report providers should clearly communicate the nature and scope
                             of their research service. This includes clearly communicating the extent to
                             which they are promoting themselves as experts and the basis for this (e.g.
                             providers should give summary information about the expertise,
                             qualifications and experience they and their staff possess).

              RG 79.50       We expect research report providers to give sufficient information for a
                             client or prospective client to understand the scope of the service and the
                             expertise the provider brings to the research task. We do not expect these
                             disclosures to include commercially sensitive aspects of the business.


                             Coverage and filters

              RG 79.51       Many research report providers filter the financial products they cover in
                             order to form smaller portfolios of products for more detailed research. The
                             selection process may often be qualitative and users of the research should
                             be made aware of this process and any selection biases that may affect
                             research report providers’ coverage decisions.

              RG 79.52       Regardless of the research report provider’s approach, it should be clear to
                             users (and prospective users) how a provider makes coverage decisions, what
                             criteria they apply and any important limitations. For example, for equities



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 16
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             research, a provider may choose to cover equities on the basis of a certain
                             sector of the economy or market capitalisation. For managed funds research, a
                             provider may cover funds within an index or on the basis of some other criteria.

              RG 79.53       Coverage decisions can be relatively stable or dynamic depending on the
                             business model adopted by the research report provider. We expect each
                             provider to determine its approach to communicating product coverage. The
                             purpose of such information is to give users a meaningful guide as to the
                             approach adopted by that provider and any limitations in that approach.

              RG 79.54       If a research report provider begins or ceases to cover a financial product, or
                             class of financial products, this information should be made available to
                             clients or subscribers and, where practicable, providers should give reasons.
                             For example, a provider may:
                             (a)   expand coverage to new sectors of the economy;
                             (b)   limit coverage to a narrower class of products than previously covered
                                   or within a class of products;
                             (c)   change the categories to which funds are allocated for rating which may
                                   have a significant impact on ratings spreads; or
                             (d)   publish research on a managed fund which is subsequently frozen and
                                   therefore cease coverage of the fund (see RG 79.100–RG 79.106).

              RG 79.55       Research report providers should publish on their website or with the
                             research report, as appropriate, either:
                             (a)   a list of all financial products they currently cover; or
                             (b)   a description of the classes of products they cover and the scope (or
                                   percentage, as appropriate) of that coverage.

              RG 79.56       This description should include all products that are below the research report
                             provider’s investment grade (or similar) rating. This information will give users
                             a more holistic view of the available products, and align the risk profile of the
                             products in the broader investment universe to which that product belongs.

              RG 79.57       Many research houses classify managed funds into specific peer groups to
                             simplify the comparison of funds. These groups are defined by selecting funds
                             which are similar in terms of asset class, asset size, investment objectives, risk,
                             and investment style. The research report provider should explain the rationale
                             for that selection and any limitations that apply.

              RG 79.58       Coverage policy is an important issue for users of research to understand to
                             make sense of individual product ratings. A research report provider may give
                             summary information about its coverage policy by type of product and indicate
                             the extent of coverage within that category. We expect this information to be
                             updated regularly for users of the research.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 17
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                              Example 1

                              A research report provider conducts a fact find and segments the market
                              against certain criteria. The excluded products may have been filtered out
                              on the basis of quality or certain qualitative and quantitative criteria and
                              the rated products considered the ‘best of breed’ and therefore warranting
                              further analysis. This process should be clear as the ratings spread is likely
                              to mean more positive product ratings are likely to result and this information
                              is important for readers of the resultant research. See RG 79.65–RG 79.69
                              on the spread of ratings.


                             Methodology
              RG 79.59       We recognise that research report providers employ different methodologies.
                             We do not seek to prescribe the way research report providers approach
                             investment research, nor do we expect all providers to adhere to the same
                             methodology. However, regardless of these differences, we expect research
                             report providers to maintain and follow a robust methodology in their research
                             and to be transparent in the methodology adopted and how it is applied.

              RG 79.60       To help users of research to assess different research models, research report
                             providers should publish (in summary form) their methodology for assessing or
                             rating products. We expect that this will include an explanation of their rating
                             system, including the definitions, criteria and assumptions used. We do not
                             expect providers to publish confidential, proprietary information. However, the
                             information should be sufficient for a reader to understand the key elements of
                             the methodology applied and any important limitations that may apply to it.

              RG 79.61       Regardless of where the information is published (e.g. on the provider’s
                             website or in the FSG), research reports should direct readers to this
                             information in the report.

                              Example 2

                              Some research report providers employ a quantitative methodology, where
                              ratings are generated based on past performance of the funds. This
                              includes factors such as historical returns, volatility, performance ratios,
                              age of fund and size of fund. Where the primary input is data from historical
                              financial reports, for example, it is essential that users understand the
                              extent to which those data inputs are reviewed (e.g. audited) or subject to
                              any further review or analysis by the research report provider. Publishing
                              ratings on the basis of such data may be misleading where users do not
                              have sufficient information to evaluate the methodology employed.


                             Reviewing and rating products
              RG 79.62       There are different ratings schemes (i.e. definitions or classifications) across
                             the spectrum of research report providers. In some sectors, classifications
                             and definitions (e.g. ‘buy, sell and hold’, ‘recommended, neutral, not
                             recommended’) are relatively well understood. In other sectors, a lack of



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 18
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             consistency in definitions of ranking classification has affected the ability of
                             users to make an accurate judgement of the quality of research. For example,
                             when rating fund managers, there is no single or agreed method for
                             classification of the type of fund manager within the investment universe.

              RG 79.63       This can lead to confusion among users about:
                             (a)   whether a product rating should be seen as an absolute conviction about
                                   the quality of a product, or a relative one against its peer group; and
                             (b)   whether the user can compare different research report providers’
                                   classification of products.

              RG 79.64       We expect research report providers to provide a clear indication of the type
                             and classification of products that they research and evaluate.


                             Spread of ratings

              RG 79.65       Information about how the ratings methodology is selected and applied in
                             practice—that is, beyond any general statement of principle—is important
                             for readers relying on the research.

              RG 79.66       Providing information about the spread of ratings is an important
                             accountability and transparency measure for both research report providers
                             and users of their services. We expect research report providers to give
                             information about the spread of their ratings (i.e. how many products or what
                             percentage received each type of rating during the relevant period). This will
                             give users of the reports another tool to gauge the quality and reliability of a
                             particular research report provider.

              RG 79.67       These disclosures should be sufficient to assist users (and prospective users)
                             to assess the methodology applied without including commercially sensitive
                             aspects of the business.

              RG 79.68       Some research report providers already provide this information to their
                             subscribers on their websites or with their research to their clients. For
                             example, some providers are subject to international obligations to disclose
                             their analysts’ spread of ‘buy, sell and hold’ recommendations over a given
                             period. Providers should consider how they can meaningfully communicate
                             their ratings spread in the context of the coverage decisions they make and
                             the filters they use to select products for research.

              RG 79.69       Ratings spreads can also be affected by issuers withdrawing from the
                             research process (where research is commissioned). Where this occurs,
                             we expect providers to disclose how many issuers withdrew from the ratings
                             process in a relevant period (such as the past year). Providers should give
                             sufficient information for users to form a meaningful view of how these
                             factors may affect the ratings spread and therefore a more holistic view of
                             the research service.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 19
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                              Example 3

                              Some research report providers provide higher ratings or more positive
                              recommendations more frequently than others. This is an important piece
                              of information for users of these services.


                             Conflicts management policy

              RG 79.70       Robust processes for managing conflicts of interest are important legal
                             requirements and essential to producing good quality research. Users of
                             research reports should have enough information to form a realistic view
                             about the potential impact of any conflicts of interest on the quality and
                             objectivity of the research service. If research report providers rely on a
                             general disclosure obligation about how they manage conflicts of interest,
                             this disclosure should include a statement on how such conflicts are
                             managed where research is concerned.

                             Testing the quality and integrity of research
              RG 79.71       Back-testing is a process by which a research report provider may compare
                             the past performance of researched or rated products against relevant
                             benchmarks. In our view, back-testing can be usefully employed as part of a
                             research report provider’s review processes to test the rigor of a ratings
                             methodology or the integrity of conflicts management processes.
              RG 79.72       While we do not require such processes under this guidance, we consider
                             self assessment processes that review research methodologies, assumptions
                             or ratings spreads, for example, to be best practice both for the research
                             report provider and for wholesale clients such as financial advisers that rely
                             on the research. We note that some research report providers already conduct
                             such reviews in compliance with international obligations.
              RG 79.73       We consider that best practice review processes would include an annual
                             review with the results being made available to the users of research reports by
                             the same method that the research is generally distributed. We recommend that
                             wholesale clients such as financial advisers consider whether such processes
                             are in place, as part of their due diligence when purchasing research. We may
                             revisit this issue in the context of any future compliance activity.

                              Example 4

                              A research report provider conducts back-testing of past ratings to examine
                              correlations between the ratings and the actual performance of products for
                              a period, appropriate to a typical investment horizon of the product type
                              (e.g. one year for equities, or three to five years for managed funds) after
                              the research is published.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 20
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                              Example 5

                              Reviewing ratings spreads, such as the proportion of ‘buy’ recommendations
                              a banking group’s corporate clients receive over a 12-month period compared
                              to those of non-corporate clients, may provide a good indicator as to whether
                              the research is of good quality and that conflicts are being effectively managed.


Allocating appropriate resources
              RG 79.74       AFS licensees have general obligations under s912A(1) of the Corporations
                             Act to:
                             (a)   do all things necessary to ensure that the financial services covered by
                                   their licence are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly;
                             (b)   comply with the conditions on their licence;
                             (c)   take reasonable steps to ensure that their representatives comply with
                                   the financial services laws;
                             (d)   have adequate financial, technological and human resources to provide
                                   the financial services covered by their licence and to carry out
                                   supervisory arrangements;
                             (e)   maintain the competence to provide the financial services covered by
                                   their licence; and
                             (f)   ensure that their representatives are adequately trained and competent to
                                   provide those financial services.
                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 104 Licensing: Meeting the general obligations (RG 104)
                                   and Regulatory Guide 105 Licensing: Organisational competence (RG 105).

              RG 79.75       As the complexity of some financial products increases, it is essential that
                             research analysts have the requisite skills and experience supported by an
                             appropriate level of supervision and adequate sign-off processes to produce
                             high-quality research.
              RG 79.76       Human resources are a key input to research report providers’ processes and
                             output. Research report providers should allocate sufficient resources to
                             support the effective performance of their research staff.
              RG 79.77       In some cases, research is heavily relied upon in the distribution of complex
                             products to retail clients who are unlikely to properly understand the product
                             their adviser recommends they invest in. Where this is the case, the expertise
                             of the research analyst and the quality measures adopted by the research
                             report provider are particularly important in ensuring retail investors (and
                             their advisers) are making properly informed decisions.
              RG 79.78       Research report providers often cover a substantial number of financial
                             products of varying complexity. Careful consideration needs to be given to
                             balancing the commercial imperative to provide broad product coverage with
                             the need to maintain the quality of research output and the allocation of
                             adequate staff time to each research report.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                               Page 21
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             Staff competence and expertise
              RG 79.79       To analyse financial products well, research report providers need to allocate
                             appropriate resources to each research task. This includes allocating
                             sufficient numbers of staff with suitable qualifications for the research task
                             and setting appropriate timelines for the completion of tasks.

              RG 79.80       In light of continuing product innovation and developments in financial
                             markets, research report providers should continue to train and supervise the
                             work of their research analysts, particularly junior staff. This can be done by
                             setting up mentoring and supervisory arrangements and ongoing training and
                             development initiatives.

              RG 79.81       The requirements set out in Regulatory Guide 146 Licensing: Training of
                             financial product advisers (RG 146) are a minimum, general standard for
                             advisers. This standard establishes a basic level of competency, a platform
                             upon which we expect AFS licensees to build to create the appropriate level
                             of competency required for analysts to perform credible research.

                             Rotating research analysts
              RG 79.82       Rotation of research analysts can be a useful way to reduce the risk that a
                             research analyst becomes too familiar or close to the products and the
                             product issuers under review, which may give rise to conflicts of interests.

              RG 79.83       If a research report provider decides not to rotate analysts in its practice,
                             careful consideration should be given to how it will manage any possible
                             conflicts of interest that may arise. For example, a research report provider
                             might be too small for analyst rotation or believe that the benefits of analysts
                             developing specialist knowledge and expertise in particular industries exceed
                             the risks involved. Each provider should consider whether it is reasonable in
                             the circumstances to rotate analysts. This issue should be the subject of
                             internal compliance controls and monitoring.

                             Research sign-off process
              RG 79.84       It is essential that an appropriate sign-off process is incorporated into a
                             research report provider’s work process. All research should be subject to
                             proper evaluation (e.g. via a peer review process) and a proper approval
                             process (e.g. involving a committee of senior research staff: see RG 79.142).

              RG 79.85       Research reports should be based on reasonable grounds. It is important that
                             the content of each research report reflects the view of the research report
                             provider, and it may be misleading for a research report provider to publish a
                             report containing views it does not agree with. An appropriate sign-off
                             process would reduce the incidence of this risk: see RG 79.89–RG 79.91.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 22
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Preparing the research report
              RG 79.86       Quality measures operate in tandem with measures to manage conflicts of
                             interest. They are mutually reinforcing and should be read together.

Table 3:    Quality and transparency measures for the research report

 Quality measures                                  Description

 Reasons for opinions or recommendations           Report should have clear, unambiguous reasons for its
                                                   recommendations.

 Reports based on ‘reasonable grounds’             Research reports should be based on ‘reasonable grounds’,
                                                   with each research report reflecting the views of the research
                                                   staff who wrote or approved it.

 Reports for ‘proper purpose’                      Offers or threats of favourable or unfavourable research must
                                                   not be used to solicit benefits or other business, and research
                                                   must not be used to unfairly or artificially increase trading
                                                   volumes or to otherwise generate revenue for the provider’s
                                                   ancillary businesses, for example.

 Past performance warning                          Where research ratings are based on past performance the
                                                   past performance warning should be given.

 Who commissioned or paid for the research         Where this occurs, it should be clearly and prominently
                                                   disclosed in the research report.

 Publishing all (including adverse research)       Many providers publish all research regardless of the rating
                                                   while others only publish research where certain rating criteria
                                                   are met. Publishing all research (broadly or limited to
                                                   subscribers only) demonstrates research coverage and
                                                   reduces the perception that conflicts of interest may interfere
                                                   with the research process and outcome.

 Research should be dated and users should         Providers should maintain the currency of research based on
 have information to assess the currency of        the parameters in this guide. Information about the currency of
 research                                          research must be made available to users.

 Research ratings should be available              Research, both positive and negative, should be available with
                                                   access to historical research to counter any perception that
                                                   conflicts of interest may influence the ratings process.



                             Reasons for opinions or recommendations

              RG 79.87       The research report (or accompanying disclosures) should state the reasons for
                             the opinions and recommendations. This will help clients form a view about
                             the research report and whether to rely on it. We expect all research report
                             providers to take reasonable steps to ensure that their recommendations, and
                             the basis for these recommendations, are clear, unambiguous and transparent.

                                  Note: This is particularly so for the main recommendation or opinion given in the report
                                  (if any). For example, research report providers should ensure that research reports
                                  explain terminology, rating systems and valuation methods used in the report.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                  Page 23
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.88       Research report providers should:
                             (a)   ensure each piece of research expresses an unambiguous view (noting
                                   that this does not exclude a qualified view) on each product researched,
                                   and uses clear, transparent and easily understood language;
                             (b)   where research ratings or recommendations are based on past
                                   performance, ensure the report carries a past performance warning;
                             (c)   ensure that each research report clearly and prominently states who
                                   commissioned it and who paid for it; and
                             (d)   maintain the currency of research in accordance with this guide, publish
                                   all research (broadly or to clients or subscribers) and ensure that ratings
                                   are available for a reasonable period of time within the parameters set
                                   out in this guide.

                              Example 6

                              Research reports should be clear when giving an opinion, recommendation
                              or rating of a particular product as to whether the particular product is
                              ‘highly recommended’ relative to the market as a whole, or only relative to
                              a particular peer group (e.g. equity funds).


                             Reports based on ‘reasonable grounds’

              RG 79.89       Research report providers should ensure that research reports are based on
                             objective, verifiable facts and analysis, and not on the special interests of the
                             research report provider’s research staff, the product issuer or others.
                             Research reports that are not based on reasonable grounds may be
                             misleading or deceptive within the meaning of the Corporations Act:
                             s1041H.

              RG 79.90       Cases decided under the analogous provisions of the (then) Trade Practices
                             Act, (now the Competition and Consumer Act 2010) have held that a
                             statement of opinion by a person in their professional capacity involves an
                             implied assertion that the opinion has a reasonable basis, is the result of the
                             exercise of due care and skill, and is able to be relied upon: see RG 79.41.

              RG 79.91       To reduce the risk that research reports are not based on reasonable grounds,
                             research report providers should ensure that each report reflects the views of
                             the person who takes responsibility for it (e.g. the person who prepared it or
                             the person who approved its distribution).

                             Reports for ‘proper purpose’

              RG 79.92       Research report providers should ensure that favourable research is not
                             offered, or changes to research threatened, as an inducement to secure the
                             business of a corporate client or receive other benefits.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 24
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.93       Care needs to be taken to ensure research reports are not used to artificially
                             increase trading volume and revenue or secure corporate advisory business,
                             for example. While high quality research may well attract dealing business
                             to research report providers, their conflicts management arrangements need
                             to identify and respond to the risk that attempts to attract dealing business do
                             not unduly distort the content of any research reports: see Section D of this
                             guide.
                                   Note: If research report providers were able to use research reports as a way to
                                   artificially increase trading volume, there would be a risk that, for example, they might
                                   be tempted to make a disproportionate number of ‘buy’ and ‘sell’ (as opposed to ‘hold’)
                                   recommendations to increase trading volume.


                             Past performance warning

              RG 79.94       Where research ratings are based on past performance, the report should
                             carry the standard past performance warning (i.e. past performance is not an
                             indication of future performance). It is important that clients do not place
                             undue reliance on past performance information, directly or indirectly via
                             qualitative research. For more information on the use of past performance
                             information, see Regulatory Guide 53 The use of past performance in
                             promotional material (RG 53).

              RG 79.95       However, a past performance warning on its own will not be sufficient to
                             communicate important limitations applying to quantitative research that
                             generates ratings on the basis of a very limited number of data inputs (e.g.
                             a product issuer’s financial reports). If a provider adopts such a methodology
                             where there is little or no additional qualitative assessment of the data done by
                             the research report provider, it is essential that users of such research receive
                             the past performance warning in addition to relevant disclosures to help them
                             understand the methodology employed and the limitations that apply.

                             Who commissioned or paid for the research

              RG 79.96       Where research is commissioned, we expect research report providers to state
                             clearly who commissioned or paid for the report. For example, where a report
                             was commissioned and paid for by the product issuer, the report should clearly
                             and prominently disclose this, preferably on the front or covering page of the
                             report.

              RG 79.97       The research report (or accompanying disclosures) should state:
                             (a)   the date the research report was prepared or finalised; and
                             (b)   who takes responsibility for the report (e.g. the person who prepared it
                                   or the person who approved its distribution).

              RG 79.98       We believe that clients will reasonably require disclosure about each of these
                             matters in forming a view about the research report and whether to rely on it.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                    Page 25
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.99       Section D of this guide deals with the disclosure of conflicts of interest such as
                             benefits and associations and relationships: see RG 79.143 and RG 79.164.
                             However, we consider it important that disclosure of any structural conflicts,
                             such as business model conflicts, is included with the headline disclosures
                             about the nature of the business: see RG 79.35–RG 79.36, RG 79.70 and
                             RG 79.123–RG 79.124.


                             Currency of research

              RG 79.100      Research reports are prepared based on information available at the time of
                             preparation. It is important that the currency of the research is clear on the
                             face of the research and where research is not current, that users can easily
                             access information to help assess the current status of the research.

              RG 79.101      Ratings that are not monitored or updated can be misleading unless research
                             report providers prominently state how currency will be communicated to users,
                             including whether the research is being monitored or whether it will be updated
                             in future.

              RG 79.102      To assist users, providers should maintain a log of historical research. Where
                             research reports and their recommendations are no longer current (e.g. where
                             there have been material changes to the product or market), the research should
                             be clearly flagged as historical and providers should indicate that the original
                             recommendation no longer applies. Failure to do so affects the reliability of the
                             research report and the credibility of the provider and risks misleading users
                             relying on that research.

              RG 79.103      Depending on the class of product that is the subject of the research, update and
                             review cycles differ. Equities research, for example, is current at a ‘point in time’.
                             Updates occur frequently at the discretion of the analyst in response to market
                             events or compliance obligations on the part of the provider. Other research is less
                             sensitive to market developments, less time critical and is updated less frequently.
                             For example, in the case of much managed funds research, updates and reviews
                             may occur annually and the research, once published, is considered to be current
                             on an ongoing basis until the next scheduled review.

              RG 79.104      Irrespective of the underlying product, it is essential that meaningful
                             information about the currency of a piece of research and the status of the report
                             is available. We expect research report providers to maintain and communicate
                             the currency of their research as appropriate to the products they provide
                             research about and the research methodology they employ.

              RG 79.105      All research report providers should ensure that
                             (a)   each research report has the date of issue and a statement that the report
                                   is current ‘as at’ that date; and
                             (b)   clients or subscribers can access a log of historical research where they
                                   can see, for example, the research history relevant to that product; and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 26
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             (c)   where a provider claims that a research report is current on an ongoing
                                   basis, the report should include a statement that the research is current
                                   until it is replaced, updated or withdrawn and, if this is the case,
                                   communicate to users or subscribers how they can find out if the report
                                   has been replaced, updated or withdrawn. This may be in the form of an
                                   alert to subscribers about current research status or directing users to the
                                   historical log to check the status of research.

              RG 79.106      We expect research report providers to communicate the currency of their
                             research to clients or subscribers in such a way that a reasonable investor can
                             understand it. Regardless of business model, client base or researched
                             products, currency should be clearly communicated and sufficient to ensure
                             a reasonable investor is not misled.

                              Example 7

                              A research report provider publishes a research report which highly rates a
                              managed fund. Months later, the product issuer publishes material disclosures
                              about the negative performance of the underlying investments in the fund. The
                              provider does not update or review the research or rating and gives no guidance
                              to users as to how they can assess the currency of the research and whether
                              and to what extent they rely on it. Such research is likely to be misleading.


                              Example 8

                              Where a research report provider’s service includes quantitative research that
                              is updated regularly (e.g. daily or weekly) based on financial disclosures, the
                              currency requirement may be met by ensuring the research is dated, the
                              update cycle is communicated to clients who can also access and review the
                              historical log of research about a particular entity and those clients have
                              information about the research methodology employed, consistent with the
                              requirements in Section B of this guide (e.g. a past performance warning is
                              given and any limitations on the reliability of the data is given so that users
                              can make an informed decision about the data and any rating attached).


                             Publishing all (including adverse research)

              RG 79.107      Many providers publish all research regardless of the rating while others
                             only publish research where certain rating criteria are met. Publishing all
                             research (broadly or limited to clients or subscribers only) demonstrates
                             research coverage and reduces the perception that conflicts of interest
                             associated with the research process affect the research process.

                              Example 9

                              Where a product issuer commissions research, the terms of engagement
                              should be clear that the resulting research report and rating (regardless of
                              rating) will be published (broadly or to subscribers). See RG 79.96–RG 79.99
                              and Table 5.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 27
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             Research ratings should be available
              RG 79.108      It is an important principle that product ratings are made available (published
                             to clients or subscribers), irrespective of whether they are positive or negative.
              RG 79.109      External scrutiny of the research and ratings process and outcome is
                             necessary to limit any potential for product issuers shopping for ratings
                             without leaving a ‘footprint’ that a product has been subject to a research
                             process that has had, or may potentially have had, an adverse result.
              RG 79.110      We expect research ratings to be made available for a reasonable period of
                             time. What is a ‘reasonable period’ will depend on a number of factors
                             which may affect the currency of the research report and its recommendation
                             and require its withdrawal. These may include:
                             (a)   a response to market events;
                             (b)   a provider’s need to comply with other regulatory obligations;
                             (c)   the closure of an offer period to which the research related; or
                             (d)   the issue of a supplementary Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) in
                                   relation to the researched product.
              RG 79.111      Where such factors affect the longevity of a piece of research, providers can
                             comply with our expectations that research is made available by ensuring users
                             can access the research history of a product, including the rating the product had
                             when it was current, that it is no longer current and cannot be relied upon, with
                             a short explanation as to the reason. Ensuring access to historical research will
                             help manage any perception that conflicts of interest may influence the ratings
                             process or outcome. It also allows users to see that a product has been the
                             subject of research and the outcome of that process. See RG 79.100–RG 79.106.


Compliance reporting
              RG 79.112      Compliance reporting is a measure that research report providers can use to
                             assess their compliance against the key issues in this guide. There are
                             regulatory costs and benefits of a compliance reporting requirement and we
                             do not require mandatory compliance reporting at this time. We will conduct
                             targeted surveillance on research report providers to assess compliance with
                             this guide. The focus of surveillance activity may be compliance in general,
                             or a select group of issues (e.g. conflicts management).
              RG 79.113      A sample compliance report is attached as an appendix to this guide. It is
                             intended as a useful checklist to guide research report providers in
                             complying with their obligations. Providers that choose to use this
                             compliance report format may customise it to suit their business models and
                             compliance arrangements. It is not a requirement to complete the compliance
                             report and it is not a template for future ASIC surveillance activity.
              RG 79.114      We may revisit the need for compliance reporting in the future based on the
                             outcome of our surveillance activities.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 28
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




D          Avoiding, controlling and disclosing conflicts
           of interest

                              Key points

                              Conflicts of interest, whether direct or indirect, can reduce the quality,
                              integrity and reliability of research.

                              Some conflicts of interest should be avoided entirely.

                              Other conflicts of interest can be managed by:
                              • adopting an appropriate business model and ensuring the organisation is
                                structured to minimise and manage real and potential conflicts;
                              • adopting robust research processes;
                              • having adequate controls in place to manage conflicts; and
                              • giving meaningful disclosure to help users of the research understand
                                any conflicts, how they are managed and the extent to which they can
                                rely on the research.



Conflicts and the research industry
              RG 79.115      The conflicts management obligation in the Corporations Act requires a
                             licensee to have adequate arrangements to manage conflicts of interest:
                             s912A(1)(aa). This obligation and our guidance in RG 181 apply to all
                             licensees, including research report providers, and relate to the integrity of
                             any research. What an individual licensee needs to do to comply with the
                             obligation varies according to the nature, scale and complexity of its
                             financial services business.

              RG 79.116      RG 181 focuses on broad principles and guidance for licensees generally
                             in managing conflicts of interest, and sets out expectations that licensees
                             should meet in order to comply with the conflicts management obligation
                             see RG 181.16. Our guidance in this section supplements RG 181, and
                             should be read together with it.

              RG 79.117      The three key mechanisms we expect research report providers generally to
                             use to manage conflicts of interest are controlling, disclosing and avoiding
                             conflicts of interest: see RG 181.20. To control conflicts of interest, research
                             report providers should have mechanisms to:
                             (a)   identify conflicts of interest;
                             (b)   assess and evaluate those conflicts; and
                             (c)   decide upon and implement an appropriate response to those conflicts:
                                   see RG 181.29.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 29
                            REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.118        We expect research report providers to take reasonable steps to ensure that
                               conflicts of interest:
                               (a)   do not compromise the integrity of the advice they give in their research
                                     reports;
                               (b)   do not result in the licensee breaching its duties including (but not
                                     limited to) the duty to act efficiently, honestly and fairly; and
                               (c)   are adequately disclosed.

              RG 79.119        A culture of integrity that includes an ethical approach to conflicts of interest
                               should be encouraged. However, this is no substitute for implementing,
                               maintaining and monitoring robust policies and procedures. Research report
                               providers should avoid placing an unacceptable level of reliance on staff integrity.

              RG 79.120        Our guidance for research report providers focuses on the following issues:
                               (a)   adopting an appropriate business model and ensuring the organisation is
                                     structured to minimise and manage real and potential conflicts
                                     associated with internal research processes; and
                               (b)   having adequate controls in place to manage conflicts, including
                                     avoiding conflicts that cannot otherwise be managed; and
                               (c)   giving meaningful disclosure to help users of the research understand
                                     any conflicts, how they are managed and the extent to which they can
                                     rely on the research.
                                     Note: See also the related discussion of disclosure issues in Sections B and C of this
                                     guide, particularly disclosure of products and services and clarity and transparency.

Table 4:    Summary of issues to consider in managing conflicts of interest

 Issue                          Description

 Business model and             Different business models can increase or reduce the incidence of certain
 organisational                 conflicts arising and influencing the research process and outcome.
 structure

 Information barriers and       Information barriers should be robust to protect the objectivity and
 segregation of business        independence of the research process and its outcome. Research staff should
 units                          be physically separate from, and not supervised by, any staff that are
                                performing an investment banking, corporate advisory, consulting or dealing
                                function. Similarly, electronic systems and communications systems should be
                                restricted to access by research staff only.

 Provision of non-research      Research report providers should have a policy on how and when non-
 services                       research services are provided to an issuer for whom the research report
                                provider also produces research.

                                Ancillary services that may conflict with the research function should be strictly
                                and formally segregated. Such services may include where a provider offers
                                funds management or consulting services. Where segregation is not sufficient
                                to manage the conflict, it should be avoided.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                       Page 30
                            REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




 Issue                          Description

 General advice about           General advice about a licensee’s own or related party products is not
 products issued by a           research for the purposes of this guide: see RG 79.26(d) and the examples in
 licensee or related body       Table 1.
 corporate

 Controls                       Having adequate controls in place to manage conflicts ensures that conflicts
                                are identified and dealt with appropriately as they arise.

 Documentation                  Conflicts management arrangements should be documented.

 Monitoring compliance          There should be a person or separate unit responsible for monitoring
                                compliance with the research report provider’s conflicts management
                                arrangements.

 Communication                  Research report providers should have a detailed policy on communications
                                within and outside the licensee, including ensuring that research reports are
                                not communicated outside the research report provider before they are broadly
                                distributed.

 Approval before                To maintain the quality and integrity of reports, research reports should be
 distribution                   reviewed and approved by an experienced supervisor (or by a group of peers)
                                before they are distributed to clients.

 Benefits and                   Decisions about the remuneration of research staff should be made by staff not
 remuneration                   directly connected with another business unit.

 Trading restrictions           Research report providers should have a policy on trading restrictions.

 Disclosure of conflicts        Specific, prominent and meaningful disclosures about conflicts of interest allow
 of interest                    users to form a realistic view about the research and whether to rely on it.

 Issuer paid research           Where research is commissioned, we expect research report providers to
                                clearly and prominently disclose who commissioned and paid for the research,
                                preferably on the front or covering page of the report.

 Interests                      Research report providers should disclose in or with each research report
                                whether they (or any associated persons) have, or are likely in the future to
                                have, a material interest in financial products that are the subject of the report.
                                Disclosure will generally need to cover both the existence and extent of the
                                interest

 Benefits                       Research report providers should disclose whether they (or any associated
                                persons) are likely to receive any benefits from the report. This includes
                                disclosure that the research has been commissioned and by whom.

 Assistance provided by         The research report (or accompanying disclosures) should disclose whether
 product issuer                 the research staff who prepared the research report were helped in any way by
                                the product issuer and the type of assistance given.

 Quality research               Robust research processes also ensure that real or potential conflicts are less
 processes                      likely to have an adverse impact on research quality: see Section C of this
                                guide.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                 Page 31
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Business model and organisational structure
              RG 79.121      The structure of a business may increase or reduce the incidence of conflicts of
                             interest. It can affect the independence of the research and the extent to which
                             a user can rely, with confidence, on the integrity of that research. Research
                             report providers should consider the impact of such conflicts in developing
                             their business model and adopt appropriate controls to preserve the objectivity
                             and independence of the research process and outcome. See RG 181.15.

              RG 79.122      Business or professional relationships with entities commissioning research,
                             or entities the subject of research, and any fee or benefit or other financial
                             interests capable of influencing the research report provider’s ability to give
                             an independent and objective assessment of the product should be disclosed.


                             Business model conflicts

              RG 79.123      Business model conflicts may be direct or indirect. There is a distinction
                             between conflicts that are directly related to a specific piece of research—for
                             example, that the research report provider has also been an underwriter for
                             an initial public offering (IPO)—compared to indirect business model
                             conflicts that apply across your business model. Indirect conflicts can be as
                             corrosive as direct conflicts to the integrity of the research.

                              Example 10

                              Direct conflicts include circumstances where another part of the business
                              (e.g. investment bank) has provided underwriting or consulting services to
                              an entity that is the subject of the research.


                              Example 11

                              Direct conflicts include issuer commissioned research. The research report
                              provider’s dependence on the income stream generated by the client
                              relationship has the potential to adversely influence the independence of
                              the research, ratings process and outcome.


                              Example 12

                              Indirect conflicts include circumstances where the client relationships and
                              revenue streams generated by ancillary business units such as consulting
                              or funds management services may indirectly conflict with the integrity of the
                              research service. Such conflicts may not directly relate to or affect a specific
                              piece of research on a specific product or issuer. Nevertheless, these
                              indirect conflicts share the potential to negatively affect the independence
                              and integrity of the overall research process. Unlike direct conflicts, this
                              impact may not be as readily apparent to a user of the research.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 32
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.124      Research report provider selects their own business models and each model
                             has the potential to present certain conflicts of interest. Our expectation is
                             that business model conflicts, whether direct or indirect, should be avoided
                             unless there are robust processes and controls in place and meaningful
                             disclosure. We do not require avoidance of conflicts of interest associated
                             with issuer pays research at this time. However, if an outcome of our
                             surveillance activity is that this conflict is not being robustly and effectively
                             managed, we will revisit the need for avoidance.

Table 5:    Conflicts and controls with direct and indirect business model conflicts

 Conflict                              Control

 Commercial imperatives to             Fee and contractual arrangements for the research services should be
 generate and guarantee ongoing        clearly separated from the research or rating process and outcome.
 revenue streams create potential      The research service should be clearly separated from the providers
 conflicts which may have an           business management or consulting services. If this cannot be achieved,
 adverse influence on research         the conflict should be avoided.
 analysts by creating pressure to
 give favourable ratings rather than
 truly independent ratings

 Relationship between the              Adopt clear, written terms of engagement with the commissioning party to
 research report provider and          ensure interactions are free from undue influence. This should specify:
 commissioning party                    fees for service;
                                        avenues of communication;
                                        access to information and commitment to the ratings process;
                                        use and distribution of the report; and
                                        publication of the research (irrespective of the final rating).
                                        Clear disclosure to users that the issuer has paid for the research
                                       Entities with this conflict should consider the analogous requirements in
                                       RG 112 on independence of experts.

 Contractual arrangements should       Where a product issuer directly commissions research from a research
 support robust research               report provider, the provider should contract with a product issuer to
 processes                             ensure they provide all necessary information to enable a proper
                                       assessment. Such arrangements can help manage conflicts of interest
                                       and improve the quality of information for the provider and ultimate end
                                       user.

 Fee structures that create a nexus    Research and rating fees should be transparent.
 between remuneration and              Split payment arrangements such that an entity may pay a fee only if their
 research                              product gets to a certain phase of the research process, should be
                                       avoided.
                                       Such arrangements risk compromising the integrity of the research in
                                       linking the remuneration too closely to the research process and
                                       outcome.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                               Page 33
                             REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




 Conflict                                    Control

 Cross subsidisation arrangements            Revenue sources and cross subsidisation relationships should be
                                             managed to preserve the independence of the research process. They
                                             should be clearly disclosed for end users to assess any impact on the
                                             integrity of the research. This includes any fees charged for the use of the
                                             rating in advertisements or other licensing arrangements or outsourced
                                             research services.
                                             The impact of this potential conflict should be considered, reviewed and
                                             disclosed in the context of the overall business model. Where such
                                             conflicts cannot be managed, they should be avoided.

 Selection bias and coverage                 Because investment research is not conducted in a vacuum, controls and
 decisions can lead to conflicts or          adequate disclosures are necessary to address selection bias in research
 perceived conflicts of interest.            coverage so users can understand coverage decisions and derive
                                             meaning from a research rating.
                                             Users need to be able to evaluate a rating in context (e.g. whether the
                                             rating is an absolute conviction about the quality of a product or a rating
                                             of the product relative to its products in its peer group).
                                             Publishing ratings spreads and ratings outcomes helps users to assess
                                             the value and integrity of the research service. See RG 79.65–RG 79.69.

 Poor transparency in ratings                All ratings should be published (to subscribers or clients) to allow external
 processes                                   scrutiny of the process and to avoid issuers shopping for ratings without
                                             leaving a ‘footprint’. Where a product issuer withdraws from the ratings
                                             process, providers should publish that information and the reasons why.

Note: This is not an exhaustive list of business model conflicts or controls.



                                 Information barriers and segregation of business units

                RG 79.125        Robust information barriers and the segregation of business units help
                                 preserve the objectivity and independence of the research process and are
                                 essential for a research report provider to manage their conflicts of interest.
                                 It is the responsibility of each research report provider to achieve this
                                 separation in an operationally effective way given the nature, size and
                                 complexity of the business.

                RG 79.126        To be effective, robust information barriers (physical and electronic) must
                                 actually prevent information passing between research staff (and their
                                 managers) and other staff. Electronic controls should prevent the flow of and
                                 access to research data by non-research staff. The effectiveness of such
                                 controls should be the object of regular review.

                RG 79.127        We expect research report providers to ensure that research staff are
                                 structurally and physically separated from (and are not supervised by) any
                                 staff who are performing an investment banking, corporate advisory,
                                 consulting, or dealing function or are involved in product design or
                                 development.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                   Page 34
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.128      For research to be genuinely objective and independent, research staff must be
                             quarantined from other business units such as units who have client relationship
                             management responsibilities. Segregating research staff from roles relating to
                             the management of client relationships should also be supported by electronic
                             separation of research data. Staff working in non research business units should
                             not be able to access research data, working files or draft research.

              RG 79.129      What will be appropriate structures and supervision practices for a research
                             report provider will depend on the nature, scale and complexity of its business:
                             see RG 181.35–RG 181.37. Smaller firms may have less capacity to fully
                             separate research and other staff, and may need to consider other measures to
                             ensure their research reports are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly and
                             that the integrity of the advice they contain is not compromised (e.g. internal,
                             independent and senior approval of research reports: see RG 79.84–RG 79.85).


                             Provision of non-research services

              RG 79.130      If research report providers also provide non-research services to a product
                             issuer, there is a potential conflict of interest. Conflicts management
                             arrangements need to take this into account to ensure the integrity of
                             research reports is not compromised. Whether the non-research services
                             have, or are likely to have, an impact on the preparation of research will
                             depend on all of the facts and circumstances.

              RG 79.131      If research cannot be separated from other services to issuers, or ‘add on’
                             consultancy services cannot be provided at arm’s length from the research
                             service, the conflict should be avoided.

              RG 79.132      Examples of non-research services include:
                             (a)   underwriting a public offering;
                             (b)   advice about the prospects for a potential public offering (including
                                   likely reception in the financial market);
                             (c)   help in marketing and promoting a public offering (including
                                   participation in ‘roadshows’ and ‘conference calls’);
                             (d)   advice on structuring and developing new financial products; and
                             (e)   business management or consulting services on investment manager
                                   selection and asset allocation or the offering of ‘fund of funds’.

              RG 79.133      Research report providers will need to consider, among other measures,
                             whether they should:
                             (a)   ensure that research on a product issuer is not published while non-
                                   research services are being provided to the product issuer, and for a
                                   short period afterwards (i.e. a ‘quiet period’); and/or
                             (b)   fully disclose in relevant research reports the nature of any non-research
                                   services provided to a product issuer: see also RG 79.164.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 35
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.134      What is an appropriate solution will depend on the circumstances and the
                             nature of the non-research services being provided. Senior management will
                             need to consider how they manage the conflicts of interest inherent in
                             providing non-research services to entities that they publish research about.

                                  Note: What is an appropriate solution will also depend on the extent to which robust
                                  information barriers ensure that research staff are not aware of any non-research
                                  services being provided to an issuer: see RG 79.125–RG 79.129.


                             General advice about own products
              RG 79.135      Some research report providers are also product developers and issuers.
                             Where a provider’s research analysts produce information, analysis or other
                             material about its own products or products produced by a related body
                             corporate for internal use, such information is not research for the purposes
                             of this guidance. See RG 79.26 and the examples in Table 1. For example,
                             although a licensee’s analysts may produce such general advice for
                             promotional purposes, it is not advice to which this guide applies. Because
                             such general advice is not a research report, it should not claim to be one, as
                             it does not have the requisite objectivity, rigor or independence that typically
                             characterises a ‘research report’.

              RG 79.136      Where a licensee wishes to broadly distribute research about its own
                             products a clear conflict of interest arises. In such cases and consistent with
                             industry practice, we expect licensees to avoid the conflict by obtaining
                             research from an external source.


Controls
                             Documentation
              RG 79.137      Research report providers should maintain specific policies and procedures
                             for managing conflicts of interest, and make these available to all staff.
                             To be adequate, these policies and procedures need to be documented:
                             see RG 181.44–RG 181.48.


                             Monitoring compliance

              RG 79.138      Research report providers also need to ensure their conflicts management
                             policies and procedures are implemented, maintained and actually complied
                             with in practice. The appropriate monitoring and supervision practices for a
                             research report provider will depend on the nature, scale and complexity of
                             its business: see RG 181.35–RG 181.37.

                                  Note: We expect that conflicts management policies will include specific reference to
                                  supervision, monitoring, review, audit and disciplinary matters.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                  Page 36
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.139      Generally, research report providers should maintain an organisational unit
                             separate to the business units (e.g. part of the compliance area) that is
                             responsible for ensuring that conflicts management arrangements are
                             implemented, monitored, reviewed and updated. It is important that the unit
                             responsible for monitoring the research report provider’s compliance with its
                             conflicts management obligations is separate from the business units where
                             the potential conflicts are likely to arise. In smaller firms, it may be an
                             individual person rather than an organisational unit who has this
                             responsibility.

                                  Note: We expect that all units of the research report provider will contribute to its
                                  management of conflicts of interest, not just the compliance unit.


                             Communication

              RG 79.140      A communications policy should outline appropriate and inappropriate
                             communications practices within the organisation and with external parties.
                             Particular attention needs to be paid to communications between research staff
                             and other staff of the research report provider, and between research staff and
                             external organisations (particularly product issuers). The communications
                             policy should be made clear to all staff (both research staff and others). This
                             includes, but is not limited to, information barriers: see RG 79.125–RG 79.129.

              RG 79.141      Research report providers should ensure that research reports or information
                             about their contents are not communicated outside the research report
                             provider before the report is provided to clients in the normal course of
                             business. This does not mean that a research report provider cannot check
                             the factual accuracy of parts of a research report with a product issuer before
                             it is provided to clients. However, we expect that this checking would be
                             done in a carefully controlled way (e.g. without communicating the
                             recommendations or opinions also contained in the report).

                             Approval before distribution

              RG 79.142      To maintain the quality and integrity of reports, research reports should be
                             reviewed and approved by an experienced supervisor or by a group of peers
                             (e.g. review committee) before they are distributed to clients. Reports should
                             not be reviewed or approved by staff from another business area (e.g.
                             investment banking, corporate advisory or dealing function), other than a
                             restricted review for factual accuracy purposes. A written record should be kept
                             of the review and approval of each research report. See RG 79.125–RG 79.129.


                             Benefits and remuneration

              RG 79.143      Decisions about the remuneration of research staff should not be made by
                             staff that are directly connected with another business unit (e.g. investment




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                     Page 37
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             banking, corporate advisory or dealing). Remuneration decisions should not
                             be contingent on:
                             (a)   research staff introducing new clients or retaining existing clients for
                                   the investment banking, corporate advisory or dealing units;
                             (b)   any specific investment banking, corporate advisory or dealing
                                   transaction; or
                             (c)   the level of any asset management fee.

                             Trading restrictions

              RG 79.144      If research report providers or their research staff trade in the financial
                             products that they publish research about, there is a potential conflict of
                             interest. Conflicts management arrangements need to take this into account
                             to ensure the integrity of research reports is not compromised.

              RG 79.145      What is an appropriate solution will depend on the circumstances but some
                             of the things a research report provider may need to consider include:
                             (a)   ensuring it has a policy on the distribution of research reports on
                                   financial products that the research report provider or its research staff
                                   have an interest in;
                             (b)   ensuring it does not unfairly trade ahead of the distribution of a research
                                   report (e.g. through appropriate compliance arrangements and
                                   information barriers); and
                             (c)   having formal review and approval processes for trading by its research
                                   staff.

                             Having an interest in the researched product
              RG 79.146      Research report providers need to consider whether there are any types of
                             conduct that are so inconsistent with proper management of conflicts of
                             interest that they should be avoided completely: see RG 181.42.

              RG 79.147      Having a material interest in the researched product presents a potential conflict
                             of interest. General advice that is provided only to related bodies corporate of
                             the licensee and general advice that is only about products issued by the
                             licensee or its related bodies corporate is not research for the purposes of this
                             guide and should not be described or distributed as such: see RG 79.26.

              RG 79.148      If research reports are provided about products that the provider’s research
                             staff hold a material interest in, there is a potential conflict of interest.
                             Research report providers should ensure that this conflict does not result:
                             (a)   in a failure to comply with their duties as licensees (including the duty
                                   to act efficiently, honestly and fairly); or
                             (b)   in the integrity of the advice contained in their research reports being
                                   compromised.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 38
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.149      Research report providers may wish to consider adopting one or more of the
                             following approaches:
                             (a)   prohibiting their research staff from holding or trading in financial
                                   products that they prepare research on;
                             (b)   adopting robust information barriers (see RG 79.125–RG 79.129) that
                                   ensure that research staff are not aware of the trading conducted by the
                                   research report provider; and
                             (c)   ensuring that any holding or trading of financial products by their
                                   research staff is properly approved.

              RG 79.150      What is an appropriate solution will depend on the circumstances. The senior
                             management of each research report provider will need to consider how the
                             research report provider manages the conflicts of interest inherent in trading
                             in financial products it publishes research about. Whatever arrangements are
                             put in place, care should be taken by the research report provider to ensure
                             that its trading intention or trading strategy, or that of its research staff, does
                             not affect the contents of its research reports.

                                   Note: For example, a research report provider may prohibit research staff from trading in
                                   securities (or derivatives of that security) that they cover, or any securities in that industry
                                   sector (e.g. following the relevant sector indices). Trading restrictions should take into
                                   account both direct and indirect interests (e.g. a person may have an indirect interest due
                                   to derivatives they hold, or the assets of a discretionary account that they manage).


                             Trading ahead of distribution

              RG 79.151      Care needs to be taken where the research report provider or its research
                             staff trade in a financial product before (or shortly after) the research report
                             provider broadly distributes a research report about that product (e.g.
                             proprietary trading by or on behalf of the research report provider and
                             personal trading by research staff). A research report provider may wish to
                             consider the following approaches:
                             (a)   imposing a ‘quiet period’ on itself and/or its research staff; or
                             (b)   adopting robust information barriers that ensure that trading staff are
                                   not aware of pending research.

              RG 79.152      If adopting a quiet period, the research report provider will need to assess
                             what is a reasonable period before and/or after the distribution of research
                             for trading to be restricted. Quiet periods may also need to cover:
                             (a)   discretionary trading on accounts managed by the research report providers
                                   (as well as dealings on the research report provider’s own account); and
                             (b)   dealings in derivatives of the financial products that are the subject of
                                   research reports.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                        Page 39
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.153      Research report providers should take reasonable steps to ensure that their
                             research staff do not circumvent any trading restrictions by encouraging or
                             arranging for others (e.g. the staff member’s family or other associated
                             persons) to deal during the quiet periods. Generally, the trading activities of
                             research staff should be monitored and recorded.

              RG 79.154      Non-public information about the timing of and recommendations contained
                             in future research reports may amount to inside information: s1042A. This is
                             especially so where the report is based on information which is itself not
                             generally available. To the extent that the research report itself is or involves
                             ‘inside information’, trading before or shortly after its publication is likely to
                             amount to insider trading: s1043A(1).

                                  Note: Information barrier defences may apply: s1043F–1043G. However, it is important
                                  that product issuers and research report providers take reasonable steps to avoid
                                  selective disclosure.




Disclosure of conflicts of interest
              RG 79.155      Research reports are relied on by retail and wholesale clients as a source of
                             useful information for making decisions about investing in financial
                             products. Users of research reports should be given enough information
                             about conflicts of interest relating to a report to form a realistic view about
                             the report and whether to rely on it. Specific, prominent and meaningful
                             disclosures about conflicts of interest should be included either in or with
                             each research report: see RG 181.52. The disclosures should focus on
                             material conflicts: see RG 79.161–RG 79.162.

                                  Note: As a matter of good practice, the research report (or accompanying disclosures)
                                  should also state who prepared the report and when (see RG 79.96–RG 79.99) and the
                                  reasons for the opinions and recommendations (see RG 79.87–RG 79.88).

              RG 79.156      We recognise there are some situations where disclosing a particular conflict
                             will be inappropriate (e.g. where the relevant matter is highly confidential).
                             In these situations, research report providers will need to assess whether the
                             conflict can be adequately managed through other mechanisms. If it cannot
                             be adequately managed, research report providers may need to avoid the
                             conflict altogether: see RG 181.60.

              RG 79.157      Conflicts of interest disclosures are important, regardless of whether the client
                             is wholesale or retail. We expect that research report providers’ conflicts
                             management arrangements will include procedures to ensure all clients receive
                             conflicts of interest disclosure (not just retail clients): see RG 181.58–RG 181.59.
                             What is appropriate disclosure to a wholesale client will depend on all the facts
                             and circumstances. We acknowledge that in some cases, the disclosure a
                             research report provider needs to give to a wholesale client to comply with the
                             law may be less detailed than for a retail client: see RG 181.58.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                 Page 40
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.158      Research report providers should provide conflicts of interest disclosure to
                             all clients, including generally disclosing:
                             (a)   any material interests they have in financial products that are the subject
                                   of the report (see RG 79.161–RG 79.162);
                             (b)   any benefits they are likely to receive from the report (see RG 79.163);
                             (c)   their relationship (if any) to the product issuer, including any other
                                   services they provide to the product issuer (see RG 79.164); and
                             (d)   any help they were given by the product issuer (see RG 79.165);
                             (e)   the date the research report was written and who took responsibility for
                                   it; and
                             (f)   the reasons behind the opinions and recommendations in the research
                                   report.

              RG 79.159      We would expect research report providers to take into account the factors in
                             RG 181.58 in assessing the disclosure that should be provided to any given client.

              RG 79.160      Robust information barriers (see RG 79.125–RG 79.129) may mean the staff
                             preparing and authorising a research report are unaware of some of these
                             matters. To be effective, such barriers must actually prevent information going
                             to research staff. For example, research staff may be unaware of some
                             confidential non-research services being provided to a product issuer by another
                             department. In this case, we would not expect the research report to include
                             disclosures relating to that service. Whether any particular matter does not need
                             to be disclosed in a research report will, of course, depend on the facts and
                             circumstances: see RG 181.62.

                             Interests
              RG 79.161      Research report providers should disclose in or with each research report whether
                             they (or any associated persons) have, or are likely in the future to have, a material
                             interest in financial products that are the subject of the report. Disclosure will
                             generally need to cover both the existence and extent of the interest.
                                   Note: For example, the disclosures should cover:
                                   (a)   beneficial interests in and derivatives relating to the financial product;
                                   (b)   likely allocations as part of a public offering; and
                                   (c)   significant interests that the research report provider (or its staff) may have in the
                                         product issuer.

              RG 79.162      It is important that conflicts of interest disclosures are specific and clear.
                             It would be inadequate simply to make a generic statement that the research
                             report provider may from time to time have interests in those financial
                             products that are the subject of research: see RG 181.53. It would also be
                             inappropriate for these disclosures to be hidden in small print or otherwise
                             obscured.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                       Page 41
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             Benefits
              RG 79.163      Research report providers should disclose whether they (or any associated
                             persons) are likely to receive any benefits from the report. Disclosure will
                             generally need to cover both the existence and extent of the benefits: see
                             RG 181.54.
                                   Note: For example, the disclosures should generally cover if:

                                   (a)   the research staff member principally responsible for preparing the report
                                         received, or expects to receive, any benefit or inducement; and

                                   (b)   the research report provider (or its research staff) received compensation from the
                                         subject of the report recently, or if the research report provider (or its research
                                         staff) expect to receive compensation in the near future.


                             Associations or relationships
              RG 79.164      If any of the following associations or relationships apply and assuming the
                             provider does not need to avoid the conflict, they should be disclosed in or
                             with the research report:
                             (a)   that the research report provider (or an associated person) provides
                                   underwriting, managerial, consultancy or market-making services to the
                                   product issuer;
                             (b)   that the product issuer is otherwise a corporate client of the research
                                   report provider; or
                             (c)   that the product issuer is related to or otherwise associated with the
                                   research report provider.
                                   Note 1: For example, the disclosures should cover the following relationships (if present)
                                   between the research report provider (or its associates) and a product issuer (or its associates):

                                   (a)   underwriting or sub-underwriting;

                                   (b)   making a market in the relevant financial product;

                                   (c)   acting as broker or sponsor in a securities issue;

                                   (d)   holding a position (including as a director) with the issuer;

                                   (e)   providing expert opinions; and

                                   (f)   investment banking, corporate advisory and dealing services.

                                   Note 2: The disclosures should cover at least the last 12 months.


                             Assistance provided by product issuer
              RG 79.165      The research report (or accompanying disclosures) should disclose whether
                             the research staff who prepared the research report were helped in any way
                             by the product issuer. Disclosure will generally need to state the type of
                             assistance given.
                                   Note: For example, the disclosures should refer to any assistance provided via site visits
                                   or other means.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                      Page 42
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Additional disclosure issues

                             Focus on material conflicts

              RG 79.166      Adequate disclosure means providing enough detail to allow clients to make
                             an informed decision about how the conflict may affect the service being
                             provided to them. We expect disclosure by research report providers to focus
                             on material conflicts: see RG 181.50. Overly detailed or irrelevant disclosure
                             is likely to confuse clients and reduce the effectiveness of the disclosure: see
                             RG 181.61.

              RG 79.167      Other matters that a reasonable person might take into account in assessing
                             the impact of conflicts of interest on a research report and whether to rely on
                             it should also be disclosed. This information could be provided in a number
                             of ways, including in or with research reports, in a separate document and on
                             the research report provider’s website.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 43
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




E          Users of research

                              Key points

                              We expect users of research, such as financial advisory firms and industry
                              associations, to conduct careful due diligence on research report providers
                              they intend to rely on in preparing approved product lists and Statements of
                              Advice (SOAs).

                              More detailed and specific guidance for advice providers is set out in
                              Regulatory Guide 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—Conduct and
                              disclosure (RG 175).


              RG 79.168      As providers of general advice, research report providers are important
                             gatekeepers in the provision of financial product advice to Australian
                             investors. The quality of the research produced by research report providers
                             and their conduct has a material impact on the integrity of the financial
                             planning industry, and the quality of advice they produce.

              RG 79.169      Our guidance in this section is designed to help improve the quality of
                             research and any personal advice prepared in reliance on third party research
                             produced by research report providers. Users of research can place more
                             confidence in research where there is:
                             (a)   greater transparency by research report providers in communicating key
                                   features, strengths and limitations of their research services;
                             (b)   a clearly articulated and applied research methodology and effective
                                   research processes; and
                             (c)   appropriate and compliant management of conflicts of interest.


FOFA reforms
              RG 79.170      From 1 July 2013, AFS licensees and their representatives that provide
                             personal advice to clients must comply with the best interests duty and related
                             obligations unless they elect to comply before this date (from 1 July 2012).

              RG 79.171      These obligations are part of the Australian Government’s Future of
                             Financial Advice (FOFA) reform package under the Corporations
                             Amendment (Further Future of Financial Advice Measures) Act 2012
                             (FOFA Act No.2). The FOFA reforms are aimed at improving the trust and
                             confidence of retail investors in the financial advice sector.

              RG 79.172      The best interests duty and related obligations replace the conduct obligations
                             in Subdiv B of Div 3 of Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act relating to the basis of
                             advice—that is, the requirement to have a reasonable basis of personal advice
                             (s945A), and the obligation to warn the client if advice is based on incomplete
                             or inaccurate information (s945B).


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 44
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




              RG 79.173      These obligations require the ‘advice provider’—generally the individual
                             who provides the personal advice—to:
                             (a)   act in the best interests of the client: best interests duty (s961B);
                             (b)   provide appropriate advice (s961G);
                             (c)   warn the client if advice is based on incomplete or inaccurate
                                   information (s961H); and
                             (d)   prioritise the interests of the client (s961J).

              RG 79.174      In satisfying these obligations, where an advice provider considers it would
                             be reasonable to recommend a financial product, the provider must:
                             (a)   conduct a reasonable investigation into financial products that might
                                   achieve the objectives and meet the needs of the client that would
                                   reasonably be considered relevant to the subject matter of the advice
                                   (s961B(2)(e)(i)); and
                             (b)   assess the information gathered in the investigation (s961B(2)(e)(ii)).



Due diligence
              RG 79.175      Our expectations of advice providers in relying on research produced by
                             external research report providers in preparing approved product lists or
                             Statements of Advice (SOAs) are set out in Regulatory Guide 175 Licensing:
                             Financial product advisers—Conduct and disclosure (RG 175).

              RG 79.176      We expect AFS licensees (including advice providers) to conduct
                             appropriate due diligence in choosing a research report provider. Our
                             guidance is designed to assist and support licensees and advice providers in
                             that process. This is particularly important where general advice prepared by
                             research report providers is relied upon in preparing approved product lists
                             or SOAs. Not all research is the same and we expect AFS licensees who
                             provide personal advice to apply the requisite level of rigour in assessing the
                             quality of the research when preparing personal advice.

              RG 79.177      In conducting due diligence, we expect advice providers to take into account
                             the business model and conflicts of interests associated with each potential
                             service provider, as well as ensuring they understand and take into account
                             the disclosures each research report provider makes about its business
                             model, product selection processes, scope and coverage of research service,
                             ratings spread and conflicts management in accordance with our guidance.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 45
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Personal advice
              RG 79.178      In addition to conducting appropriate due diligence in selecting a research
                             report provider, we expect advice providers to make their own inquiries and
                             research into the products they give advice on. While they may rely to some
                             extent on various service providers, such as research report providers, advice
                             providers are still responsible for the advice they give clients: see RG 175.

              RG 79.179      When using research, advice providers should ensure that they have read and
                             understood the research report before relying on it. We expect advice
                             providers to critically evaluate research reports, including considering the
                             scope and coverage of the research, the nature of the rating applied, the
                             methodology applied and the currency of the research. When users of
                             research better understand the nature, scope and expertise that different
                             research report providers bring to the research task, they can better assess
                             the value of the research and the extent to which they can rely on it.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 46
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Key terms

                           Term                       Meaning in this document

                           advice provider            A person to whom the obligations in Div 2 of Pt 7.7A of the
                                                      Corporations Act apply when providing personal advice to a
                                                      client. This is generally the individual who provides the
                                                      personal advice. However, if there is no individual that
                                                      provides the advice, which may be the case if advice is
                                                      provided through a computer program, the obligations in
                                                      Div 2 of Pt 7.7A apply to the legal person that provides the
                                                      advice (e.g. a corporate licensee or authorised
                                                      representative)
                                                            Note: These obligations will apply from 1 July 2013, or a
                                                            person may elect to comply from 1 July 2012.

                           AFS licence                An Australian financial services licence under s913B that
                                                      authorises a person who carries on a financial services
                                                      business to provide financial services
                                                            Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                            Corporations Act.

                           AFS licensee (or           A person that holds an Australian financial services (AFS)
                           licensee)                  licence
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s761A of the Corporations Act.

                           ASIC                       Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                           ASIC Act                   Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001

                           associated person          An associate (within the meaning of Div 2 of Pt 1.2 of the
                                                      Corporations Act) of the research report provider, including
                                                      its research staff

                           conflicts management       Section 912A(1)(aa) of the Corporations Act, which takes
                           obligation                 effect on 1 January 2005

                           conflicts of interest      As defined in RG 181.15, that is:
                                                            …conflicts of interest are circumstances where some
                                                            or all of the interests of people (clients) to whom a
                                                            licensee (or its representative) provides financial
                                                            services are inconsistent with, or diverge from, some
                                                            or all of the interests of the licensee or its
                                                            representatives. This includes actual, apparent and
                                                            potential conflicts of interest.

                           Corporations Act           Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                      purposes of that Act

                           financial product          A facility through which, or through the acquisition of which,
                                                      a person does one or more of the following:
                                                       makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                       manages financial risk (see s763C); and/or
                                                       makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s763A of the Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                    Page 47
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                           Term                       Meaning in this document

                           financial product advice   A recommendation, a statement of opinion or an
                                                      interpretation of information, or a report of any of those
                                                      things, that:
                                                       is intended to influence a person(s) in making a decision
                                                        about a particular financial product or class of financial
                                                        products, or an interest in a particular financial product or
                                                        class of financial products; or
                                                       could reasonably be regarded as being intended to have
                                                        such an influence;

                                                      but does not include anything in an exempt document
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s766B of the Corporations Act.

                           Financial Services         A document that must be given to a client in relation to the
                           Guide (FSG)                provision of a financial service in accordance with Div 2 of
                                                      Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                            Note: See s761A of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                            definition.

                           FOFA reforms               A package of proposed reforms to the regulation of
                                                      financial advice issued by the Australian Government in
                                                      response to the PJC report Inquiry into financial products
                                                      and services in Australia, November 2009:
                                                      http://futureofadvice.treasury.gov.au

                           general advice             Financial product advice that is not personal advice
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s766B of the Corporations Act.

                           personal advice            Financial product advice given or directed to a person
                                                      (including by electronic means) in circumstances where:
                                                       the provider of the advice has considered one or more of
                                                        the client’s objectives, financial situation and needs; or
                                                       a reasonable person might expect the provider to have
                                                        considered one or more of these matters
                                                            Note: This is the definition contained in s766B(3) of the
                                                            Corporations Act.




                           Product Disclosure         A document that must be given to a client in relation to the
                           Statement (PDS)            offer or issue of a financial product in accordance with
                                                      Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                            Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                           representative             In the case of an AFS licensee:
                                                       an authorised representative of the licensee;
                                                       an employee or director of the licensee;
                                                       an employee or director of a related body corporate of
                                                        the licensee; or
                                                       any other person acting on behalf of the licensee
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s910A.

                           research report            As defined in RG 79.25–RG 79.26




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                    Page 48
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                           Term                       Meaning in this document

                           research report            As defined in RG 79.27
                           provider

                           retail client              A client as defined in s761G of the Corporations Act and
                                                      Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of Ch 7 of the Corporations Regulations
                                                      2001

                           RG 181                     An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 181)

                           s912A (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                      numbered 912A)

                           SOA (Statement of          A document that must be given to a client for the provision
                           Advice)                    of personal advice under Subdivs C and D of Div 3 of
                                                      Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act

                                                            Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                           Trade Practices Act        Trade Practices Act 1974




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 49
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             avoiding, conflicts of interest, conflicts management, disclosure, information
                             barriers, internal controls, research analyst, research report, research report
                             provider, securities analyst

                             Pro formas

                             PF 209 Australian financial services licence conditions

                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 53 The use of past performance in promotional material

                             RG 104 Licensing: Meeting the general obligations

                             RG 105 Licensing: Organisational competence

                             RG 111 Content of expert reports

                             RG 112 Independence of experts

                             RG 146 Licensing: Training of financial product advisers

                             RG 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—Conduct and disclosure

                             RG 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest

                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Div 2 of Pt 1.2, Div 3 of Pt 7.7, Div 2 of Pt 7.7A, s761G,
                             763, 766B, 910A, 912A(1)(aa), 912A(1)(a), 945A, 945B, 1041H and 1042A

                             Corporations Amendment (Further Future of Financial Advice Measures)
                             Act 2012

                             Trade Practices Act, s52

                             Cases
                             Bathurst Regional Council v Local Government Financial Services Pty Ltd
                             (No 5) [2012] FCA 1200

                             Chiarabaglio v Westpac Banking Corporation (1989) ATPR 40–971

                             MGIGA (1992) Ltd v Kenny & Good Pty Ltd (1996) 70 FCR 236

                             RAIA Insurance Brokers Ltd v FAI General Insurance Co Ltd (1993) 41
                             FCR 164



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 50
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




                             Consultation papers and reports

                             CP 171 Strengthening the regulation of research report providers (including
                             research houses)

                             REP 143 Review of credit rating agencies and research houses: A joint
                             report

                             REP 318 Response to submissions on CP 171 Strengthening the regulation
                             of research report providers


                             Other documents

                             IOSCO, IOSCO Statement of principles for addressing sell-side securities
                             analyst conflicts of interest: A statement of the Technical Committee of the
                             International Organisation of Securities Commissions, 25 September 2003




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                              Page 51
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 79: Research report providers: Improving the quality of investment research




Appendix: Sample compliance review

                             This appendix is intended as a useful checklist for research report providers
                             in meeting their obligations, including any relevant licence conditions.
                             Providers can use it as a tool to review current and ongoing compliance with
                             RG 79 and to assess the implementation and timing of any planned measures.
                             The topics and processes can be tailored to suit a provider’s particular
                             business model or compliance arrangements.

                                  Note: It is not a requirement to complete a compliance review and this appendix is not a
                                  template for future ASIC surveillance activity.


                             Compliance topics
                             Topics that can be reviewed include:
                                 research methodology and processes;
                                 internal conflicts management procedures;
                                 research publication and distribution;
                                 conflicts disclosure to users;
                                 monitoring and updating research;
                                 staff training and supervision;
                                 compliance and risk management; and
                                 procedures for managing research quality and transparency.

                             Compliance processes
                             For any planned measures:
                                 explain when and how the measures will be implemented;
                                 include an explanation of how the relevant measure will ensure
                                  compliance with the law, licence conditions and RG 79;
                                 describe the resources, including the internal compliance resources,
                                  allocated to the measures;
                                 detail any testing and reviews of the measures that have been or will be
                                  conducted and the results of those tests and reviews;
                                 where a measure necessarily involves the disclosure of information,
                                  include a hyperlink to access such disclosed information;
                                 identify any failings of the measures against their aims and explain how
                                  those failings have been or will be addressed;
                                 identify by name any existing or planned policies or similar documents;
                                 only address any measure that has been implemented or planned, or any
                                  failing that has occurred, since any previous compliance review; and
                                 address the specific instructions, if any, given for a topic.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2012                                                  Page 52
