REGULATORY GUIDE 73


Continuous disclosure
obligations: Infringement
notices

October 2017




About this guide
This guide is for anyone who is subject to continuous disclosure obligations,
including listed and unlisted disclosing entities. It covers:
   our general approach to the infringement notice remedy; and
   the stages in the infringement notice process.
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in October 2017 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. On 5 July 2023, we updated the
                             information on maximum penalties in RG 73.32(a).

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 73, updated June 2012
                                    Superseded Continuous disclosure obligations: infringement notices—
                                     An ASIC guide, issued May 2004, rebadged as Regulatory Guide 73 in
                                     July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                Page 2
                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Summary............................................................................................ 4
                                    Our overall approach ......................................................................... 4
                                    Our use of infringement notices ......................................................... 4
                                    Infringement notice process............................................................... 4
                             B      The infringement notice process ................................................... 6
                                    Stage 1: Investigation of alleged breach ........................................... 6
                                    Stage 2: An ASIC delegate is briefed ................................................ 7
                                    Stage 3: The ASIC delegate examines the matter ............................ 7
                                    Stage 4: A hearing notice is issued ................................................... 7
                                    Stage 5: The hearing is conducted .................................................... 8
                                    Stage 6: An infringement notice may be issued ................................ 9
                                    Stage 7: The infringement notice is served ..................................... 11
                                    Stage 8: The disclosing entity responds to the notice ..................... 11
                                    Stage 9: Action following response to the notice ............................. 11
                                    Stage 10: Publication by ASIC ........................................................ 14
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 15
                             Related information ............................................................................... 16




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                                       Page 3
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               We consider continuous disclosure obligations to be fundamental to
                               maintaining the integrity of the market by ensuring transparency and equal
                               access to information.

                               We issue infringement notices to address less serious breaches of the
                               continuous disclosure laws.




Summary
              RG 73.1        Infringement notices are a means by which ASIC can respond to alleged
                             breaches by disclosing entities of the continuous disclosure obligations in
                             Ch 6CA of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act). We tend to use
                             infringement notices as a regulatory response to alleged breaches that are
                             considered to be less serious.



Our overall approach
              RG 73.2        ASIC’s key role in administering Ch 6CA is to ensure that listed and unlisted
                             disclosing entities disclose material information on a timely basis and
                             comply with any relevant listing rules. Our approach is based on the
                             principle that the continuous disclosure obligations are fundamental to
                             maintaining the integrity of the market by ensuring transparency and equal
                             access to information.



Our use of infringement notices
              RG 73.3        Infringement notices provide a regulatory tool for ASIC to address less
                             serious breaches of the continuous disclosure obligations. They are designed
                             to provide a fast and effective regulatory response that is proportionate and
                             proximate in time to the alleged breach. The matter will be dealt with in a
                             timely way, while still providing significant protection to the disclosing
                             entity.



Infringement notice process
              RG 73.4        The process for issuing infringement notices for breaches of s674(2) or
                             675(2) of the Corporations Act consists of the 10 stages listed in Table 1.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                Page 4
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




Table 1:     The 10 stages of the infringement notice process

  Stage                         Description                                                    More information

  1. Investigation of           If a possible breach of the continuous disclosure              RG 73.5–RG 73.8
     alleged breach             obligations has been identified we may conduct an
                                investigation using our compulsory powers. In the course
                                of the investigation we will decide whether use of the
                                infringement notice remedy is appropriate.

  2. An ASIC delegate is        If we consider that the issue of an infringement notice        RG 73.9
     briefed                    may be an appropriate remedy, an ASIC delegate is
                                briefed on the matter to determine if there has been a
                                breach. The delegate will not have been involved in the
                                investigation of the suspected breach, and will look at the
                                matter for the first time when receiving the brief.

  3. The ASIC delegate          The delegate examines the matter and forms a belief as         RG 73.10
     examines the matter        to whether or not there may have been a breach. In
                                forming that belief, the delegate must have regard to the
                                views of the relevant market operator.

  4. A hearing notice is        If the delegate believes there has been a breach, a            RG 73.11–RG 73.12
     issued                     written statement (the hearing notice) will be issued to the
                                disclosing entity. The notice will set out the reasons for
                                believing there has been a breach.

  5. The hearing is             The delegate will hold a hearing to determine whether to       RG 73.13–RG 73.19
     conducted                  issue an infringement notice. In the hearing the disclosing
                                entity may give evidence and make submissions.

  6. An infringement            The delegate takes all submissions and evidence into           RG 73.20–RG 73.24
     notice may be issued       account and may decide to issue an infringement notice if
                                there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been a
                                breach.

  7. The infringement           The infringement notice is served on the disclosing entity,    RG 73.25–RG 73.27
     notice is served           with a compliance period of 28 days.

  8. The disclosing entity      The disclosing entity may comply with the notice or seek       RG 73.28–RG 73.29
     responds to the            an extension of time to comply or seek to have the notice
     notice                     withdrawn or choose not to comply with the notice.

  9. Action following           If the infringement notice is complied with, we cannot         RG 73.30–RG 73.38
     response to the            begin proceedings against the entity. If the notice is not
     notice                     complied with, we may commence civil proceedings
                                against the entity under Pt 9.4B and/or s1324B of the
                                Corporations Act. If the notice is withdrawn, ASIC is not
                                restricted in the action it may take against the entity. In
                                any event, we will consider exercising exclusion powers.

  10. Publication by ASIC       If the infringement notice is complied with, we will publish   RG 73.39–RG 73.41
                                details of the notice. If we begin proceedings against the
                                entity following withdrawal of, or failure to comply with, a
                                notice we will publish that fact.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                Page 5
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




B          The infringement notice process

                               Key points

                               This section details the stages of the infringement notice process.




Stage 1: Investigation of alleged breach
              RG 73.5        We have a number of mechanisms for identifying and receiving information
                             about possible failures by entities to comply with the continuous disclosure
                             obligations. When we identify or receive such information, we conduct an
                             initial analysis to determine if the matter needs to be investigated. We may
                             use our compulsory powers to obtain relevant documents and examine
                             people who may be able to provide relevant information.

              RG 73.6        In the course of our investigation we will decide whether use of the
                             infringement notice remedy may be appropriate. We will consider all of the
                             relevant facts and circumstances of the matter and we will generally have
                             regard to:
                             (a)   the seriousness of the alleged breach; and
                             (b)   the view of the relevant market operator.

              RG 73.7        In determining the seriousness of an alleged breach, we will have regard to a
                             number of different factors depending on the circumstances of the matter.
                             Relevant considerations may include:
                             (a)   the impact of the alleged breach on the market for the entity’s securities
                                   (including, for example, any change in price of the securities and/or the
                                   number of securities traded during the period of the alleged breach);
                             (b)   the materiality of the information the subject of the alleged breach (such
                                   as whether the information went to the heart of the entity’s continued
                                   operations);
                             (c)   the factual circumstances giving rise to the alleged breach (such as
                                   whether the conduct giving rise to the alleged breach was negligent,
                                   reckless or deliberate);
                             (d)   the adequacy of the entity’s internal controls, and whether they were
                                   complied with; and
                             (e)   the conduct of the entity before the alleged breach (including whether
                                   the entity sought and followed professional advice in relation to
                                   disclosure) and after the alleged breach (for example, whether the entity
                                   took immediate steps to correct the failed disclosure).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                Page 6
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




              RG 73.8        We must consult with the relevant market operator before issuing a notice of
                             hearing to a listed disclosing entity for an alleged breach of s674(2) or
                             675(2) of the Corporations Act, although we are not bound by the opinion of
                             the market operator.



Stage 2: An ASIC delegate is briefed
              RG 73.9        If we consider, as a result of our investigation, that an infringement notice
                             may be an appropriate remedy, we will provide a brief to an ASIC delegate
                             for their consideration. The brief will consist of all the material that the
                             investigation team believes is relevant to establishing the suspected breach.
                             The delegate will not have been involved in ASIC’s investigation of the
                             suspected offence, and will look at the matter for the first time when
                             receiving the brief.



Stage 3: The ASIC delegate examines the matter
              RG 73.10       The delegate considers the brief provided by the investigation team and
                             forms a belief as to whether or not the disclosing entity has contravened
                             s674(2) or 675(2) of the Corporations Act. In forming the belief the delegate
                             will consider the view of the relevant market operator.



Stage 4: A hearing notice is issued
              RG 73.11       If the delegate believes that the disclosing entity has breached s674(2) or
                             675(2) of the Corporations Act, the entity must be notified in writing of the
                             basis for issuing the infringement notice. The delegate provides a written
                             statement (the hearing notice) that sets out the reasons for their belief that
                             there has been a breach. The hearing notice will include:
                             (a)   the sections of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                                   Act 2001 (ASIC Act) or Corporations Act under which the hearing is
                                   being conducted;
                             (b)   the purpose of the hearing;
                             (c)   the issues of concern (i.e. why the delegate believes that the entity has
                                   breached s674(2) or 675(2));
                             (d)   details of the disclosing entity’s opportunity to appear at a private
                                   hearing before the delegate, and give evidence to the delegate and make
                                   submissions;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                Page 7
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




                             (e)   the date, time and place of the hearing, and how long the delegate
                                   estimates it will take (21 days is considered adequate time to prepare for
                                   the hearing);
                             (f)   that, if a representative of the disclosing entity does not want to appear,
                                   the entity may make a written submission that will be taken into
                                   account;
                             (g)   what happens if the disclosing entity does not respond to the notice (i.e.
                                   the delegate will make a decision on the basis of the information
                                   available); and
                             (h)   a copy of Information Sheet 1 Administrative hearings (INFO 1), which
                                   provides an outline of how we conduct our administrative hearings, and
                                   how to obtain a copy of Regulatory Guide 8 Hearings practice manual
                                   (RG 8).

              RG 73.12       We will keep the fact of the hearing notice confidential.



Stage 5: The hearing is conducted
              RG 73.13       An ASIC delegate must hold a hearing to determine whether to issue an
                             infringement notice. A representative of the entity can give evidence and
                             make submissions at the hearing. The hearing will be run as closely as
                             possible in accordance with RG 8—there will only be departures where this
                             is necessary for the hearing to proceed promptly and fairly. Where relevant,
                             Div 6 of Pt 3 of the ASIC Act applies to the hearing process: see s51 and 54–
                             62. Further information about how we administer these provisions and the
                             delegate’s responsibilities when conducting hearings is set out in RG 8.
                             There are a number of important points to note about the hearing process.


                             There is no obligation to appear

              RG 73.14       Although the Corporations Act requires the delegate to issue an invitation to
                             appear at the hearing, the entity is not obliged to appear. An entity may
                             simply provide written submissions to the delegate, or it may decline to
                             appear or take part in the process in any way. In the latter case the delegate
                             will still make a decision.


                             A right to representation

              RG 73.15       The entity has a right to legal representation. Other people, such as a
                             corporate officer, may also appear as a representative. The delegate has the
                             discretion to allow people other than the representative of the entity to
                             appear at the hearing.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                Page 8
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




                             The hearing is fact-finding, not adversarial

              RG 73.16       In accordance with RG 8, the hearing is a fact-finding one. It is not an
                             adversarial exercise, such as in a court. Hearings are conducted informally
                             and as expeditiously as possible.


                             Rules of evidence do not apply

              RG 73.17       The rules of evidence and the usual court rules of procedure and practice do
                             not apply to ASIC hearings: see s59(2)(a) of the ASIC Act. A delegate will
                             base their decision on material that is relevant, credible and logically proves
                             the facts.


                             Procedural fairness

              RG 73.18       We are obliged by the rules of procedural fairness to ensure that an entity
                             appearing before us at a hearing has an opportunity to put its submissions.
                             We consider that, as a matter of general principle, it will not be necessary to
                             call witnesses. In most instances a written statement will be adequate.


                             Expert witnesses

              RG 73.19       We may rely on the written report of an independent expert witness to
                             establish some elements of the breach. The ASIC delegate may ask the
                             expert to be present to assist at the hearing.



Stage 6: An infringement notice may be issued
              RG 73.20       After a hearing has taken place, or a delegate has received written
                             submissions or been notified that the entity does not wish to participate in a
                             hearing, the delegate is required to take all submissions and evidence into
                             account and make a decision. For a listed entity, the delegate must also
                             consider any guidelines issued by the relevant market operator that relate to
                             the listing rules referred to in s674(1) of the Corporations Act, although the
                             delegate is not bound by these.

              RG 73.21       If the delegate has reasonable grounds to believe that a disclosing entity has
                             breached s674(2) or 675(2), they may issue an infringement notice.

                                   Note: The fact that the delegate issued the hearing notice does not mean that they are
                                   biased in their determination of whether to issue the infringement notice: see
                                   McLachlan v ASIC (1999) 85 FCR 286.

              RG 73.22       The issue of an infringement notice, and subsequent satisfaction of it, is not
                             an admission of liability and does not represent a finding that the
                             Corporations Act has been breached. It simply signals our view of the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                      Page 9
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




                             alleged conduct and provides a way to deal with the issue without engaging
                             in lengthy and expensive court proceedings.

              RG 73.23       The infringement notice will set out what is required for compliance. It will
                             include details (as required by s1317DAE of the Corporations Act), such as:
                             (a)   the day on which it was issued;
                             (b)   that it is issued by ASIC;
                             (c)   a description of the alleged breach, including the date of the alleged
                                   breach and the provision that was breached;
                             (d)   a statement that if the entity complies with the infringement notice, we
                                   may publish details of the disclosing entity’s compliance with the
                                   infringement notice in accordance with s1317DAJ;
                             (e)   the amount of the penalty—this will be $33,000, $66,000 or $100,000,
                                   depending on the circumstances and whether there has been a previous
                                   breach of s674(2) or 675(2);

                                   Note: The levels of penalty that are to be imposed are set out in s1317DAE(2)–(7). We
                                   have no discretion as to the amount of the penalty.

                             (f)   the maximum pecuniary penalty that a court could impose under
                                   Pt 9.4B of the Corporations Act (civil penalty provisions) for the
                                   alleged breach;
                             (g)   an explanation that under s1317DAF, the compliance period is 28 days
                                   beginning on the day after the notice is issued, and that the period may
                                   be extended once by ASIC if appropriate (s1317DAH sets out certain
                                   requirements for the extension);
                             (h)   an explanation of the effect of s1317DAF, which provides protection
                                   from certain other proceedings during the compliance period (if the
                                   notice has not been withdrawn) and after the notice is complied with;
                             (i)   an explanation of the effect of s1317DAG, which sets out the effects of
                                   a failure to comply with an infringement notice that is not withdrawn
                                   (although certain proceedings are not available, a civil penalty action by
                                   ASIC is available); and
                             (j)   a statement that the entity may make written representations to ASIC
                                   seeking the withdrawal of the infringement notice, in accordance with
                                   s1317DAI.

              RG 73.24       We will aim to issue an infringement notice promptly after identifying the
                             alleged breach, consistent with properly assessing the facts and our
                             conclusion that there has been an actionable breach. We will not make the
                             fact of the issue of the infringement notice public.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                  Page 10
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




Stage 7: The infringement notice is served
              RG 73.25       The infringement notice is served on the disclosing entity by leaving it at, or
                             posting it to, the entity’s registered office, or delivering a copy personally to
                             a director residing in Australia.

              RG 73.26       The compliance period for an infringement notice is 28 days beginning on
                             the day after the notice was issued, unless it is extended by ASIC, in which
                             case the extension must not be for longer than 28 days.

              RG 73.27       During the compliance period, provided the infringement notice is not
                             withdrawn, the proceedings that we may begin or continue against the entity
                             are limited. We cannot begin proceedings for the alleged breach specified in
                             the infringement notice or for an offence constituted by that conduct.
                             However, some proceedings may be commenced or continued against the
                             entity by third parties: see s1317DAF(6) of the Corporations Act. The most
                             significant of these are referred to in RG 73.31.



Stage 8: The disclosing entity responds to the notice
              RG 73.28       The disclosing entity has several options when it receives the infringement
                             notice. It may:
                             (a)   satisfy the infringement notice within the compliance period by paying
                                   the specified penalty and disclosing to the market or lodging a
                                   document about any specific information referred to in the notice;
                             (b)   seek an extension for the compliance period (see s1317DAH);
                             (c)   make written representations to ASIC seeking the withdrawal of the
                                   notice (see s1317DAI); or
                             (d)   decline to satisfy the infringement notice within the compliance period.

              RG 73.29       Decisions to issue and withdraw infringement notices are excluded from
                             review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). The AAT merits
                             review does not apply because there is no obligation on an entity to comply
                             with the notice.



Stage 9: Action following response to the notice

                             Effect of compliance with an infringement notice

              RG 73.30       If the infringement notice is complied with, we cannot take civil or criminal
                             proceedings against the entity for the alleged breach specified in the
                             infringement notice. Compliance with the infringement notice does not,
                             however, preclude ASIC from taking civil penalty proceedings under



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                               Page 11
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




                             s674(2A) or 675(2A) of the Corporations Act against people involved in the
                             alleged breach.

              RG 73.31       Compliance with the infringement notice does not affect the right of third
                             parties, who have been adversely affected by the entity’s conduct, to bring
                             certain proceedings against the entity in relation to the alleged breach.
                             Proceedings that individuals may take against the entity are set out in
                             s1317DAF(6) of the Corporations Act. They include proceedings brought
                             under s1317HA, 1101B and 793C of the Corporations Act.


                             Effect of failure to comply with an infringement notice

              RG 73.32       If an entity does not comply with the infringement notice, we cannot enforce
                             the notice. However, if the notice is not withdrawn we may take the
                             following action against the entity:
                             (a)   We may begin civil penalty proceedings against the entity under
                                   Pt 9.4B of the Corporations Act seeking a declaration that the entity
                                   breached the provision specified in the infringement notice and a
                                   pecuniary penalty order. The size of the pecuniary penalty is not limited
                                   to the amount specified in the infringement notice:
                                   (i)    The maximum pecuniary penalty for an individual is the greater of:
                                          (A)   5,000 penalty units; and
                                          (B)   three times the benefit derived and detriment avoided.
                                   (ii)   The maximum pecuniary penalty for a body corporate is the
                                          greatest of:
                                          (A)   50,000 penalty units;
                                          (B)   three times the benefit derived and detriment avoided; and
                                          (C)   10% of the annual turnover for the 12-month period ending at
                                                the end of the month in which the body corporate
                                                contravened, or began to contravene, the relevant provision
                                                (capped at 2.5 million penalty units).

                                   Note: For more information about penalties, including the value of a penalty unit, see
                                   www.asic.gov.au/penalties.

                             (b)   We may (if applicable) begin proceedings under s1324B of the
                                   Corporations Act seeking an order that specified information be
                                   disclosed in the manner required by the infringement notice.
                             (c)   Where a court has made any of the orders set out in RG 73.32(a)–
                                   RG 73.32(b), we can make an order under s91 of the ASIC Act for
                                   recovery of expenses of our investigation into the breach specified in
                                   the infringement notice. We can also bring proceedings to enforce that
                                   order.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                    Page 12
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




                             (d)   We can accept an enforceable undertaking under s93AA of the ASIC
                                   Act and bring proceedings to enforce the undertaking.

              RG 73.33       We cannot otherwise begin or continue any proceedings against the
                             disclosing entity for the alleged breach specified in the infringement notice.

              RG 73.34       Failure to comply with the infringement notice does not affect the right of
                             third parties to bring proceedings against the entity for the alleged breach.
                             Proceedings that individuals may take against the entity are set out in
                             s1317DAG(4) of the Corporations Act.


                             Withdrawal of an infringement notice

              RG 73.35       The entity may seek the withdrawal of the infringement notice by making a
                             written request to ASIC. We may withdraw the infringement notice (whether
                             or not the entity has sought its withdrawal) if the infringement notice has not
                             been satisfied. We will advise the entity in writing if the notice is withdrawn.
                             If a notice is withdrawn, we are not restricted in the action we may take
                             against the disclosing entity for the alleged breach. We may consider
                             criminal proceedings against the entity.


                             Limit on use of information given to ASIC

              RG 73.36       If we begin proceedings after withdrawal of, or failure to comply with, an
                             infringement notice, any evidence or information given to us by a
                             representative of the entity at a private hearing under s1317DAD, or in the
                             course of making written representations to ASIC seeking the withdrawal of
                             the notice, is not admissible in evidence against:
                             (a)   the entity in any proceedings; or
                             (b)   the representative of the entity in any proceedings (other than
                                   proceedings for an offence based on the evidence or information given
                                   being false or misleading).


                             ASIC’s exclusion powers

              RG 73.37       We will also consider making determinations under s708A(2), 713(6),
                             713A(23), 1012DA(2) or 1013FA(3) in circumstances where an
                             infringement notice has been issued to an entity. These determinations
                             exclude entities from relying on certain provisions of the Corporations Act
                             that only require limited disclosure in regulated documents or ‘cleansing
                             notices’, having regard to the continuous disclosure obligations.

              RG 73.38       We will consider making determinations under our exclusion powers
                             irrespective of whether the entity has complied with the infringement notice.
                             We may make these determinations if we are satisfied that in the previous
                             12 months the entity has contravened the continuous disclosure provisions.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                               Page 13
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




Stage 10: Publication by ASIC

                             Publication of compliance with an infringement notice

              RG 73.39       If the disclosing entity complies with an infringement notice we will publish
                             details of the notice. Publication is limited to one or both of the following:
                             (a)   publishing a copy of the infringement notice in the Gazette together
                                   with statements that:
                                   (i)     the disclosing entity has complied with the infringement notice;
                                   (ii)    compliance with a notice is not an admission of guilt or liability;
                                           and
                                   (iii)   the disclosing entity is not regarded as having breached the
                                           provision specified in the notice; and/or
                             (b)   issuing a statement (whether written or oral) about the disclosing
                                   entity’s compliance with the infringement notice, where the statement is
                                   limited to an accurate summary of the infringement notice including:
                                   (i)     the name of the entity;
                                   (ii)    the amount of the penalty payable;
                                   (iii)   the conduct specified in the notice for which the infringement
                                           notice was issued;
                                   (iv)    a statement that the disclosing entity has complied with the
                                           infringement notice;
                                   (v)     a statement that compliance with the notice is not an admission of
                                           guilt or liability; and
                                   (vi)    a statement that the disclosing entity is not regarded as having
                                           breached the provision specified in the notice.

              RG 73.40       We are restricted from otherwise publishing details of an infringement notice
                             or a disclosing entity’s compliance with an infringement notice. This does
                             not prevent us from publishing information on an aggregate and anonymous
                             basis, including for example the number of infringement notices issued and
                             the number resulting in fines or civil penalty proceedings in a given period.


                             Publication of commencement of proceedings

              RG 73.41       If we begin proceedings against the entity following withdrawal of, or failure
                             to comply with, an infringement notice we will publish the fact of
                             commencement of the proceedings and details of the outcome of the
                             proceedings in a media release.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                Page 14
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




Key terms

                                Term                      Meaning in this document

                                AAT                       Administrative Appeals Tribunal

                                ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                                ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                          2001

                                Ch 6CA (for example)      A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                          numbered 6CA), unless otherwise specified

                                Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                                disclosing entity         Has the meaning given in s111AC of the Corporations
                                                          Act

                                hearing                   Has the meaning given in s5 of the ASIC Act

                                hearing notice            A written notice issued under s1317DAD(1) of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                                INFO 1 (for example)      An ASIC information sheet (in this example numbered 1)

                                infringement notice       An infringement notice issued under reg 7.2A.04 of the
                                                          Corporations Regulations 2001

                                RG 8 (for example)        An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 8)

                                s674(2) (for example)     A section of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                          numbered 674(2)), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                                 Page 15
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 73: Continuous disclosure obligations: Infringement notices




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             continuous disclosure obligations, disclosing entity, hearing, hearing notice,
                             infringement notice


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 8 Hearings practice manual


                             Legislation

                             ASIC Act, Pt 3, Div 6; s51, 54–62, 91, 93AA

                             Corporations Act, Ch 6CA; Pt 9.4B; s674(1)–(2A), 675(2)–(2A), 708A(2),
                             713(6), 713A(23), 793C, 1012DA(2), 1013FA(3), 1101B, 1317DAD–
                             1317DAJ, 1317HA, 1324B


                             Cases

                             McLachlan v ASIC (1999) 85 FCR 286


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 1 Administrative hearings




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2017                                               Page 16
