REGULATORY GUIDE 55

Statements in disclosure
documents and PDSs:
Consent to quote

March 2016




About this guide
This regulatory guide is for persons who prepare disclosure documents and
Product Disclosure Statements (PDSs). It explains how ASIC administers
the requirement under s716(2) and 1013K(1) of the Corporations Act 2001
(Corporations Act) for an issuer to obtain consent before citing a person in a
disclosure document or PDS (the consent requirement).

This guide is also relevant for persons preparing takeover documents, as it
explains the relief we give from the consent requirement and from the
requirement in s636(3) and 638(5) for a bidder or target to obtain consent to
cite this information in a bidder’s or target’s statement.

Note: From 27 July 2020, applications for relief should be submitted through
the ASIC Regulatory Portal. For more information, see how you apply for
relief.
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in March 2016 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. The note on the front page was inserted
                             on 27 July 2020. In March 2024, we updated references to remade
                             legislative instruments.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 55 Disclosure documents and PDS:
                                     Consent to quote, issued 5 July 2007, updated 23 April 2010 and
                                     November 2011
                                    Superseded Practice Note 55 Prospectuses citing experts and
                                     statement of interests, issued 23 January 1995, updated 17 June 1996
                                     and rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                               Page 2
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    What is the purpose of the consent requirement? ............................. 4
                                    When is consent required? ................................................................ 5
                                    What must an issuer do to comply with the consent requirement? ... 6
                                    What relief is available? ..................................................................... 6
                             B      When is consent required?............................................................. 7
                                    What is a statement? ......................................................................... 7
                                    Statement is included in a disclosure document or PDS ................... 7
                                    Statement is ‘made by’ a person ....................................................... 8
                                    Based on a statement by a person .................................................. 10
                                    Materiality and novelty ..................................................................... 12
                             C      What must an issuer do to comply with the consent
                                    requirement? .................................................................................. 13
                                    Obtaining consent ............................................................................ 13
                                    Disclosing consent ........................................................................... 14
                             D      What relief is available? ................................................................ 15
                                    Overview of our relief ....................................................................... 15
                                    Government officials ........................................................................ 16
                                    Books and journals .......................................................................... 17
                                    Geological reports ............................................................................ 18
                                    Trading data ..................................................................................... 19
                                    Takeovers ........................................................................................ 20
                                    Other relief ....................................................................................... 20
                                    Applying for relief ............................................................................. 22
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 23
                             Related information ............................................................................... 24




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                                          Page 3
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               The Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) allows issuers of a
                               disclosure document or Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) to include
                               statements made by another person (e.g. an expert). However, such
                               statements may only be included if the issuer complies with certain
                               obligations under the Corporations Act in relation to the statement.

                               The consent requirement allows the maker of the statement to control the
                               effect of their statement in the disclosure document or PDS, and to control
                               their liability.

                               Where a disclosure document or PDS cites a statement made by a person,
                               the issuer must obtain consent to include the statement in the disclosure
                               document or PDS unless exempted.

                               The issuer must obtain consent to include the statement in the form and
                               context that it is included, and must state in the disclosure document or
                               PDS that the person has given this consent.

                               We have provided relief to allow an issuer to make a statement that cites
                               (or is based on) certain statements made by particular people without
                               consent. We may also provide individual relief from the consent
                               requirement.



What is the purpose of the consent requirement?
              RG 55.1        A disclosure document or PDS may include a statement made by another
                             person if certain consent requirements are met.

              RG 55.2        Under s716(2) and 1013K(1) of the Corporations Act, persons that an issuer
                             wants to cite can:
                             (a)   control the effect of a statement in the context of a disclosure document
                                   or PDS as a whole; and
                             (b)   control their liability.

              RG 55.3        Sections 716(2) and 1013K(1) are also evidentiary provisions supporting
                             other provisions:
                             (a)   A person cited in a disclosure document or PDS with their consent is
                                   liable for loss or damage caused by the relevant statement: item 5 of
                                   s729(1), 1022B(2) and 1022B(3)(c). The Explanatory Memorandum to
                                   the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998, para 8.31,
                                   states:
                                      A person will need to have consented to being named in the disclosure
                                      document in relation to a statement … before any liability may arise.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                              Page 4
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             (b)   A person cited in a PDS with their consent commits an offence if the
                                   statement is misleading or deceptive and is materially adverse from the
                                   point of view of a reasonable person considering whether to acquire the
                                   financial product: s1021L(1).
                             (c)   Issuers have a defence for a defective disclosure document if they prove
                                   that they reasonably relied on information provided by the cited person:
                                   s733(1). Issuers also have a defence for including a defective statement
                                   in a PDS if they took reasonable steps to ensure that it would not be
                                   defective: s1022B(7).

              RG 55.4        The consent requirement is not concerned with, or designed to protect, any
                             intellectual property or rights to confidentiality that any party may have in cited
                             statements or information. Nor does the relief we give from the consent
                             requirement abrogate any rights any person may have in cited statements,
                             including rights to restrain the use of that statement or information.

              RG 55.5        The consent requirement is independent of the prohibitions on making
                             misleading and deceptive statements in a disclosure document or PDS:
                             s728(1) and 1041E(1). ASIC relief from the consent requirement does not
                             affect issuers’ liability for misleading or deceptive statements. In any event,
                             there is no statutory liability for the maker of a statement included in a
                             disclosure document without consent under item 5 of s729(1).



When is consent required?
              RG 55.6        The consent requirement applies:
                             (a)   if the cited statement is:
                                   (i)     in the body of the text of the disclosure document or PDS;
                                   (ii)    in a document included in the disclosure document or PDS; or
                                   (iii)   in a document incorporated by reference into the disclosure
                                           document;
                             (b)   regardless of the expertise of the person to whom the statement is
                                   attributed (the person does not have to be an ‘expert’);
                             (c)   if a statement contains a view attributed to a person but they are not
                                   named; and
                             (d)   even where the citation of a person is only apparent when different parts
                                   of the disclosure document or PDS are read together.

              RG 55.7        The consent requirement does not apply where the issuer or directors make a
                             statement without any kind of attribution: see Section B.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                              Page 5
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




What must an issuer do to comply with the consent requirement?
              RG 55.8        In complying with the consent requirement, an issuer must:
                             (a)   obtain consent from the person attributed to making the statement for it
                                   to be included in the disclosure document or PDS in the form and
                                   context in which it is included;
                             (b)   state in the disclosure document or PDS that the person has given this
                                   consent; and
                             (c)   ensure that the person has not withdrawn this consent before the date of
                                   the disclosure document or PDS.

              RG 55.9        A person who gives ongoing or general consent to use a statement does not
                             meet the consent requirement under the Corporations Act: see Section C.



What relief is available?
              RG 55.10       Relief from the consent requirement is available for citing:
                             (a)   statements by government officials;
                             (b)   statements already published in books, journals or comparable
                                   publications;
                             (c)   certain statements taken from geological reports available from
                                   government departments, authorities and agencies, or a prescribed
                                   financial market; and
                             (d)   trading data from prescribed financial markets or approved foreign
                                   exchanges.

              RG 55.11       We also give relief from the requirement in s636(3) and 638(5) for a bidder
                             or target to obtain consent to cite this information in a bidder’s or target’s
                             statement.

              RG 55.12       We may give individual relief from the consent requirement and the
                             requirement in s636(3) and 638(5) in other circumstances: see Section D.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                              Page 6
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




B          When is consent required?

                               Key points

                               This section sets out our guidance to help issuers determine whether they
                               need to obtain consent when including a statement in a disclosure
                               document or PDS.

                               The consent requirement applies if:
                               • a statement is included in a disclosure document or a PDS; and
                               • the issuer holds out that the statement has the authority of a person
                                 because it is:
                                  –   made by the person (i.e. a quote); or
                                  –   based on a statement made by the person.

                               Consent is not required where the statement is used without any kind of
                               attribution; however, consent is required where a statement is attributed to
                               an unnamed person.

                               Consent is also required for a summary of a statement; however, it may not
                               be required for a deduction from a statement for which consent is obtained.

                               Consent is required even if a statement attributed to a person is not
                               material or new.



What is a statement?
              RG 55.13       A ‘statement’ is not limited to text. For a PDS, a ‘statement’ is expressly
                             defined to include a ‘matter that is not written but conveys a message’: s9.
                             This includes diagrams, graphs, charts and maps. A ‘statement’ includes a
                             statement of fact as well as a statement of opinion. Neither the language nor
                             the underlying policy of s716(2) or 1013K(1) limit those provisions to
                             statements of expert opinion.



Statement is included in a disclosure document or PDS
              RG 55.14       The consent requirement applies to a statement in a document that forms part
                             of a disclosure document or a PDS. The statement can be included in the
                             disclosure document or PDS, or incorporated by reference: see s712 and
                             reg 7.9.15DA of the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations).
                             For example, an issuer may include parts of its annual report in a disclosure
                             document, or incorporate these parts by reference. However, auditors’ reports,
                             valuations and other material in an annual report should not be used in a
                             disclosure document without the consent of their authors.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                              Page 7
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




              RG 55.15       For margin loans, some superannuation products and simple managed
                             investment schemes, the Corporations Regulations impose additional
                             requirements when incorporating by reference: see regs 7.9.11E, 7.9.11P
                             and 7.9.11X.

                                   Note: These products are subject to a shorter PDS regime (see Corporations
                                   Amendment Regulations 2010 (No. 5)). For more information on the shorter PDS
                                   regime that applies to these products, see Information Sheet 155 Shorter PDSs—
                                   Complying with requirements for superannuation products, simple managed investment
                                   schemes and simple sub-fund products (INFO 155). Modified disclosure regimes also
                                   apply to general insurance products and First Home Saver Accounts: see Pt 7.9 of the
                                   Corporations Regulations.

              RG 55.16       Statements incorporated by reference are taken to be included in the
                             disclosure document or PDS.

              RG 55.17       The issuer must obtain consent for the form and context of the statement in
                             which it is included. For example, consent for the statement to be included in
                             an annual report will not be sufficient consent for including the statement
                             being incorporated by reference in a disclosure document or PDS.



Statement is ‘made by’ a person
              RG 55.18       A person’s consent is needed only if a disclosure document or PDS holds out
                             that a statement was ‘by’ or ‘made by’ a person (i.e. the statement is a quote
                             that has the authority of that person). For example, s716(2) and 1013K(1) do
                             not apply in any of the following situations:
                             (a)   A person is mentioned in a disclosure document or a PDS as having
                                   assisted with the preparation of these documents, but is not mentioned
                                   as the authority for any particular statement.
                             (b)   A person’s views are used without express or implied attribution. The
                                   Corporations Act does not require each statement in a disclosure
                                   document or PDS to be attributed to someone authoritative on that
                                   matter. The issuer is responsible for everything in a disclosure
                                   document or PDS, subject to the defences in s731, 733 and 1022B(7).
                             (c)   A document is listed in the bibliography of a disclosure document or
                                   PDS but is not cited for any particular proposition. It will be necessary
                                   to obtain the consent of the author of the document only if it is apparent
                                   that the document is listed as authority for a statement in the disclosure
                                   document or PDS.

              RG 55.19       The consent requirement applies regardless of the profession, reputation,
                             qualifications, skills or expertise of the person to whom the statement is
                             attributed. The consent requirement does not use the language ‘expert’. If the
                             disclosure document or PDS holds someone out to be a person making a




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                   Page 8
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             statement, we will require that person’s consent without inquiring if the
                             person in fact has the expertise to make the statement.


                             Unnamed attribution

              RG 55.20       The consent requirement also applies where a statement contains a view
                             attributed to a person, but the person is not named. For example, it applies to
                             statements like:
                             (a)   ‘our legal advisers assure us we have a strong case’;
                             (b)   ‘our audited profit is $X’;
                             (c)   ‘the building has been valued at $Y’; and
                             (d)   ‘our geologist’s tests show that the tenement has significant gold
                                   mineralisation’.

                                   Note: Relief may be available from the consent requirement for citing previous
                                   geological reports (see RG 55.63–RG 55.65).

              RG 55.21       The consent requirement applies because these statements are held out as
                             having the authority of the type of person making the statement. This is not
                             changed by the fact that the person is only described as a member of a
                             profession or referred to by implication. The issuer clearly intends that
                             potential investors will rely on the views of these persons.

              RG 55.22       We note the practice of including averaged anonymous broker valuations
                             without the consent of the brokers concerned. If averaged anonymous broker
                             valuations are used, the issuer of the document will need to ensure that their
                             use is not misleading.

                                   Note: Where averaged anonymous broker valuations are used in a takeover document
                                   and there is a risk of shareholders being misled, the bidder or target may risk an
                                   application to the Takeovers Panel for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances. For
                                   more information, see Takeovers Panel Guidance Note 18 Takeover documents.


                             No attribution

              RG 55.23       The consent requirement does not apply where the issuer or directors use a
                             statement without any kind of attribution. For example, directors cannot
                             attribute a statement to an expert in pharmaceuticals without the expert’s
                             consent. But the directors may include a detailed analysis of the properties of
                             a pharmaceutical product in a disclosure document or PDS without
                             attribution, even though they have no technical expertise in pharmaceuticals
                             themselves.

              RG 55.24       Directors can use a statement without attribution (and so without consent)
                             even if it may be apparent to some readers of the disclosure document or
                             PDS that none of the directors have the expertise to make the statement.
                             Such an assessment by a reader does not mean that there is an implied



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                       Page 9
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             attribution to an unidentified person: contrast this with the examples in
                             RG 55.20. In such cases, the issuer and directors will be liable for the
                             statement (subject to defences), not the maker of the statement.

              RG 55.25       However, if the disclosure document or PDS mentions the name of a person
                             (e.g. a biochemist) and elsewhere in the disclosure document or PDS the
                             directors make a statement about a matter that is within the person’s area of
                             expertise (e.g. the properties of a drug), we may conclude that there is an
                             implied attribution to that person and that the consent requirement applies.


                             Implied and split mentions

              RG 55.26       If several passages in a disclosure document or PDS can fairly be read
                             together and clearly attribute a view to a person, the consent requirement
                             applies to those passages.

              RG 55.27       The test is always how potential investors will understand the relevant
                             passages. The principle applies when:
                             (a)   one passage in a disclosure document or PDS refers to another or
                                   cannot be fully understood in isolation from the other; and
                             (b)   when read together by potential investors, those passages appear to
                                   attribute a view to a person.

              RG 55.28       An example is a disclosure document that:
                             (a)   on one page says what a company’s profit was for a particular year; and
                             (b)   on another page states that the company’s accounts for that year have
                                   been audited.

              RG 55.29       A potential investor would be entitled to assume that the profit figure was
                             from the audited accounts and that the auditors have not qualified those
                             accounts. This is because, to a person reading the disclosure document, the
                             unqualified reference to the profit figure plainly implies that the auditors
                             approved that profit figure.



Based on a statement by a person
              RG 55.30       The issuer must obtain a person’s consent where a disclosure document or
                             PDS includes a statement said in the document to be based on a statement by
                             the person. This ensures that the consent requirement cannot be avoided by
                             giving a person’s views in indirect speech. A distinction needs to be drawn
                             between the following types of statements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                             Page 10
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             Summary of a statement

              RG 55.31       The first type of statement is based on the views of a person in the sense that
                             it represents or summarises those views. Consent is required to include a
                             statement of this type. The person should have the opportunity to control the
                             effect of a statement or veto its inclusion.

              RG 55.32       This applies even if the person’s statement is set out fully in another part of
                             the disclosure document or PDS with the person’s consent (e.g. a disclosure
                             document or PDS that includes an investigating accountant’s report with
                             consent and elsewhere states that ‘in the investigating accountant’s report at
                             page 7, the company’s assets are valued at …’).


                             Deduction from a statement

              RG 55.33       The second type of statement is a deduction made by a person (e.g. the
                             directors of the issuer) from another person’s statement. The other person’s
                             consent is not required for every deduction drawn from what that person has
                             said. Consent is only required if:
                             (a)   the directors cite the original statement; or
                             (b)   the directors attribute the deduction itself to the person.

              RG 55.34       Where a disclosure document or a PDS includes a statement by a person and
                             elsewhere makes inferences based on that statement, the inferences are part
                             of the context in which the person’s statement appears. The person may
                             withhold consent to include their statement in this context.

              RG 55.35       We will not require a person to consent to a statement (e.g. by the directors)
                             containing a deduction based on the views of that person if:
                             (a)   it is made clear that the deduction represents the opinion of the directors
                                   rather than the person;
                             (b)   there is no suggestion that the person is vouching for the directors’
                                   deduction; and
                             (c)   the directors take responsibility for the deduction.

                             But the other person’s consent will be required to include the views on
                             which the directors’ deduction is based.

              RG 55.36       For example, a disclosure document to raise capital for an on-site sewage
                             works construction company contains an independent expert’s report. The
                             report concludes that ‘ecotourism is going to boom in Australia in the
                             current climate’ and is included with the expert’s consent. Elsewhere in the
                             disclosure document, the directors of the company state that ‘given the
                             expected boom in ecotourism, we anticipate the demand for our company’s
                             services in the coming years will grow exponentially’. Section 716(2) does
                             not require the expert to consent to this statement by the directors.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                             Page 11
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




Materiality and novelty
              RG 55.37       The consent requirement applies even if a statement attributed to a person is
                             not material or new. We will not overlook non-compliance with, or give
                             exemptions from, s716(2) or 1013K(1) merely because a statement seems
                             unimportant or standard.

              RG 55.38       Directors who feel that a statement is not important enough to seek consent
                             can use it without any type of attribution to another person: see RG 55.18(b)
                             and RG 55.24.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                             Page 12
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




C          What must an issuer do to comply with the
           consent requirement?

                               Key points

                               This section provides guidance on what we expect issuers to do in order to
                               comply with the consent requirement.

                               The issuer must obtain consent to the use of the statement in the form and
                               context in which the issuer includes it (e.g. ongoing or general consent will
                               not meet the consent requirement).

                               The issuer must also keep a record of the consent in a form that complies
                               with the Corporations Act. The consent must be in writing and name the
                               person giving it.

                               The disclosure document or PDS must state that the person has given, and
                               has not withdrawn, consent. The disclosure of the consent should identify
                               the person’s statement specifically, follow the language of the provisions
                               and must state that the person has given, and has not withdrawn, consent.


Obtaining consent
              RG 55.39       In satisfying the consent requirement, the issuer must obtain consent to its
                             inclusion of the statement in the disclosure document or PDS in the form and
                             context in which it is included: s716(2)(a) and 1013K(1)(a).

              RG 55.40       For example, if an issuer includes an extract of a geologist’s report in a
                             prospectus, the issuer must obtain consent for the inclusion of the extract in
                             the section in which it is included in the prospectus. It is not sufficient for
                             the issuer to only obtain consent to cite the geologist’s report in its entirety,
                             or to cite the extract in a different section of the prospectus. The person must
                             not have withdrawn the consent before the date of the disclosure document
                             or PDS: s716(2)(c) and 1013K(1)(c).

              RG 55.41       The consent of a company or firm should be given on its behalf by an
                             authorised officer of the company or by a member of the firm.


                             Ongoing or general consent

              RG 55.42       Where a person gives ongoing or general consent or licence to use a
                             statement (e.g. to all customers), this does not meet the consent requirement.
                             This is so even if the consent is for limited purposes and subject to
                             conditions (e.g. that issuers attribute the information to the author). The
                             person has not consented to the use of the statement in the form and context
                             in which the issuer includes it: s716(2)(a).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                             Page 13
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             Form of consent

              RG 55.43       The issuer must keep a record of the consent. The consent must be in writing
                             and name the person giving it. The consent must be kept in its physical form
                             or an electronic form capable of being reproduced in physical form: s735,
                             1013K(2) and reg 7.9.76.



Disclosing consent
              RG 55.44       The statement in the disclosure document or PDS for which the person has
                             given consent should identify the person’s statement specifically and follow
                             the language of the provisions. For example, s716(2) and 1013K(1) draw
                             attention to ‘the form and context in which’ a statement ‘is included’
                             because these may colour the way it is read.

              RG 55.45       The disclosure document or PDS must state that the person has given, and
                             has not withdrawn, consent.

              RG 55.46       For example, a disclosure document can include statements under s716(2),
                             such as:
                             (a)   ‘Consultant Pty Ltd has consented to the valuation of Blackacre on
                                   page 10 being included in the form and context in which it is included,
                                   and has not withdrawn this consent as at the date this disclosure
                                   document is lodged with ASIC’; or
                             (b)   ‘Consultant Pty Ltd has given its written consent to all statements by it
                                   or said to be based on statements by it in the form and context in which
                                   they are included, and has not withdrawn this consent as at the date this
                                   prospectus is lodged with ASIC. The statements are in sections 4.1, 4.2
                                   … of this prospectus’.

              RG 55.47       We may take regulatory action where a person places artificial limitations on
                             the context in which a statement may be read. For example, we may impose
                             an interim stop order on the disclosure document or PDS: s739(3) or
                             1020E(5). This is because people are already protected by the power to
                             withhold consent to anything in the disclosure document or PDS that gives a
                             misleading colour to their statements. By consenting to the inclusion of the
                             statement in the form or context in which it appears, a person is not
                             assuming liability for the disclosure document or PDS as a whole: see
                             RG 55.3(a).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                             Page 14
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




D          What relief is available?

                               Key points

                               This section sets out the relief that is available to issuers to cite a statement
                               without the requirement to obtain consent from the maker of the statement.
                               This section also provides some guidance on what we look at in deciding
                               whether to grant individual relief.

                               Relief from the consent requirement is available for citing government
                               officials, books and journals, geological reports and trading data.

                               We have provided relief from the requirement in s636(3) and 638(5) for a
                               bidder or target to obtain consent to cite this information in a bidder’s or
                               target’s statement.

                               Relief is also available where the bidder’s or target statement fairly
                               represents the statement and certain conditions are complied with.

                               We may give individual relief from the consent requirement and the
                               requirement in s636(3) and 638(5) in other circumstances.




Overview of our relief

              RG 55.48       Under ASIC Corporations (Consents to Statements) Instrument 2016/72,
                             relief from the consent requirement is available for citing:
                             (a)   statements made by government officials (see RG 55.51);
                             (b)   statements already published in books, journals or comparable
                                   publications (see RG 55.58);
                             (c)   statements taken from certain geological reports (see RG 55.63); and
                             (d)   trading data from prescribed financial markets or approved foreign
                                   exchanges (see RG 55.66).

              RG 55.49       ASIC Corporations (Takeover Bids) Instrument 2023/683 provides further
                             relief from the consent requirement for certain information in a bidder’s or
                             target’s statement: see RG 55.72.

              RG 55.50       Where appropriate, we may also grant individual relief from the consent
                             requirement in other circumstances. In general, we will look at the
                             circumstances of the statement and the maker of the statement in
                             determining whether or not to grant relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                             Page 15
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




Government officials
              RG 55.51       A disclosure document or PDS may include a statement by an official person
                             or a statement in a public official document without consent: see ASIC
                             Corporations (Consents to Statements) Instrument 2016/72.

                                   Note: The ASIC logo must not be displayed or reproduced in a disclosure document or
                                   PDS.

              RG 55.52       This relief does not apply where the original statement was made in
                             connection with the issuer, the offer or any business, property or person that
                             is the subject of the disclosure document or PDS.

              RG 55.53       We may give individual relief where a statement by an official person or in a
                             public official document was made in connection with the issuer or the offer.
                             However, we will not give the relief where:
                             (a)   national interests are involved (e.g. in the context of a privatisation); or
                             (b)   the statement was made for the purpose of being included in the
                                   disclosure document or PDS.

              RG 55.54       Without our relief, issuers would need to obtain consent to refer to
                             statements of government officials and government publications (e.g. the
                             Australian Bureau of Statistics and the Bureau of Meteorology). To obtain
                             the consent of a government official or body may be onerous for an issuer.
                             There is also a low risk of civil liability in this case.
                                   Note: In any event, there would be no statutory liability for a government official or
                                   body under, for example, item 5 of s729(1) if it did not consent.

              RG 55.55       Guidance on the meaning of ‘public official document’ used in RG 55.51
                             can be found in cases on evidence that have considered the term ‘public
                             document’. A public document is one made by a public official as a result of
                             a public inquiry and available to the public: Lord Blackburn in Sturla v
                             Freccia [1874–80] All ER Rep 657. Documents do not become public
                             official documents merely because they have been lodged with a government
                             department or statutory authority and are maintained for public access on a
                             registry by the department or authority.

              RG 55.56       Our relief applies to statements made by a foreign ‘official person’ or
                             contained in a foreign ‘public official document’. An issuer should be
                             prepared to satisfy us that a foreign person is a foreign ‘official person’ or a
                             foreign document is a document made by a foreign ‘official person’.
                             However, our relief only covers statements by government officials made in
                             their capacity as government officials.

              RG 55.57       We note that disclosure documents have occasionally contained information
                             based on summaries of resource exploration reports lodged by holders of
                             exploration permits. These summaries have been prepared by staff of
                             government departments, authorities or agencies. We do not regard these



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                        Page 16
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             summaries as statements by official persons or contained in public official
                             documents. They do not state the views of the government department,
                             authority or agency. However, other relief may be available for the use of
                             these summaries or the underlying exploration reports: see RG 55.63.



Books and journals
              RG 55.58       ASIC Corporations (Consents to Statements) Instrument 2016/72 also
                             exempts statements by authors used in disclosure documents or PDSs from
                             the consent requirement. The relief applies to a correct and fair copy of (or
                             an extract from) a book, journal or comparable publication.

              RG 55.59       The relief does not apply where the original statement was made in
                             connection with the issuer, the offer or any business, property or person that
                             is the subject of the disclosure document or PDS.

              RG 55.60       It is generally impractical for an issuer to obtain the consent of the author of
                             a statement in a book, journal or other comparable publication where the
                             statement is not specific to the issuer or its business. There is also a low risk
                             of civil liability for the author in this case.

                                   Note: In any event, there would be no statutory liability for the author under, for
                                   example, item 5 of s729(1) if they did not consent.

              RG 55.61       The phrase ‘book, journal or comparable publication’ includes statements in
                             a form and of a standard similar to those normally contained in a book or
                             journal, but made available through the internet or other electronic means. It
                             excludes, for example, references to statements made in internet chat rooms,
                             news groups and home pages with unaccountable content (i.e. with
                             anonymous participants or without editorial control). For example, we would
                             generally consider:
                             (a)   professional reports on, or analyses of, an industry sector (whether
                                   available for free or as part of a paid subscription service) to be
                                   ‘comparable publications’ to which our relief applies; and
                             (b)   analysis or commentary on an industry sector published in a blog post
                                   as falling short of the standard required of ‘comparable publications’—
                                   even where the author may hold relevant qualifications—due to the lack
                                   of editorial control.

              RG 55.62       Where issuers rely on our relief and include a statement from a book, journal
                             or comparable publication without the consent of the author, we consider it
                             best practice for the issuer to:
                             (a)   appropriately reference the statements to the source document; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                            Page 17
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             (b)   note that the author has not provided their consent for the statement to
                                   be included in the disclosure document or PDS. If multiple statements
                                   from the same source are included, this note need only be included as
                                   part of the first reference to that document (provided it is clear that the
                                   successive references are from the same source).



Geological reports
              RG 55.63       ASIC Corporations (Consents to Statements) Instrument 2016/72 gives relief
                             from the consent requirement for a geologist’s report dealing with the
                             estimation, assessment or evaluation of minerals in a disclosure document or
                             PDS to cite a previous geological report where:
                             (a)   the current geologist is either (or both) a Member or Fellow of the
                                   Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (AusIMM) or the
                                   Australian Institute of Geoscientists (AIG) with a minimum of five
                                   years experience relevant to estimating, assessing and evaluating the
                                   resources the subject of the report;
                             (b)   the statement is made in, or based on, a statement made in the previous
                                   geological report and publicly available (with or without payment of a
                                   fee) from:
                                   (i)    a government department, authority or agency of an Australian
                                          state or territory; or
                                   (ii)   a prescribed financial market;
                             (c)   the previous geological report was not prepared in connection with the
                                   offer of products under the disclosure document or PDS;
                             (d)   the previous geological report was not prepared or commissioned by a
                                   person with or from whom the issuer (or any associate of the issuer):
                                   (i)    has a shared interest in the tenement that is the subject of the
                                          disclosure document or PDS; or
                                   (ii)   has purchased the tenement that is the subject of the disclosure
                                          document or PDS; and
                             (e)   the current geological report states, close to the first occurring reference
                                   to the previous geological report, that the author of the previous report
                                   has not consented to its use in the current report.

              RG 55.64       A disclosure document or PDS relating to the acquisition or exploitation of
                             mining tenements will often contain an independent technical assessment or
                             valuation of the mining tenements.

              RG 55.65       Inherent in the preparation of the reports is the need to refer to previous
                             results and assessments on the mining tenements (historical results). In many
                             cases, the historical results are obtained from an open file register or website




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                Page 18
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             of a government department, authority or agency, or an open register or
                             website of a prescribed financial market. The historical results are often
                             obtained from geologists’ reports commissioned by previous holders of the
                             tenements.



Trading data
              RG 55.66       ASIC Corporations (Consents to Statements) Instrument 2016/72 gives relief
                             from the consent requirement for issuers to include in a disclosure document
                             or a PDS trading data relating to trading on a prescribed financial market or an
                             approved foreign exchange (e.g. the New York Stock Exchange) without the
                             consent of the relevant market operator or of any other party who provided the
                             trading data (e.g. Bloomberg, Reuters or IRESS). The disclosure document or
                             PDS must also include a statement close to the first occurring trading data
                             reference that the person who prepared the trading data has not consented to
                             the use of the trading data.
                                   Note: ‘Prescribed financial market’ is defined under reg 7.1.01. For a list of approved
                                   foreign exchanges, see ASIC Corporations (Consents to Statements) Instrument
                                   2016/72.

              RG 55.67       Our relief applies where the information is quantitative data on financial
                             product trading prices and volumes quoted on a prescribed financial market
                             or an approved foreign exchange.

              RG 55.68       Trading data is purely factual information. If the issuer adds commentary,
                             analysis or deduction, the attribution to the market data provider should be
                             clearly limited to the underlying trading data. Our relief extends to a citation
                             where the market data provider:
                             (a)   presents trading data in pictorial form (e.g. graphs, charts and
                                   diagrams); and
                             (b)   applies simpler, objective formulas to trading data (e.g. volume-
                                   weighted average price (VWAP)).

              RG 55.69       For our relief to apply, the information must not amount to subjective
                             analysis or financial modelling and must retain its purely factual character.

              RG 55.70       The consent requirement applies to raw trading information and other purely
                             factual information just as it applies to professional opinion and analysis. We
                             give relief because the risk of trading data being misleading or inaccurate is
                             limited. It is also unlikely that the market data provider would be liable.

                                   Note: In any event, there would be no statutory liability for the market data provider
                                   under, for example, item 5 of s729(1) if it did not consent.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                       Page 19
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




Takeovers
              RG 55.71       ASIC Corporations (Consents to Statements) Instrument 2016/72 also gives
                             relief from the requirements under s636(3) and 638(5A) so that a bidder or
                             target may cite the following kinds of statements in a bidder’s or target’s
                             statements without consent:
                             (a)   statements from government officials or in public official documents;
                             (b)   statements in books, journals or similar publications;
                             (c)   geological reports; and
                             (d)   trading data.
                                   Note: See also Regulatory Guide 9 Takeover bids (RG 9) and ASIC Corporations
                                   (Takeover Bids) Instrument 2023/683.

              RG 55.72       We have also provided relief from the consent requirement under ASIC
                             Corporations (Takeover Bids) Instrument 2023/683 where a statement is
                             made in a document lodged with ASIC (or the operator of prescribed
                             financial markets), the bidder’s or target’s statement fairly represents the
                             statement and:
                             (a)   the bidder’s or target’s statement includes, or is accompanied by, a
                                   correct and fair copy of the document or the part of the document that
                                   contains the statement; or
                             (b)   if the bidder’s or target’s statement is not accompanied by a copy of the
                                   document or the part of the document that contains the statement:
                                   (i)    the bidder or target gives a copy of the document or the part of the
                                          document that contains the statement to a holder who asks for it
                                          during the bid period within two business days of the request, free
                                          of charge; and
                                   (ii)   the bidder’s or target’s statement identifies the document or the part of
                                          the document that contains the statement and informs holders of their
                                          right to obtain a copy of the document (or part) free of charge.

              RG 55.73       We may give individual relief from the requirement in s636(3) and 638(5) in
                             other circumstances. Applicants for this relief should use the criteria in
                             RG 55.74 as a guide.



Other relief
              RG 55.74       We may give case-by-case relief from the consent requirement in other
                             circumstances. Generally, relief will be limited to circumstances where consent
                             to use a statement is wholly impracticable or impossible to obtain. The
                             following considerations will generally be relevant to our decision:
                             (a)   Will the statement assist potential investors to make better informed
                                   decisions (e.g. because it provides a context in which other material can
                                   be better judged)?



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                Page 20
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             (b)     Was the statement made in connection with a matter other than the
                                     issuer, the offer or any business, property or person that is the subject of
                                     the disclosure document or PDS?
                             (c)     Is it wholly impracticable or impossible to obtain the statement maker’s
                                     consent (e.g. the person is dead or, in the case of a corporation, does not
                                     exist as an entity anymore or is in liquidation)?
                             (d)     Is there any practical alternative to citing the statement for the
                                     information it contains (e.g. would it be too expensive to replicate the
                                     information contained in the statement)?
                             (e)     Will the use of the statement in the disclosure document or PDS without
                                     the person’s consent expose them to civil liability?

                                     Note: In any event, there would be no statutory liability under, for example, item 5 of
                                     s729(1) if the person did not consent.

                             (f)     Is the information widely available to the public or is it available to
                                     professional investors (see s9) but not other investors?
                             (g)     Is the maker of the statement credible or authoritative on the subject
                                     matter?
                             (h)     Are the statements contained in unpublished material comparable to
                                     published books and journals?

              RG 55.75       In considering granting relief, we will consider the policy tension between
                             the disclosure obligations of s710 and 1013E and the consent requirements.
                             Without relief, material information has to be omitted from the disclosure
                             document or PDS because consents are not available.

              RG 55.76       Case law indicates that, in general, the author of a statement will not be
                             civilly liable for the inclusion in a disclosure document of that statement
                             (or a statement based on it) if the original statement was not made for the
                             purpose of being included in the disclosure document or PDS: see Morgan
                             Crucible Co plc v Hill Samuel Bank Ltd [1991] 1 All ER 148, Bride as
                             Trustees for the Pinwernying Family Trust v KMG Hungerfords (1991) 109
                             FLR 256 and Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Peat Marwick Hungerfords
                             (Reg) (1997) 188 CLR 241.

              RG 55.77       We will not normally give relief on the grounds of expense for reports
                             recently obtained by an issuer, such as valuations and auditors’ reports
                             provided to (or issued by) the issuer for internal use or publication in their
                             annual report and notices of meeting. We would want to know why an expert
                             from whom a report had recently been obtained had not consented to the
                             report being used in a disclosure document or a PDS. An exception would be
                             made if, for example, an auditor died after signing the audit report but before
                             consenting to its use in the disclosure document or PDS.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                         Page 21
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




Applying for relief
              RG 55.78       Applications for relief must address all of the criteria in RG 55.74 where
                             relevant to the particular circumstances of that application and supply all
                             relevant information.

                                   Note: For more information on applying for relief, see Regulatory Guide 51
                                   Applications for relief (RG 51).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                   Page 22
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




Key terms

                                Term                      Meaning in this document

                                AIG                       Australian Institute of Geoscientists

                                ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                                AusIMM                    Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy

                                bidder’s statement        Has the meaning given in s9

                                consent requirement       The requirement for an issuer to obtain the consent of a
                                                          person to include in a disclosure document or PDS a
                                                          statement by the person, or a statement said in the
                                                          disclosure document or PDS to be based on a statement
                                                          by the person, under s716(2) or 1013K(1)

                                Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                                Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                                Regulations

                                disclosure document       For an offer of securities, this includes a prospectus, a
                                                          profile statement and an offer information statement

                                INFO 155 (for             An ASIC information sheet (in this example numbered
                                example                   155)

                                prescribed financial      Has the meaning given in s9
                                market

                                Product Disclosure        A document that must be given to a retail client in relation
                                Statement (PDS)           to the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance
                                                          with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                                Note: See s9 for the exact definition.

                                reg 7.9.76 (for           A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                                example)                  example numbered 7.9.76)

                                RG 9 (for example)        An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 9)

                                s716 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 716)

                                shorter PDS               A PDS that is required to comply with the shorter PDS
                                                          regime

                                shorter PDS regime        The requirements set out in Div 3A of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                          Corporations Act as modified by Subdivs 4.2 to 4.2C and
                                                          Schs 10B, C, D and E of the Corporations Regulations,
                                                          which prescribe the content and length of the PDS for first
                                                          home saver accounts, margin loans, superannuation
                                                          products and simple managed investment schemes

                                target’s statement        Has the meaning given in s9




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                                  Page 23
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             adviser, auditor, biochemist, brokers, consent, consent requirement,
                             consultant, director, disclosure document, expert, geological report,
                             geologist, government official, independent expert, issuer, market data
                             providers, misleading statement, PDS, Product Disclosure Statement,
                             publication, public official document, statement, valuer


                             Legislative instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Consents to Statements) Instrument 2016/72

                             ASIC Corporations (Takeover Bids) Instrument 2023/683


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 9 Takeover bids

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 228 Prospectuses: Effective disclosure for retail investors

                             RG 254 Offering securities under a disclosure document


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 155 Shorter PDSs—Complying with requirements for superannuation
                             products, simple managed investment schemes and simple sub-fund products


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, s9, 636(3), 638(5), 638(5A), 710, 712, 716(2), 728(1),
                             729(1), 731, 733, 735, 739(3), 1013E, 1013K(1), 1013K(2), 1020E(5),
                             1021L(1), 1022B(2), 1022B(3)(c), 1022B(7) and 1041E(1)

                             Corporations Regulations, Pt 7.9, regs 7.1.01, 7.9.15DA, 7.9.11E, 7.9.11P,
                             7.9.11X and 7.9.76

                             Explanatory Memorandum to the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program
                             Bill 1998, para 8.31


                             Cases

                             Sturla v Freccia [1874–80] All ER Rep 657

                             Morgan Crucible Co plc v Hill Samuel Bank Ltd [1991] 1 All ER 148



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                             Page 24
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 55: Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote




                             Bride as Trustees for the Pinwernying Family Trust v KMG Hungerfords
                             (1991) 109 FLR 256

                             Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Peat Marwick Hungerfords (Reg) (1997)
                             188 CLR 241


                             Guidance notes

                             Takeovers Panel Guidance Note 18 Takeover documents




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2016                                             Page 25
