REGULATORY GUIDE 69

Debentures and notes:
Improving disclosure for
retail investors

February 2012




About this guide
This guide is for issuers and others involved with the issue of mortgage
debentures, debentures, secured notes, and unsecured notes or unsecured
deposit notes.

It sets out our guidelines for disclosure to retail investors to help them
understand and assess unlisted debentures and notes, while maintaining the
flexibility of the public fundraising process. It also provides guidance on how
debentures and notes may be described.
    Note: See also Regulatory Guide 156 Advertising of debentures and notes to retail
    investors (RG 156).
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This version was issued in February 2012 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at that date. In July 2022 we updated references to Class Order
                             [CO 12/1482] When debentures can be called secured notes to ASIC
                             Corporations (Describing Debentures—Secured Notes) Instrument 2022/61
                             because [CO 12/1482] was reviewed as part of the sunsetting of legislative
                             instruments under the Legislative Instruments Act 2003; updated references to
                             Regulatory Guide 99 Quotation of securities offered by prospectus (s1031) to
                             Regulatory Guide 254 Offering securities under a disclosure document, as in
                             March 2016 we consolidated seven regulatory guides relating to disclosure
                             documents into Regulatory Guide 254; removed outdated references to a no-
                             action position that preceded [CO 12/1482]; and removed outdated references
                             to updates to the investor guide Investing in unlisted debentures and
                             unsecured notes?.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 69, issued October 2007, reissued
                                     August 2008 and June 2010


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                  Page 2
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Who this guide applies to................................................................... 4
                                    Improving disclosure to retail investors ............................................. 5
                                    Benchmarks for unlisted notes .......................................................... 6
                                    Other participants involved with unlisted notes ................................. 7
                                    Underlying principles ......................................................................... 7
                             B      The unlisted note sector ................................................................. 9
                                    Business models and activities .......................................................... 9
                                    Risks to investors ............................................................................. 10
                             C      Benchmarks for unlisted notes .................................................... 13
                                    Benchmark 1: Equity ratio................................................................ 13
                                    Benchmark 2: Liquidity .................................................................... 14
                                    Benchmark 3: Rollovers ................................................................... 16
                                    Benchmark 4: Debt maturity ............................................................ 16
                                    Benchmark 5: Loan portfolio ............................................................ 17
                                    Benchmark 6: Related party transactions ........................................ 19
                                    Benchmark 7: Valuations ................................................................. 20
                                    Benchmark 8: Lending principles—Loan-to-valuation ratios ........... 21
                             D      Form and method of disclosure ................................................... 23
                                    Disclosure obligations ...................................................................... 23
                                    Disclosure against the benchmarks: ‘If not, why not’ ...................... 24
                                    Disclosure in a prospectus............................................................... 25
                                    Ongoing disclosure .......................................................................... 27
                             E      Trustees of issues ......................................................................... 31
                                    The trustee’s role ............................................................................. 31
                                    Monitoring disclosure against the benchmarks ............................... 31
                                    Underlying principles ....................................................................... 32
                             F      Auditors and valuers ..................................................................... 34
                                    Auditors ............................................................................................ 34
                                    Valuers ............................................................................................. 35
                             G      Naming of debentures ................................................................... 36
                                    The categories of debentures .......................................................... 36
                                    Conditions to the use of the term ‘secured note’ ............................. 38
                                    The concept of ‘sufficiency of property’ ........................................... 40
                                    Branding of products ........................................................................ 41
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 43
                             Related information ............................................................................... 45




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                                        Page 3
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




A          Overview


                               Key points

                               This guide applies to issuers of unlisted ‘mortgage debentures’, ‘debentures’,
                               ‘secured notes’, and ‘unsecured notes’ or ‘unsecured deposit notes’: see
                               RG 69.1–RG 69.3.

                               The risk features of notes and their appeal to ordinary retail investors
                               require an improved approach to disclosure: see RG 69.4–RG 69.6.

                               ASIC has developed eight benchmarks that can help investors understand
                               the risks, assess the rewards being offered and decide whether these
                               investments are suitable for them: see RG 69.7–RG 69.8. An issuer of
                               unlisted notes should address the benchmarks in its disclosures on an ‘if
                               not, why not’ basis, and ensure that their advertising is consistent with
                               these disclosures: see RG 69.9–RG 69.10.

                               Those parties involved with issuers (e.g. trustees, auditors and valuers)
                               should use the benchmarks and the ‘if not, why not’ explanations in
                               carrying out their responsibilities: see RG 69.11.

                               This guide also provides guidance to all issuers of notes (whether listed or
                               unlisted) on how these products may be described consistently with
                               s283BH of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act): see RG 69.2.



Who this guide applies to
              RG 69.1        This guide applies to issuers of unlisted ‘mortgage debentures’, ‘debentures’,
                             ‘secured notes’, and ‘unsecured notes’ or ‘unsecured deposit notes’. These
                             products are interchangeably referred to as ‘notes’ in this guide.

                                   Note: See s283BH of the Corporations Act, ASIC Corporations (Describing
                                   Debentures—Secured Notes) Instrument 2022/61 and Section G of this guide for
                                   information on how these products may be described.

              RG 69.2        We expect issuers of unlisted notes to follow the guidance and expectations
                             in this guide. We expect issuers of listed notes to follow the guidance on the
                             naming of notes set out in Section G.

              RG 69.3        Apart from Section G, this guide does not apply to:
                             (a)   issuers of notes that were not required to follow the guidance when
                                   RG 69 was first introduced in October 2007;
                             (b)   initial public offerings under a prospectus that states that the offered
                                   notes are to be quoted on a financial market. This guide will apply,
                                   however, if that prospectus is varied by a supplementary or replacement



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                  Page 4
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                                   prospectus indicating withdrawal of the intention to quote the notes on a
                                   financial market. For further information, see Regulatory Guide 254
                                   Offering securities under a disclosure document (RG 254) and s723(3)
                                   of the Corporations Act; or
                             (c)   any notes that are convertible into listed securities at the discretion of
                                   the investors.



Improving disclosure to retail investors
              RG 69.4        Notes held by retail investors are used as a source of finance for a range of
                             business models and activities. With notes, the investor provides loan funds
                             to the issuer, and in return the person borrowing the funds (the issuer) issues
                             a note with a promise to pay a rate of interest (usually fixed) for a defined
                             term, and then repay the loan.

              RG 69.5        Some features and risks common to notes and their issuers can create risks
                             for investors. This is particularly the case for notes that are not quoted on a
                             public market (‘unlisted’ notes): see Section B. A lack of clear benchmarks
                             can also make it hard for investors to adequately understand, assess and
                             compare these securities.

              RG 69.6        We have identified four guiding principles for improved disclosure by
                             issuers of unlisted notes, which are designed to provide for better risk
                             assessment by retail investors: see Table 1. These principles are the
                             foundation for our approach in this guide.

Table 1:     Guiding principles for improved disclosure on unlisted notes

 What the principle is                                                Related information

 Principle 1: Benchmarks can help retail investors assess the         See Section C of this guide.
 risk and risk−reward prospects of notes.

 Principle 2: Issuers of unlisted notes should disclose against       See Section D of this guide and Regulatory
 the benchmarks on an ‘if not, why not’ basis, and ensure that        Guide 156 Advertising of debentures and
 their advertising is consistent with these disclosures.              notes to retail investors (RG 156).

 Principle 3: Those parties involved with issuers (e.g. trustees,     See Sections E–F of this guide.
 auditors and valuers) should use the benchmarks and the ‘if
 not, why not’ explanations in carrying out their responsibilities.

 Principle 4: Additional education will assist investors and          See our investor guide, Investing in unlisted
 potential investors in the unlisted note sector, including by        debentures and unsecured notes?
 helping them understand and use the benchmarks and the ‘if
 not, why not’ responses in their investment decision making.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                Page 5
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Benchmarks for unlisted notes
              RG 69.7        We have developed eight benchmarks that apply to unlisted notes: see
                             Table 2 and Section C. Some benchmarks apply to all issuers; others apply
                             only to certain issuers. We expect issuers to disclose against the benchmarks
                             (as applicable) on an ‘if not, why not’ basis: see RG 69.9–RG 69.10. We also
                             expect any advertising to support the use of these benchmarks: see RG 156.

              RG 69.8        Failing to meet one or more of these benchmarks does not mean that a
                             particular note is necessarily a poor investmenthowever, additional
                             disclosure to investors will be needed to address that benchmark on an ‘if
                             not, why not’ basis so that investors can assess its impact on their investment
                             decision.

Table 2:     Benchmarks for unlisted notes

                        1 Equity ratio
                                                         Benchmarks 1 and 2 address the issuer’s financial
                                                         structure and ability to meet loan obligations on time.
                        2 Liquidity
 General
 benchmarks for
                                                         Benchmark 3 addresses the transparency of the issuer’s
 all issuers of         3 Rollovers
                                                         approach to ‘rollovers’ of investments.
 unlisted notes
                                                         Benchmark 4 addresses the debt maturity profile of the
                        4 Debt maturity
                                                         issuer and associated interest rates.

                        5 Loan portfolio                 Benchmark 5 addresses the issuer’s lending practices.
 Additional
 benchmarks
                        6 Related party
 for lenders                                             Benchmark 6 addresses a specific area of lending risk.
                          transactions

                                                         Benchmark 7 addresses the issuer’s property-related
 Additional             7 Valuations
                                                         practices.
 benchmarks for
 property-related
                        8 Lending principles            Benchmark 8 addresses the issuer’s property-related
 notes
                          Loan-to-valuation ratios       practices.



                             Disclosure against the benchmarks: ‘If not, why not’

              RG 69.9        Issuers of unlisted notes should disclose against the benchmarks on an ‘if
                             not, why not’ basis: see Section D. This means stating that the issuer and
                             product either:
                             (a)   meet the benchmark; or
                             (b)   do not meet the benchmark and explaining how and why the issuer
                                   deals with the business factors or issues underlying the benchmark in
                                   another way.

              RG 69.10       Disclosure against the benchmarks should be:
                             (a)   addressed up-front in the prospectus;


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                Page 6
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (b)   updated in ongoing disclosure as material changes occurfor example:
                                   (i)    in a replacement prospectus, supplementary prospectus or
                                          continuous disclosure notice; and
                                   (ii)   at least twice a year, in quarterly reports to trustees; and
                             (c)   supported in, and not undermined by, advertising material.



Other participants involved with unlisted notes
              RG 69.11       We expect other parties involved with issues of unlisted notes to support the
                             guiding principles in Table 1: see Sections E–F. This includes trustees,
                             auditors and valuers.



Underlying principles
              RG 69.12       The disclosure framework in the Corporations Act requires issuers of
                             financial products who seek retail investors to:
                             (a)   disclose up-front to these investors all they need to know to make
                                   prudent decisions in their own interest; and
                             (b)   provide ongoing disclosure to help retail investors monitor whether
                                   their expectations are being met.

                                   Note: For notes, the framework provides an additional safeguard by requiring that there
                                   be a trustee for note holders: see Section E.

              RG 69.13       In recent years, there have been a number of market failures in the note
                             sector, including unlisted notes. If the funds invested in failed unlisted notes
                             were raised in professional markets or provided by professional investors,
                             their commercial failure would be of less concern to ASIC or the broader
                             community. In an open economy, such as that in Australia, business failure
                             is accepted as an inevitable result of a competitive environment.

               RG 69.14      What is of concern is the combination of the risk features of these types of
                             investments (see Section B) and their appeal to ordinary retail investors.

              RG 69.15       The regulatory framework places special emphasis on the needs of retail
                             investors, and makes disclosure the key tool for them. Disclosure is not
                             designed to stop retail investors from taking investment risks, but to help
                             them understand the risks involved in any particular investment or type of
                             investment. This enables them to make an informed decision about whether
                             the potential reward (the return on their investment) matches the level of risk
                             involved, and whether they are prepared to take on that risk.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                   Page 7
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 69.16       This assessment is particularly important and difficult if investors need to
                             consider not only underperformance risk (the risk that an investment will not
                             produce returns as high as expected), but also the risk of significant or total
                             loss of the original investment funds. For notes, typically the return is fixed
                             because the issuer promises to pay interest on the loan at a fixed rate.
                             Therefore, the issuer’s ability to repay the funds lent (credit risk) is usually
                             the most critical risk.

               RG 69.17      We believe that our approach balances:
                             (a)   the need to improve disclosure to allow investors to make informed
                                   decisions; and
                             (b)   the desirability of not unduly interfering with this market as a market
                                   for raising capital.

                                   Note: The need to strike an appropriate balance between protecting investors’ interests
                                   and allowing markets to operate freely is part of ASIC’s mandate under the Australian
                                   Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act).

              RG 69.18       Our approach cannot prevent investments failing, nor ensure that they
                             perform to investors’ expectations. However, better disclosure can help
                             investors make better risk–reward decisions.

              RG 69.19       Our approach should not result in longer disclosures. Recent experience
                             shows that investors need better quality and relevant disclosure, presented in
                             a way best suited to investor understanding.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                    Page 8
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




B          The unlisted note sector


                               Key points

                               Notes held by retail investors are used as a source of finance for a range of
                               business models and activities: see RG 69.20–RG 69.21.

                               Some features of unlisted notes and their issuers can create risks for
                               investors, and a lack of clear benchmarks can make it hard for investors to
                               adequately understand and assess these products: see RG 69.22–RG 69.30.




Business models and activities
              RG 69.20       Capital markets provide funds to enable companies in the real economy to
                             innovate and take commercial risks without certainty of return.

               RG 69.21      Notes held by retail investors are used as a source of finance for a range of
                             business models and activities, and have been part of capital markets for a
                             long time. Uses of capital raised in this way include:
                             (a)   debt capital funding—money raised and applied as working capital or
                                   transaction-specific funding to further the issuer or group’s business
                                   operations;
                             (b)   finance—lending for personal and general commercial purposes;
                             (c)   integrated property—funding of property transactions and development
                                   within a group or with related parties where that amount of funds
                                   applied is greater than 10% of the total assets of the note issuer;
                             (d)   mortgage financing—secured mortgage lending for residential and
                                   commercial property ownership and improvement, with security over
                                   real property;
                             (e)   structured real estate investments—participation in ownership of
                                   commercial and residential real estate as part of a wider ownership
                                   structure; and
                             (f)   memberships—notes issued to facilitate membership of clubs, groups or
                                   franchise operations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                Page 9
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Risks to investors
              RG 69.22       In recent years, there have been a number of market failures in the note
                             sector, including unlisted notes. A large number of investors have faced
                             potential losses of significant amounts of money.

              RG 69.23       We have analysed the common features of those failures. This analysis has
                             identified the key features and risks common to those failed entities: see
                             Table 3. These features are not present in every issue of notes to retail
                             investors. The investment risks described will vary from issuer to issuer and
                             from business model to business model. However, disclosure about these
                             features and risks, including to what extent they are present in a given
                             offering, is desirable for a broad range of notes.

Table 3:     Common risk features of unlisted notes

 Risk feature        Description                               What this means

 Minimal equity      The note issuer frequently has little     The owners of the entity that issues the notes have
 capital             equity capital relative to the loan       little capital at risk compared to note holders and
                     funding it relies on to operate its       other lenders. This arguably means they have less
                     business (loan funds include both         incentive to ensure the prudent management of the
                     funds borrowed from a lending             business, and also that their interests and those of
                     institution and funds contributed by      note holders are not well aligned. If an investment
                     note holders).                            runs into difficulties, there is no source of funds to tide
                                                               the investment over, other than by raising further
                                                               investment funds.

 Liquidity           The liquidity of the issuer is key to     Liquidity is often at risk because of a mismatch between
                     its ability to meet its obligations to    the timing of the issuer’s obligations to repay note
                     pay interest and principal to note        holders, and the timing of cash flows from the underlying
                     holders on time.                          businesses or assets to which funds have been on-
                                                               lent. Liquidity is frequently heavily dependent on
                                                               continuing inflows from new investors, or ‘rollovers’ by
                                                               existing investors.

                                                               This problem is exacerbated if inadequate disclosure
                                                               in a prospectus leads to ASIC halting further
                                                               fundraising by issuing a stop order. The issuer can
                                                               then no longer rely on an inflow of funds from new
                                                               investors. This may worsen its liquidity and in extreme
                                                               cases threaten its solvency.

 Loan                The criteria issuers use to decide        In many cases, the note issuer’s loan book exposure
 assessment and      what loans to make are extremely          is not diversified. Lack of diversification means there
 diversification     variable and prone to risk, especially    is greater risk that an adverse event affecting one
                     in the following key areas:               borrower or one type of loan will simultaneously affect
                      loan-to-valuation ratios are often      the majority of borrowers, and therefore put the
                       much higher than for traditional        overall portfolio at risk.
                       lending; and
                      the loans issuers make may be
                       highly concentrated to particular
                       types of assets, commercial
                       activities, locations or borrowers.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                 Page 10
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




 Risk feature        Description                               What this means

 Inconsistency in    The valuations lenders rely on are        This makes it difficult to assess reliably the risk
 valuations          carried out on a variety of bases,        exposure associated with a loan, and difficult to
                     with differing assumptions and            monitor loan-to-valuation ratios on a continuing basis.
                     instructions.

 Related party       Funds raised through notes are            There is an increased risk that lending decisions will
 lending             often on-lent to companies or             not be made on arm’s-length commercial terms, and
                     businesses associated with the            that the note issuer who makes the loans will not
                     note issuer.                              monitor performance by the borrower as rigorously as
                                                               it would in an arm’s-length transaction.

 Misleading          Advertising used to promote some          Even if the prospectus disclosure highlights risk in an
 advertising         notes helps create unrealistic            appropriate way, advertising that conveys messages
                     expectations about the relative           not in line with the regulated disclosure document can
                     safety of the notes.                      undermine the effect of that disclosure.


               RG 69.24      Unlisted notes pose particular challenges because retail investors who hold
                             these types of securities do not have the benefit of price discovery mechanisms
                             and market forces to:
                             (a)   help them work out the value of their securities on an ongoing basis;
                             (b)   monitor and publicise the ongoing performance of the issuer (through
                                   a licensed market’s continuous disclosure regime); and
                             (c)   provide them with a reliable way to exit their investment efficiently.

               RG 69.25      Being unlisted means there is no liquid secondary market on which an
                             investor can sell an investment that is no longer required, or in which the
                             investor has lost confidence. Some note issuers offer early exit mechanisms,
                             but these are likely to be unavailable if the issuer is in financial difficulty.

               RG 69.26      Being unlisted also means that there is no market supervisor to:
                             (a)   initially assess and, if appropriate, admit the issuer’s securities to
                                   trading; and
                             (b)   supervise the issuer’s ongoing compliance with any listing rulesin
                                   particular, a continuous disclosure regime.

               RG 69.27      The absence of a market listing exacerbates the risk that key new
                             information about the performance of the issuer may not be communicated
                             to existing investors. This is of particular concern given that the
                             Corporations Act does not require that existing investors receive a
                             prospectus before rolling over their investment or making a further
                             investment in the issuer’s notes: see s708(14) and RG 69.45.

               RG 69.28      Typically, there are few external benchmarks retail investors can use to
                             assess and understand the risk of the investment, and the value of the notes
                             they may subscribe for. In particular:
                             (a)   retail investors cannot obtain and rely on research prepared by market
                                   professionals (such as analysts) or the coverage the financial media
                                   provides for many listed securities;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 11
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (b)   few retail adviser groups conduct detailed research on individual note
                                   products; and
                             (c)   retail investors do not have a way of assessing the market value of their
                                   investment, and of monitoring the ongoing performance of the issuer, as
                                   reliably as they would have if these products were listed and traded on a
                                   regulated financial market (and were therefore subject to the relevant
                                   supervision and continuous disclosure regime).

              RG 69.29       Risks are most significant where funds are on-lent for the development of
                             property assets. Reasons include that there is often no cash flow to meet
                             obligations until after a development has been completed and can be sold. In
                             these circumstances, there is likely to be greater uncertainty about whether
                             properties can be completed and sold for anticipated values; and if further
                             loan investments are needed to complete development projects, the overall
                             viability of the venture may be doubtful because interest costs for the project
                             will increase.

              RG 69.30       Nonetheless, the features described in Table 3 are present, or potentially
                             present, to varying extents in many forms of note investments. For example:
                             (a)   the underlying business models of property development issuers share
                                   some features with other note issuers who on-lend funds to third parties;
                             (b)   many types of note issuers have low levels of equity capital; and
                             (c)   many types of note issuers have some degree of mismatch between the
                                   maturities of their assets and liabilities, making them vulnerable to
                                   liquidity problems in adverse market conditions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 12
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




C          Benchmarks for unlisted notes


                               Key points

                               All issuers of unlisted notes should address general benchmarks on:
                               • equity ratio (see RG 69.31–RG 69.34);
                               • liquidity (see RG 69.35–RG 69.42);
                               • rollovers (see RG 69.43–RG 69.46); and
                               • debt maturity (see RG 69.47–RG 69.49).

                               Issuers of unlisted notes who lend money should address additional
                               benchmarks on:
                               • loan portfolio (see RG 69.50–RG 69.59); and
                               • related party transactions (see RG 69.60–RG 69.63).

                               Issuers of unlisted notes involving property should address additional
                               benchmarks on:
                               • valuations (see RG 69.64–RG 69.69); and
                               • lending principles—loan-to-valuation ratios (see RG 69.70–RG 69.75).




Benchmark 1: Equity ratio
              RG 69.31       An issuer should use the following equity ratio benchmarks:
                             (a)   where more than a minor part of the issuer’s activities is property
                                   development or lending funds directly or indirectly for property
                                   development—the issuer should maintain a minimum equity ratio
                                   of 20%;
                             (b)   in all other cases—the issuer should maintain a minimum equity ratio
                                   of 8%;
                             (c)   the issuer’s equity ratio should be calculated as follows:
                                                 total equity
                                                                             ; and
                                       total liabilities + total equity

                             (d)   the issuer should disclose its comparative equity ratio from the prior
                                   year.

                                   Note 1: ‘Equity’ and ‘liabilities’ have the meanings given under the Australian
                                   accounting standards.

                                   Note 2: The comparative equity ratio should be from a date approximately 12 months
                                   prior to the current equity ratio.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                     Page 13
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Explanation

              RG 69.32       Paid-up capital or equity is the money invested by the owners of the issuer
                             (plus any profits retained by the issuer). It provides a ‘buffer’ to the issuer in
                             the event of financial difficulties, and it also provides the issuer’s owners
                             with an incentive to operate prudently and responsibly (sometimes referred
                             to as ‘hurt money’ or ‘skin in the game’): see ‘Minimal equity capital’ in
                             Table 3.

              RG 69.33       Insufficient capitalisation appears to be a contributing factor in each of the
                             failures of unlisted note issuers in recent years. Where involved in property
                             development, the issuer is more vulnerable to adverse market movements
                             and at higher risk of financial distress. Therefore, this benchmark has a
                             higher minimum capital requirement where more than a minor part (e.g.
                             10%) of the issuer’s activities (e.g. as a proportion of notes on issue) is
                             related to property development. If this capital is not present, investors
                             should be informed (on an ‘if not, why not’ basis) so they can make their
                             own assessment of the risks involved.

              RG 69.34       The disclosure of a comparative equity ratio from the prior year will help
                             investors identify any change in the issuer’s equity capital over the past year.



Benchmark 2: Liquidity
              RG 69.35       An issuer should:
                             (a)   have cash flow estimates for the next three months; and
                             (b)   ensure that at all times it has cash or cash equivalents sufficient to meet
                                   its projected cash needs over the next three months.

              RG 69.36       In reporting against this benchmark, an issuer should disclose:
                             (a)   material assumptions underlying its cash flow estimates (e.g. cash,
                                   estimate rollover or retention rates);
                             (b)   how its rollover or retention rate assumptions relate to historical rates;
                                   and
                             (c)   its policy on balancing the maturity of its assets and the maturity of its
                                   liabilities. For example, where an issuer has a policy of ensuring that its
                                   assets and liabilities have similar maturity profiles, it should state this in
                                   its prospectus and report against this in its ongoing disclosures.

              RG 69.37       An issuer should also disclose whether it would have cash on hand or cash
                             equivalents sufficient to meet its projected cash needs if:
                             (a)   the percentage of note funds to be rolled over during the next three
                                   months were 20% less than the percentage that was rolled over in the
                                   past three months; or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 14
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (b)   for note funds that are held on an ‘at call’ basis—the amount of note
                                   funds retained during the next three months were 20% less than the
                                   amount that was retained during the past three months.

                                   Note: In estimating cash flows, an issuer can take into account a reasonable estimate of
                                   ‘rollovers’ based on previous experience, but not new fundraising. An issuer should
                                   consider possible redemptions as well (if its policy or practice is to allow redemptions).
                                   An issuer can also take into account reasonable estimations of cash inflows generated
                                   by operations (e.g. payments of interest, repayments of debt) in preparing its cash flow
                                   projection.


                             Explanation

              RG 69.38       Liquidity is the proportion of cash or cash equivalents in a company’s assets.
                             It is a powerful indicator of the short-term financial health of a company. For
                             note issuers it is relative liquidity (i.e. short-term assets relative to short-term
                             liabilities) that we are particularly concerned with.

              RG 69.39       Experience and expert advice we have received show adequate liquidity is a
                             key feature in the ability of note issuers to meet their obligations to
                             investors. Insufficient liquid assets appear to be a contributing factor in
                             recent failures. Historically, lack of liquid assets has been a contributing
                             factor in the failure of otherwise well-capitalised institutions.

              RG 69.40       We envisage an issuer would need to review its forecast cash flows on an
                             ongoing basis to determine whether it continues to meet this benchmark. We
                             would expect an issuer to take into account its historical experience on
                             redemptions and rollovers in estimating its cash flows. We also expect an
                             issuer to disclose material assumptions underlying its cash flows (e.g.
                             historical rollover rate) when disclosing against this benchmark.

              RG 69.41       By ‘cash’ or ‘cash equivalents’ we mean cash or cash equivalents as defined
                             in Australian Accounting Standard AASB 107 Cash flow statements.
                             Generally, this includes highly liquid assets that can be reliably realised for
                             cash within a very short period of time and undrawn amounts under certain
                             bank overdraft facilities.

              RG 69.42       We expect an issuer to periodically ‘stress test’ its liquidity assumptions. For
                             example, we would expect an issuer to consider:
                             (a)   its current prospectus and the possibility of an ASIC stop order
                                   disrupting its cash flows;
                             (b)   the possibility of an overdraft or other credit facility on which the issuer
                                   is relying being withdrawn; and
                             (c)   the possibility of a significant reduction in the rate of investor rollovers.

                             We would expect an issuer to take into account the results of its stress testing
                             in its liquidity planning. In some cases, this may mean it needs to increase its
                             cash position: see RG 69.35.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                     Page 15
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Benchmark 3: Rollovers
              RG 69.43       An issuer should clearly disclose its approach to rollovers, including:
                             (a)   what process is followed at the end of the investment term; and
                             (b)   how it informs those rolling over or making further investments of any
                                   current prospectus and continuous disclosure announcements.


                             Explanation

              RG 69.44       Some note issuers rely on investors keeping their funds in the investment
                             beyond the end of the initial period. In some cases, the terms of the issue
                             allow this to occur automatically unless the investor makes a positive
                             decision to withdraw their funds. In other cases, it is the investor who makes
                             a positive decision to have their funds reinvested. It is important that
                             investors fully understand the issuer’s approach to rollovers through clear
                             disclosure in the prospectus.

                                   Note: Issuers should consider the fairness of the contractual terms applying to rollovers
                                   in accordance with Subdiv BA of the ASIC Act.

              RG 69.45       Section 708(14) of the Corporations Act provides for an exception from the
                             requirement to provide investors with a prospectus for rollovers and offers to
                             existing investors. We consider that it is potentially misleading not to
                             provide investors with updated information when they are considering
                             whether to roll over their investment or make a further investment in notes.

              RG 69.46       The commercial circumstances of the issuer may have changed since the
                             initial investment. To ensure investors are fully informed about the
                             circumstances of the rollover, it is important for them to have the benefit of
                             current disclosure (in either a prospectus or disclosure notice) to help them
                             decide whether to continue with their investment. To avoid possible breaches
                             of the Corporations Act, an issuer should contact investors before each
                             rollover and make the current disclosure document and any relevant ongoing
                             disclosure available to them (e.g. direct them to a website where they can
                             obtain the documents): see RG 69.93–RG 69.101.



Benchmark 4: Debt maturity
              RG 69.47       An issuer should disclose:
                             (a)   an analysis of the maturity profile of interest-bearing liabilities
                                   (including notes on issue) by term and value; and
                             (b)   the interest rates, or average interest rates, applicable to its debts.
                                   Note: For updating information, see Section D.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                    Page 16
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             Explanation

              RG 69.48       Disclosure of debt maturities will assist investors in understanding how the
                             business is funded in terms of the nature, timing and cost of the issuer’s debt
                             obligations.

              RG 69.49       The disclosure of information about the profile of note terms and loan terms
                             (see Benchmark 5) and key assumptions underpinning the issuer’s cash flow
                             projections (see Benchmark 2) are generally matters required to be disclosed
                             by s710(1). In our view, it is information that investors and their professional
                             advisers would reasonably require to make an informed assessment of the offer.



Benchmark 5: Loan portfolio
              RG 69.50       An issuer who directly on-lends funds, or indirectly on-lend funds through a
                             related party, should disclose the current nature of its (or the related party’s)
                             loan portfolio, including:
                             (a)   how many loans they have and the value of those loans;
                             (b)   an analysis of the maturity profile of interest-bearing assets (including
                                   loan portfolio) by term and value;
                             (c)   the interest rates, or average interest rates, applicable to the assets;
                             (d)   by number and value, the loans they have by class of activity and
                                   geographic region;
                             (e)   an analysis (number of loans, value of loans, value of principal and/or
                                   interest) of those loans more than 30 days past due and renegotiated loans;

                                   Note 1: If the issuer monitors arrears on a monthly basis, then an analysis of receivables
                                   a month past due can substitute for an analysis of 30 days past due.

                                   Note 2: See the Key terms for definitions of ‘past due’ and ‘renegotiated loans’.

                             (f)   by number and value, what proportion of the total loan money is lent on
                                   a ‘secured’ basis and what is the nature of the security;
                             (g)   by number and value, what proportion of the total loan money they have
                                   lent to their largest borrower and their 10 largest borrowers; and
                             (h)   by number, value and percentage, what loans are subject to legal
                                   proceedings.

                                   Note 1: For reasons of privacy or commercial confidence, it may not be appropriate to
                                   actually name the largest borrowers. The total loan money lent to the 10 largest
                                   borrowers can be disclosed as an aggregate amount.

                                   Note 2: The term ‘related party’ should be interpreted broadly: see the Key terms. See
                                   the Key terms also for a definition of ‘legal proceeding’.

              RG 69.51       Disclosure should also cover the issuer’s policy on these issues. For
                             example, where the issuer has a policy of not lending more than (say) 5% of



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                       Page 17
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             its total loan funds to any one borrower, this should be stated in the
                             disclosure document.

              RG 69.52       Disclosure should also contain clear explanations about the issuer’s approach
                             to taking security in relation to its lending (e.g. what types of security it takes
                             and in what circumstances).


                             Explanation

              RG 69.53       This benchmark and Benchmark 6 (related party transactions) apply to note
                             issuers who on-lend funds raised through the notes. This includes issuers
                             who lend the funds to related parties only.

              RG 69.54       Many issuers of unlisted notes on-lend the funds lent to them by note holders.
                             The primary assets of the issuer are the loans it makes to others. The quality
                             of these loans is a key element in the financial position and performance of
                             the issuer.

               RG 69.55      The quality of the issuer’s loans is important at an overall loan portfolio
                             level, as well as the individual loan level. A key way lenders manage the
                             quality of an overall loan portfolio is to ensure that it is diversified. Portfolio
                             diversity has a number of elements, including:
                             (a)   the number of loans and the value of those loans;
                             (b)   how many loans are related to a particular class of activity
                                   (e.g. residential property, commercial property, leasing, development);
                             (c)   geographic concentration (e.g. are the borrowers concentrated in one
                                   geographic region?); and
                             (d)   whether the lender has major exposures to a small number of borrowers
                                   (e.g. what proportion of funds are lent to the largest borrower, and to
                                   the 10 largest borrowers?).

              RG 69.56       The more diversified a loan portfolio is, the lower the risk that an adverse
                             event affecting one borrower or one type of loan will simultaneously affect
                             the majority of borrowers, and therefore put the overall portfolio at risk.

              RG 69.57       It is important that an issuer discloses in its prospectus its approach to loan
                             portfolio diversification. At the prospectus stage, an issuer may not be able
                             to set out exactly how funds will be lent, but it should be able to generally
                             explain how funds have been lent so far. Most issuers will have a firm policy
                             of how and when they will lend funds. This should be disclosed as clearly
                             and concretely as possible to help trustees and investors monitor the
                             financial position and performance of the issuer over time.

              RG 69.58       It is important that investors understand what proportion of loans is secured,
                             by number and by value. However, this needs to be explained carefully,
                             including by reference to the nature and scale of the security (e.g. its



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 18
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             ranking, the value of the assets supporting the security and the financial
                             position of any guarantor).

                                   Note: If any security rights (e.g. mortgages) held by the issuer have been assigned or
                                   transferred to third parties, this needs to be disclosed as well.

              RG 69.59       It is also important for investors to know what proportion of loans are in
                             default and what the issuer’s approach is to such loans. The issuer may be
                             relying heavily on repayment of the loans it has made for it to repay note
                             money. Investors (as the holders of the notes) therefore have a strong interest
                             in knowing the proportion of loans in arrears and what the issuer is doing to
                             address this.



Benchmark 6: Related party transactions
              RG 69.60       An issuer who on-lends funds should disclose its approach to related party
                             transactions, including:
                             (a)   how many loans it has made to related parties;
                             (b)   the value of those loans;
                             (c)   the value of the loans as a percentage of total assets; and
                             (d)   the assessment and approval process it follows with related party loans
                                   when loans are advanced, varied or extended (e.g. are they subject to
                                   the approval of the trustee?).

              RG 69.61       The issuer should also disclose any policy it has regarding related party
                             lending (including matters such as interest rates, security and loan-to-
                             valuation ratios).

                                   Note: The term ‘related party’ should be interpreted broadly: see the Key terms.


                             Explanation

              RG 69.62       Related party loans are less likely to be monitored as robustly as third-party
                             loans, and this can affect valuations, loan-to-valuation ratios and credit
                             assessment processes. Related party loans appear to be a contributing factor
                             in some recent failures.

              RG 69.63       It is important that an issuer discloses in its prospectus its approach to related
                             party lending. At the prospectus stage, an issuer may not be able to set out
                             exactly how funds will be lent, but it should be able to generally explain how
                             funds have been lent so far. As discussed under Benchmark 5, we expect that
                             most issuers will have a firm policy of how and when they will lend funds
                             and this should be disclosed to investors.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                      Page 19
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Benchmark 7: Valuations
              RG 69.64       Where the issuer is involved in or (directly or indirectly) lends money for
                             property-related activities, it should take the following approach to obtaining
                             and relying on valuations:
                             (a)   properties (i.e. real estate) should be valued on an ‘as is’ and, for
                                   development property, on an ‘as if complete’ basis;
                                   Note: See the Key terms for definitions of ‘as is’ and ‘as if complete’ valuations.

                             (b)   development properties should be re-valued at least every 12 months
                                   unless the funds are retained by the issuer and only released in stages to
                                   cover project completion costs;
                                   Note: For advancing funds in stages for loans relating to property development, see
                                   RG 69.71 and RG 69.75.

                             (c)   an issuer should have a clear policy on how often it obtains valuations,
                                   including how recent a valuation has to be when it makes a new loan;
                             (d)   an issuer should establish a panel of valuers and ensure that no single
                                   valuer conducts more than one-third of the total number of valuations
                                   obtained; and
                             (e)   the appointment of valuers should be with the trustee’s consent.

              RG 69.65       An issuer should also include information about the valuation of a particular
                             property in its prospectus where:
                             (a)   the property accounts for 5% or more of the total value of property
                                   assets of the issuer;
                             (b)   the property accounts for 5% or more of the total value of property assets
                                   of a related party through which the issuer has indirectly on-lent money;
                             (c)   a loan secured against the property accounts for 5% or more of the total
                                   value of the issuer’s loan book; or
                             (d)   a loan secured against the property accounts for 5% or more of the total
                                   value of the loan book of a related party through which the issuer has
                                   indirectly on-lent money.
                                   Note 1: We would also expect an issuer to include the ‘cost’ of such a property in the
                                   prospectus for comparison purposes.

                                   Note 2: The information about the valuation of a particular property should help the
                                   potential investor assess the quality and reliability of the valuation (e.g. the identity of
                                   the valuer, the valuation method and the key assumptions).


                             Explanation

              RG 69.66       This benchmark only applies to an issuer who is (directly or indirectly)
                             involved in or on-lend funds for property-related activities. It includes an
                             issuer who, for example:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                        Page 20
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (a)   is in the business of property development or lends funds to property
                                   developers;
                             (b)   uses funds as part of an ‘integrated property’ business; or
                             (c)   is involved in mortgage financing.
                                   Note: ‘Integrated property’ is defined in Consultation Paper 89 Unlisted, unrated
                                   debentures: Improving disclosure for retail investors (CP 89). See also RG 69.21(c).

              RG 69.67       Robust and objective valuations are needed to ensure the issuer’s financial
                             position is correctly stated in the prospectus and ongoing disclosure.
                             Valuations affect the key ratios of the issuer—such as the adequate capital,
                             liquidity and loan-to-valuation policies.

              RG 69.68       It is therefore important for investor confidence that independent experts
                             perform the valuations, and that the process is transparent. We expect that an
                             issuer’s policy should aim to ensure that the valuer is independent from the
                             issuer and its associates. In particular, an issuer should aim to ensure that
                             valuers do not have any conflict of interest that a reasonable person, with full
                             knowledge of all relevant facts and circumstances, would conclude is
                             capable of affecting the valuation.
                                   Note: See Section F for further discussion of valuers and the valuation process.

              RG 69.69       It is in the interests of an issuer that the valuations it obtains and uses are
                             robust and accurate. An issuer is responsible for the accuracy of the financial
                             statements and other documents that rely on these valuations. Therefore, we
                             expect that an issuer will only use professional valuers who are registered or
                             licensed in the relevant state or territory, and who are a member of an
                             appropriate professional body and subscribe to that body’s standards and
                             code of conduct. We also expect that an issuer will be careful to ensure that
                             its written instructions to valuers are comprehensive and contain reasonable
                             assumptions.



Benchmark 8: Lending principles—Loan-to-valuation ratios
              RG 69.70       Where an issuer (directly or indirectly) on-lends money in relation to
                             property-related activities, it should maintain the following loan-to-valuation
                             ratios:
                             (a)   where the loan relates to property development—70% on the basis of
                                   the latest complying valuation; and
                             (b)   in all other cases—80% on the basis of the latest complying valuation.
                                   Note 1: For the purposes of calculating the loan-to-valuation ratio, the issuer’s loan
                                   amount should be added to any prior ranking security and divided by the value of the
                                   property security.

                                   Note 2: See the Key terms for the definition of ‘complying valuation’.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                      Page 21
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 69.71       Where the loan relates to property development by a second person (even if
                             related to the issuer), the issuer should ensure that funds raised by the issue
                             of notes are only provided to the developer in stages, based on external
                             evidence of the progress of the development.


                             Explanation

               RG 69.72      This benchmark only applies to an issuer who (directly or indirectly) on-
                             lends funds for property-related activities. It includes an issuer who, for
                             example:
                             (a)   lends funds to property developers; or
                             (b)   is involved in mortgage financing.

              RG 69.73       An issuer’s approach to loan-to-valuation ratios is one indicator of how
                             conservative or aggressive its lending practices are. Less conservative
                             lenders are willing to lend funds equal to a higher proportion of a property’s
                             value (sometimes up to or exceeding 100% of its value). Such ratios mean
                             that the lender is more vulnerable to the risk that a change in market
                             conditions (such as a downturn in the property market) will lead to it being
                             unable to fully recover the money it has lent to borrowers. It also increases
                             the risk that the security (if any) it has obtained from borrowers will not be
                             sufficient to cover the loan.

              RG 69.74       We have separated loans relating to property development from other
                             property-related loans (e.g. residential mortgages). By property
                             development, we mean loans whose main or primary purpose is for real
                             estate developments (e.g. home units, retail, commercial, sub-divisions and
                             industrial development).

              RG 69.75       Where funds are on-lent for property development activities, a loan-to-
                             valuation ratio may be agreed up-front, but it is generally not appropriate to
                             advance all of the funds to the developer up-front. Rather, we expect an
                             issuer to put systems and controls in place to ensure funds are only provided
                             to the developer where there is satisfactory progress of the development
                             (based on reliable external evidence of that progress). We also expect that
                             the issuer’s policy on how and when funds are provided to developers will
                             be stated in its prospectus.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 22
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




D          Form and method of disclosure



                               Key points

                               An issuer of unlisted notes has an obligation to provide disclosure at the time
                               of offering notes, while the offer remains open and while the notes remain on
                               issue: see RG 69.76–RG 69.77.

                               In meeting these disclosure obligations to investors, an issuer should
                               disclose against the benchmarks in Section C on an ‘if not, why not’ basis:
                               see RG 69.78–RG 69.81.

                               Disclosure against the benchmarks should be:
                               • addressed up-front in the prospectus (see RG 69.86–RG 69.90);
                               • updated in ongoing disclosure (see RG 69.91–RG 69.101) as material
                                 changes occur—for example:
                                   – in a replacement prospectus, supplementary prospectus or continuous
                                     disclosure notice; and
                                   – at least twice a year, in quarterly reports to trustees; and
                               • supported in advertising material (see RG 156).




Disclosure obligations
              RG 69.76       An issuer of unlisted notes has an obligation to provide disclosure at the time
                             of offering notes, while the offer remains open and while the notes remain
                             on issue. We have issued the following general guidance about these
                             disclosure obligations:
                             (a)   Regulatory Guide 228 Prospectuses: Effective disclosure for retail
                                   investors (RG 228) provides guidance to persons offering securities
                                   about how to prepare prospectuses that satisfy the content requirements
                                   in s710. It also provides guidance on how to word and present
                                   prospectuses in a ‘clear, concise and effective’ manner under the
                                   Corporations Act.
                             (b)   Regulatory Guide 198 Unlisted disclosing entities: Continuous
                                   disclosure obligations (RG 198) provides guidance for unlisted
                                   disclosing entities about how to comply with their continuous disclosure
                                   obligations.

              RG 69.77       An issuer of unlisted notes should have regard to this general guidance as
                             well as comply with the specific disclosure guidance set out in this section.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 23
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Disclosure against the benchmarks: ‘If not, why not’
              RG 69.78       An issuer should disclose whether it meets the benchmarks in Section C, and
                             if not, why not. ‘Why not’ means explaining how it deals with the business
                             factor or the issue underlying the benchmark (including the alternative
                             systems and controls the issuer has in place to deal with the issue underlying
                             the benchmark).

                                   Note: Where a benchmark contains multiple requirements, if an issuer cannot meet all
                                   the requirements under a benchmark, it should state that it does not meet the benchmark
                                   and clearly explain why it failed to meet the particular requirements.

              RG 69.79       An issuer’s disclosures for Benchmarks 1, 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 should also
                             explain the importance of each of these benchmarks to its business. We are
                             not prescribing ‘boilerplate’ or standardised wordinghowever, we expect
                             an issuer to closely base its disclosure on the material in Table 4, which is
                             adapted from our investor guide, Investing in unlisted debentures and
                             unsecured notes?

Table 4:     Explanation of benchmarks

 Benchmark                         Explanation

 Benchmark 1—Equity ratio          If the issuer has less equity capital invested in the business, there might be no
                                   safety margin to tide things over if the business runs into financial difficulties. It
                                   could also mean that the issuer has less incentive to operate the business
                                   prudently and responsibly because less of its own money is at risk.

 Benchmark 2—Liquidity             Liquidity is an important measure of the short-term financial health of an issuer
                                   or business. If the issuer has insufficient cash or liquid assets, it might be
                                   unable to meet its short-term obligations (e.g. to run the business properly, pay
                                   interest, or pay investors their money back at the end of the term).

 Benchmark 5—Loan portfolio        Is the issuer’s loan portfolio heavily concentrated into a small number of loans,
                                   or loans to a small number of borrowers? If so, there is a higher risk that a
                                   single negative event affecting one loan will put the overall portfolio (and
                                   investors’ money) at risk.

 Benchmark 6—Related party         The risk with related party transactions is that they might not be made with the
 transactions                      same rigour and independence as transactions made on an arm’s-length
                                   commercial basis. There is a greater risk of the loans defaulting and, therefore,
                                   investors’ money is at greater risk if:
                                    the issuer has a high number of loans to related parties; and
                                    the assessment and approval process for these loans is not independent.

 Benchmark 7—Valuation             If the issuer does not include information about valuations in the prospectus, it
                                   will be more difficult for investors to assess how risky the investment is.
                                   Keeping valuations up-to-date and shared among a panel means they are
                                   more likely to be accurate and independent.

 Benchmark 8—Lending               A high loan-to-valuation ratio means that the investment is more vulnerable to
 principles                        changing market conditions, such as a downturn in the property market.
                                   Therefore, the risk of investors losing their money could be higher.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                   Page 24
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 69.80       Disclosure against the benchmarks is not intended to lead to longer and more
                             complex disclosure documents. Rather, we expect that this disclosure will
                             help issuers produce disclosure documents that are more focused on the
                             issues that matter to investors and are more clear, concise and effective.

              RG 69.81       This approach is based on our view that the inherent risks for investors in
                             unlisted notes mean that information about these risks is:
                              (a)   information that investors and their professional advisers reasonably
                                    require to make an informed investment decision (s710(1));
                             (b)    not something investors may reasonably be expected to know without
                                    explicit disclosure in a prospectus (s710(2));
                             (c)    needed to ensure a note issuer’s quarterly reports to the trustee and to
                                    ASIC comply with the content requirements for those reports
                                    (s283BF(4)); and
                             (d)    relevant to consideration of whether the issuer is required to issue a
                                    supplementary or replacement prospectus (s719) or has obligations
                                    under the continuous disclosure provisions (s675).
                                    Note: We have produced an investor guide, Investing in unlisted debentures and
                                    unsecured notes?, to help investors understand and use the benchmarks and to promote
                                    informed decision making. We encourage an issuer to make the guide available to
                                    investorsfor example, when distributing its prospectus. Copies of the investor guide
                                    are available at www.moneysmart.gov.au.




Disclosure in a prospectus
              RG 69.82       A prospectus for unlisted notes should contain a clear and prominent
                             disclosure of the key features of the product and its risks. It should address
                             the benchmarks in Section C on an ‘if not, why not’ basis. This means that it
                             should state that the issuer and product either:
                             (a)    meet the benchmark (including how they meet the benchmark, where
                                    appropriate); or
                             (b)    do not meet the benchmark and explain how and why the issuer deals
                                    with the business factor or the issue underlying the benchmark in
                                    another way.
              RG 69.83       In addition, we consider that a prospectus should state that the issuer will
                             continue to meet the benchmarks and, if not, why not. In circumstances
                             where a benchmark is not met, the extent of and reasons should be disclosed.
                             In some circumstances, not meeting a benchmark is a risk that should be
                             disclosed prominently.
              RG 69.84       An investment overview should be included to help retail investors make an
                             informed decision by highlighting key information. The investment
                             overview should:
                             (a)    be the first substantive section of the prospectus;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                  Page 25
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (b)   highlight and provide a meaningful summary of information that is key
                                   to a retail investor’s investment decision, including the benchmark
                                   information; and
                             (c)   provide balanced disclosure of the benefits and risks.

                             In particular, we expect an issuer to make it completely clear that the notes
                             are not and should not be confused with bank deposit products.

              RG 69.85       We expect an issuer’s prospectus for unlisted notes to address in a clear,
                             concise and effective manner:
                             (a)   the business model of the issuer and what it will actually do with the
                                   money raised;
                             (b)   the financial position and performance of the issuer;
                             (c)   the risks associated with the investments;
                             (d)   the track record and experience of directors and key management; and
                             (e)   the nature of the note (e.g. what security exists, if any, and whether the
                                   issuer is prudentially regulated).
                             We expect any audit qualification applying to an issuer’s financial report to
                             be disclosed and explained in a prospectus.


                             The role of up-front disclosure

              RG 69.86       The law requires up-front disclosure for these products through the mechanism
                             of a prospectus. If you are an issuer preparing a prospectus, you must:
                             (a)   include all information that investors and their professional advisers
                                   would reasonably require to make an informed assessment of the issuer
                                   and the securities being offered (s710);
                             (b)   make specific disclosures (s711); and
                             (c)   word and present the prospectus in a clear, concise and effective
                                   manner (s715A).

              RG 69.87       The general prospectus content requirement in s710 is designed to:
                             (a)   promote efficiency in the capital markets;
                             (b)   promote disclosure of relevant information;
                             (c)   reduce the likelihood of omitting important information;
                             (d)   focus issuers on the information needs of investors; and
                             (e)   be sufficiently flexible to accommodate changes in investors’
                                   information needs.

                             In particular, a prospectus should allow the investor to assess the financial
                             position, performance and prospects of the issuer.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 26
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 69.88       The benchmarks relate to matters that, in any event, must be disclosed under
                             s710. Issues relating to the amount of capital, liquidity, loan ratios,
                             valuations, related party loans and diversification are all matters that
                             investors and their professional advisers would reasonably require to make
                             an informed assessment of the assets and liabilities, financial position and
                             performance, profits and losses, and prospects of the issuer.

              RG 69.89       We will consider exercising our stop order powers under s739 if we consider
                             there is material non-disclosure of these matters. Where disclosure against
                             the benchmarks is scattered throughout the document, it is more likely that
                             the document is not clear, concise and effective. We believe that disclosure
                             against the benchmarks up-front in a prospectus is an effective form of
                             disclosure and promotes compliance with the requirement that prospectuses
                             should be worded in a clear, concise and effective manner by:
                             (a)   encouraging comparability and uniformity of financial measures; and
                             (b)   highlighting issues that we and industry experts consider crucial to
                                   making an investment decision.

              RG 69.90       Experience suggests that clear, concise and effective prospectus disclosure
                             requires simple and clear disclosure of the business model of the issuer and
                             the key risks associated with the issue. We encourage issuers to use
                             communication tools as much as possible in disclosing key features and
                             risks, including using tables, diagrams and other comparative features: see
                             Section B of RG 228.


Ongoing disclosure
              RG 69.91       Where there have been any material changes to an issuer’s performance
                             against the benchmarks, including against the issuer’s alternative approach
                             to meeting the benchmarks, the issuer should explain this in:
                             (a)   a supplementary prospectus;
                             (b)   a replacement prospectus; or
                             (c)   a continuous disclosure notice.

              RG 69.92       In addition, an issuer’s quarterly reports should, at least twice a year,
                             specifically explain any material changes to the issuer’s performance against
                             the benchmarks, including against the issuer’s alternative approach to
                             meeting the benchmarks.


                             The role of ongoing disclosure

              RG 69.93       Good ongoing disclosure plays an important role in helping investors
                             monitor their investment, evaluate its performance and decide if and when to
                             exit the product. An issuer makes a number of statements in the prospectus




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 27
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             about how the funds being raised will be used, and how the issuer will
                             conduct its business. These ‘promises’ are part of the basis on which the
                             investor invests their money, and the investor should be given the
                             opportunity to monitor the issuer’s performance against these promises.


                               Example: Investment decision and ongoing disclosure

                               Ms Investor has $20,000 invested in notes issued by Issuer 123 Ltd due for
                               repayment in the next three months. 123 Ltd has ceased raising funds from
                               new investors at this time, and so has no current prospectus. 123 Ltd writes
                               to Ms Investor asking if she would like to roll over her investment for a further
                               three years and provides Ms Investor with a copy of its latest quarterly report,
                               a subsequent continuous disclosure notice and information about where
                               later continuous disclosure notices may be found on its website.

                               Ms Investor sees from the material provided that 123 Ltd, through enforcing
                               security against some of its borrowers, is now engaged in the development
                               of property itself, rather than simply providing finance to others. Ms Investor
                               is not confident that 123 Ltd will be profitable as a property developer, and
                               so she decides not to roll over her investment.


              RG 69.94       An issuer has a number of ongoing disclosure obligations that help investors
                             and the trustee monitor performance. These include:
                             (a)   issuing a supplementary or replacement prospectus (as needed);
                             (b)   quarterly reports to the trustee, which are also lodged with us
                                   (s283BF(4));
                             (c)   audited annual and half-yearly financial reports (Ch 2M); and
                             (d)   continuous disclosure of material information not otherwise covered by
                                   a new prospectus or supplementary prospectus (s675).

                                   Note: For further information on the continuous disclosure obligations of unlisted
                                   disclosing entities, see RG 198.


                             Supplementary or replacement prospectus

              RG 69.95       Where there is a current prospectus, s719 requires an issuer to lodge a
                             supplementary or replacement prospectus where, among other matters, there
                             is a misleading or deceptive statement in the prospectus or where there is an
                             omission of information required under s710.

              RG 69.96       If the issuer becomes aware of information that is not generally available and
                             that a reasonable person would expect, if it were available, to have a material
                             effect on the price or value of the securities of the entity, s675 requires the
                             issuer to lodge a document with us containing the information. However,
                             where there is a prospectus on issue, s675 does not require lodgement of a
                             document with us if the information is required to be included in a
                             supplementary or replacement prospectus.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                   Page 28
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 69.97       Supplementary and replacement prospectuses must be given to prospective
                             investors: s719(4), 719(5) and 704. Note holders can ask for the financial
                             reports of an issuer free of charge: s318.


                             Quarterly reports

              RG 69.98       Quarterly reports must include details of:
                             (a)   money deposited with or lent to a related body corporate (s283BF(5)),
                                   including:
                                   (i)    the total of the money deposited with or lent to the related body
                                          corporate; and
                                   (ii)   the total amount of money owing to the issuer at the end of the
                                          quarter in respect of the deposits or loans to the related body
                                          corporate;
                             (b)   details of any liability of a related body corporate that the issuer has
                                   assumed during the quarter, including the extent of the liability at the
                                   end of the quarter (s283BF(6));
                             (c)   any failure of the issuer to comply with the terms of the notes;
                             (d)   any circumstances that have occurred during the quarter that materially
                                   prejudice the issuer;
                             (e)   any substantial change in the nature of the business of the issuer that has
                                   occurred during the quarter; and
                             (f)   any other matters that may materially prejudice any security or the
                                   interests of the note holders: s283BF(4).

                                   Note: See also RG 69.139 and ASIC Instrument 2022/61.

              RG 69.99       Quarterly reports are designed to give the trustee (and ASIC) regular updates
                             about the performance of the issuer. The benchmarks in Section C are the
                             key features and risks for these products so, in our view, diversions from the
                             benchmarks are material issues that should be covered in quarterly reports.
                             For example, if the issuer stopped meeting the minimum capital or liquidity
                             benchmark during the quarter, this would clearly be a matter that materially
                             prejudices the interests of the note holders and that should be brought to the
                             trustee’s attention.


                             Making ongoing disclosure available

              RG 69.100      Ongoing disclosure documents (including those lodged with us) should be
                             made available to all note holders (e.g. by an issuer putting them on its
                             website). We believe this will encourage greater scrutiny of the ongoing
                             operations of the issuer, and help trustees and investors in monitoring the
                             financial position and performance of the issuer.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 29
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 69.101      We will not require an issuer to lodge information with ASIC to satisfy its
                             continuous disclosure obligation if the information is provided on the
                             issuer’s website in accordance with our best practice guidelines: see
                             RG 198.12–RG 198.13. Investors can access quarterly reports from ASIC
                             free of charge.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 30
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




E          Trustees of issues


                               Key points

                               We expect the trustees of issues of unlisted notes to support the guiding
                               principles in Table 1 in Section A.
                               In particular, we expect trustees to actively monitor the financial position
                               and performance of the issuer, and to take into account an issuer’s
                               performance against the benchmarks in fulfilling their obligations under
                               the legislation.




The trustee’s role
              RG 69.102      The law requires that when notes are offered and a prospectus is required,
                             the issuer must also appoint a trustee. The trustee’s duty under the trust deed
                             and the Corporations Act is to ‘exercise reasonable diligence’ in monitoring
                             the issuer’s ability to repay the notes (e.g. its financial position and
                             performance). In some circumstances, it may need to notify us, seek
                             appropriate court orders or call a meeting of investors to fulfil its duties.

              RG 69.103      An issuer should set out in its prospectus whether it meets the benchmarks in
                             Section C and, if not, what alternative approach it takes to managing the
                             issues underlying those benchmarks. In our view, the matters referred to in
                             these benchmarks are key to an issuer’s ability to meet its obligations to
                             investors, and particularly its obligations to repay principal sums invested by
                             note holders at the time set out in the terms of the note.

              RG 69.104      In that sense, what an issuer says in its prospectus about the benchmarks is
                             relevant to a trustee’s obligation to monitor whether the issuer will be in a
                             position to repay amounts lent by note holders.

              RG 69.105      We therefore consider that trustees should take into account an issuer’s
                             performance against the benchmarks in fulfilling their obligations under the
                             legislation.



Monitoring disclosure against the benchmarks
              RG 69.106      If an issuer discloses in a prospectus that it meets each of the benchmarks,
                             continuing performance against them is directly relevant to the issuer’s
                             ongoing ability to meet its repayment obligations. If an issuer ceases to meet
                             a benchmark, in our view, a reasonably diligent trustee should carry out
                             sufficient inquiries to satisfy itself that the ability of the issuer to meet its
                             obligations has not been materially impaired.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 31
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 69.107      Similarly, if an issuer’s prospectus discloses that an issuer does not meet one
                             or more of the benchmarks, a trustee should use the ‘why not’ part of that
                             disclosure to understand enough about the way the issuer is operating its
                             business to use that understanding to monitor the issuer’s ongoing ability to
                             meet its obligations to investors.

              RG 69.108      An issuer should also be reporting against the benchmarks in its ongoing
                             disclosure. This is one of the reasons why, at least twice a year, an issuer
                             should include in its quarterly report to the trustee information about its
                             performance against the benchmarks, as discussed in its prospectus: see
                             RG 69.98–RG 69.99. We expect trustees to scrutinise these reports and to
                             use them to monitor the financial performance of the issuer because it is
                             critical to the issuer’s ability to repay the note holders.

              RG 69.109      We expect trustees to:
                             (a)   actively monitor the financial position and performance of the issuer,
                                   including using the benchmarks and other information set out in the
                                   quarterly reports, and half-yearly and annual financial reports; and
                             (b)   assess and form a view (and record this in writing) about the financial
                                   position and performance of the issuer at regular intervals (e.g. at least
                                   quarterly).

              RG 69.110      We do not expect trustees to form a view about whether the issuer’s
                             disclosure documents comply with the law, but we do expect trustees to use
                             the information in those disclosures to monitor the financial position and
                             performance of the issuer.

              RG 69.111      If a trustee forms the view that an issuer is failing to meet the promises made
                             in its disclosure documents, or that there have been material adverse changes
                             in the financial position or performance of the issuer, the trustee should
                             notify both ASIC and the investors promptly. For serious matters, we would
                             expect the trustee to seek appropriate court orders or call a meeting of
                             investors and seek their instructions about what action to take. We note that
                             the aim of the statutory provisions in Ch 2L of the Corporations Act are to
                             ensure that trustees may be active in the protection of investors.


Underlying principles
              RG 69.112      The law requires a trustee to be appointed to help protect the interests of
                             investors and to facilitate the ongoing monitoring of the issuer. An issuer is
                             obliged to report regularly to the trustee, including:
                             (a)   quarterly reports (s283BF);
                             (b)   information about security interests (s283BE); and
                             (c)   half-yearly and annual financial reports (Ch 2M).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 32
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




              RG 69.113      The trustee has the power to call meetings of the investors and provide
                             information to and make recommendations to the investors: s283EB. This is
                             an important protective measure because the trustee has greater resources
                             and experience than retail investors, and is therefore more likely to identify
                             issues with the financial position and performance of the issuer.

              RG 69.114      The trustee’s statutory duty is to exercise reasonable diligence to ascertain:
                             (a)   whether the property of the issuer will be sufficient to repay the
                                   amounts lent; and
                             (b)   whether the issuer has committed a breach of the terms of the notes, the
                                   trust deed or Ch 2L of the Corporations Act. This includes the issuer’s
                                   general obligations to carry on its business in a ‘proper and efficient
                                   manner’: see s283DA.

              RG 69.115      In our view, monitoring the financial position and performance of the issuer
                             generally, and the issuer’s performance against its disclosures against the
                             benchmarks in its prospectus, is part of exercising this reasonable diligence.

              RG 69.116      A trustee’s duties are a combination of general law duties and duties set out
                             in the Corporations Act. We expect trustees to take their duties into account
                             when negotiating the terms of trust deeds with issuers. To ensure that they
                             are in a position to carry out their duties under the Corporations Act, trustees
                             may need to negotiate additional terms or powers (e.g. the power to appoint
                             an independent expert or the inclusion of some of the matters referred to in
                             the benchmarks into their trust deed).

              RG 69.117      We consider that a lack of power for a trustee to intervene because of defects
                             in the trust deed is an unacceptable reason for a trustee’s failure to properly
                             carry out its obligations under the Corporations Act. If a person is asked to
                             take on a trustee role in circumstances where the proposed trust deed does
                             not provide them with sufficient powers to ascertain whether an issuer will
                             be able to meet its obligations to investors, the trustee may need to decline to
                             act as trustee for that issuer.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 33
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




F          Auditors and valuers


                               Key points

                               We expect other parties involved with the issue of unlisted notes to support
                               the guiding principles in Table 1 in Section A—in particular:
                               • auditors (see RG 69.118–RG 69.122); and
                               • valuers (see RG 69.123–RG 69.124).




Auditors
              RG 69.118      An issuer must lodge half-yearly and annual financial reports. Annual
                             reports must be audited, and half-yearly reports must at least be reviewed by
                             an auditor. These reports help trustees and investors monitor the financial
                             position and performance of the issuer.

              RG 69.119      When auditing the annual financial report of the issuer, we expect an issuer
                             to engage its auditors to prepare a separate report on the benchmarks.

              RG 69.120      The auditor’s report on the benchmarks should have regard to information
                             available in:
                             (a)   the quarterly report most recently submitted by the issuer to the trustee;
                             (b)   recent continuous disclosure notices lodged during the financial year;
                             (c)   the most recent prospectus; and
                             (d)   any supplementary prospectus.

              RG 69.121      The auditor’s report should be produced at the same time as the financial
                             report and attached to the financial report lodged with us. Copies of the
                             auditor’s report should be provided to any users of the financial report.

                                   Note: We have made a pro forma ‘auditor’s benchmark report’ available that can be
                                   used to meet this requirement: see Pro Forma 223 Interim auditor’s benchmark report
                                   (PF 223).

              RG 69.122      Auditors of note issuers have some additional obligations, designed to focus
                             their attention on matters that the auditor becomes aware of during the audit.
                             They are obliged to notify the trustee within seven days of any matter that in
                             the auditor’s opinion ‘is or is likely to be prejudicial to the interests of note
                             holders’: s313.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                Page 34
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Valuers
              RG 69.123      A key aspect of the quality of the issuer’s loan assets is their valuation. We
                             expect valuers who accept an appointment to provide valuations for a note
                             issuer to:
                             (a)   where possible, be registered under one of the state/territory valuer
                                   registration regimes; and
                             (b)   include a warranty in their valuation reports that:
                                   (i)    the report complies with all relevant industry standards and codes;
                                          and
                                   (ii)   the valuer has prepared the valuation independently and is not
                                          aware of any conflict of interest that a reasonable person would
                                          conclude is capable of affecting the valuation.

              RG 69.124      Robust and objective valuations are necessary to ensure that the issuer’s
                             financial position is correctly stated in the prospectus and ongoing
                             disclosures. It is important that valuers involved with note issuers are
                             regulated under the relevant state/territory regime and that these valuations
                             comply with the relevant industry codes. However, we realise that not all
                             states and territories have a registration or licensing regime at this time.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 35
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




G          Naming of debentures


                               Key points

                               Section 283BH of the Corporations Act sets out rules on how debentures
                               can be described.

                               We have modified the Corporations Act to introduce a further category,
                               called ‘secured notes’, which issuers can use to describe their debentures.
                               This category or name is available if certain conditions are met, including
                               where the property offered as security is sufficient and reasonably likely to
                               be sufficient to repay investors: see ASIC Instrument 2022/61.

                               The ‘secured notes’ description does not mean the product is safe, and
                               investors will still need to consider the prospectus, including the adequacy
                               of the property offered as security.




The categories of debentures
              RG 69.125      Section 283BH of the Corporations Act (including as modified under ASIC
                             Instrument 2022/61) sets out specific rules on how debentures can be
                             described. The categories of debentures under s283BH are:
                             (a)   mortgage debentures;
                             (b)   debentures;
                             (c)   secured notes; and
                             (d)   unsecured notes or unsecured deposit notes (these two terms are
                                   interchangeable under the Corporations Act).

              RG 69.126      Whether an issuer may use one of these names depends on the type of
                             property offered as security (if any) and, if offered, whether it is sufficient
                             and reasonably likely to be sufficient to repay the money owed. Certain other
                             conditions must also be met if the offer uses the ‘secured notes’ description.
                             Each of the categories is discussed below.


                             ‘Mortgage debentures’ and ‘debentures’

              RG 69.127      An issuer may describe or refer to its product as a ‘mortgage debenture’ only
                             if the debenture trustee has been given a registered first mortgage over land
                             vested in the issuer and the total amount secured by the mortgage does not
                             exceed 60% of the value of the issuer’s interest in the land.

              RG 69.128      An issuer can describe or refer to its product as a ‘debenture’ in documents
                             relating to an offer if the repayment of debenture money has been secured by




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 36
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             a security interest in favour of a debenture trustee over tangible property of
                             the issuer and the value of the tangible property that makes up the security
                             for the security interest is sufficient to repay the debentures and any other
                             liabilities of the issuer that rank in priority or have equal priority to the
                             debentures.

              RG 69.129      An issuer may also choose to describe or refer to its product as a debenture if
                             it satisfies the definition of mortgage debenture.

              RG 69.130      A key determinant of whether a product may be called a ‘debenture’ is
                             whether the obligation to repay the principal is secured by a security interest
                             over ‘tangible property’.

              RG 69.131      We consider that ‘tangible property’ is property that has an actual physical
                             existencefor example, goods and land. Tangible property is distinguished
                             from intangible or incorporeal property such as choses in action (e.g. a
                             receivable). We consider that a security interest in favour of a trustee over a
                             loan receivable by an issuer, even if the issuer’s loan receivables are secured
                             by a mortgage over land, does not constitute a security interest over the
                             ‘tangible property’ of the issuer. As a result, this type of investment cannot
                             be called a debenture for the purposes of s283BH.


                             ‘Secured notes’

              RG 69.132      An issuer can only describe or refer to its product as a ‘secured note’ in
                             documents relating to an offer if:
                             (a)   the repayment of investor money has been secured by a first ranking
                                   security interest (i.e. the highest priority security interest) in favour of a
                                   debenture trustee over property of the issuer or guarantor, and the value
                                   of the property that makes up the security for the security interest is
                                   sufficient to repay the secured notes and any other liabilities of the
                                   issuer that rank in priority or have equal priority to the secured notes;

                                   Note 1: The secured property taken into account in this case is not limited to tangible
                                   property.

                                   Note 2: Although the security interest must be first ranking, other liabilities may have
                                   priority under statute (e.g. due to the operation of s556).

                             (b)   the issuer provides an explanation of the security (including a
                                   confirmation of the sufficiency of the assets supporting the security) in
                                   any quarterly report prepared under s283BF or disclosure documents
                                   relating to the offer;
                             (c)   the issuer provides details of whether the value of any property secured
                                   by the security interest may be affected by the financial position or
                                   performance of a related body corporate or related party of the issuer in




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                     Page 37
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                                   any quarterly report prepared under s283BF or disclosure documents
                                   relating to the offer;
                             (d)   the issuer includes on its website its latest quarterly report prepared
                                   under s283BF, any current prospectus, supplementary or replacement
                                   prospectus, and any continuous disclosure notice produced within the
                                   last year; and
                             (e)   the issuer includes in advertisements relating to an offer of secured
                                   notes the statements that: ‘this product is not a bank deposit’ and ‘there
                                   is a risk that you could lose some or all of your money’.

              RG 69.133      These conditions are imposed under s283BH, as modified by ASIC
                             Instrument 2022/61, and are discussed in more detail in RG 69.135–RG
                             69.140.
                                   Note: An issuer who is entitled to refer to its product as a ‘mortgage debenture’ or
                                   ‘debenture’ under s283BH is also permitted to refer to its product as a ‘secured note’
                                   provided the requirements of ASIC Instrument 2022/61 are met.


                             ‘Unsecured notes’ or ‘unsecured deposit notes’

              RG 69.134      When a product does not meet the standards to be called a ‘debenture’ or
                             ‘secured note’ for the purposes of s283BH (including as modified by ASIC
                             Instrument 2022/61), the product must be described as an ‘unsecured note’
                             or ‘unsecured deposit note’ for the purposes of s283BH. These two terms are
                             interchangeable under the Corporations Act.



Conditions to the use of the term ‘secured note’
              RG 69.135      RG 69.132 sets out the conditions that must be observed by issuers seeking
                             to call their products ‘secured notes’.


                             Sufficiency of property as security

              RG 69.136      A key condition for the use of the ‘secured note’ description relates to whether
                             the property that constitutes the security for the first ranking security interest is
                             sufficient and is reasonably likely to be sufficient to meet the liability for the
                             repayment of investors’ money and any other liabilities of the issuer that rank
                             in priority or have equal priority to the secured notes. The concept of
                             sufficiency of property is discussed at RG 69.141–RG 69.144.


                             Description of the property and security

              RG 69.137      In describing the property and security in disclosure documents or quarterly
                             reports prepared under s283BF, an issuer should provide a general
                             description of the nature of the security and assets covered by the security




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                    Page 38
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             interest with sufficient detail to enable readers to understand the business
                             model. For example:

                                 ‘... are secured by first ranking security interests (including...) in favour
                                 of the Trustee over the Company’s assets, predominantly comprising loan
                                 receivables and also real property. Details of these assets are provided in
                                 Benchmark 5 (including information relating to past due loans and
                                 impairment) and the investment overview section of the prospectus.
                                 Further information concerning the Company’s lending activities is
                                 provided in Benchmarks 6 to 8 in Section 3 of the Prospectus.’


                             Details of related party exposure

              RG 69.138      It is relevant for investors to understand if the value of assets secured by a
                             security interest may be affected by the financial position or performance of
                             a related party or related body corporate. This will allow investors to assess
                             whether there is any risk that any related party transactions have not been
                             entered into, or monitored, with the same rigour and independence as
                             transactions made on an arm’s-length commercial basis. Investors will be
                             able to consider such exposure by reviewing information disclosed in a
                             prospectus in accordance with Benchmark 6.


                             Ongoing disclosure

              RG 69.139      If the term ‘secured note’ is used, updated information about the property and
                             security which gives investors information about the sufficiency of the security
                             must be included in disclosure documents and quarterly reports prepared under
                             s283BF. Making this information readily available to investors by providing it
                             on the issuer’s website is an important way investors may gain an understanding
                             of the nature and adequacy of the security for notes described as ‘secured
                             notes’. In addition, any continuous disclosure notices required to be lodged
                             with ASIC in the previous 12 months will also assist investors.


                             Statements in advertising

              RG 69.140      Issuers must ensure that the statements to be included in advertisements
                             relating to an offer are prominent, as discussed in RG 156. We consider this
                             is important because even when a product can be described as a secured
                             note, this does not mean that the product is safe or without risk. Therefore,
                             statements required by ASIC Instrument 2022/61 that are buried in the fine
                             print of an advertisement will not be regarded as sufficiently prominent.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 39
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




The concept of ‘sufficiency of property’
              RG 69.141      The term ‘debenture’ or ‘secured note’ may be used only if the property that
                             is provided as security is sufficient and is reasonably likely to be sufficient to
                             meet the liability for the repayment of money lent under the notes and other
                             liabilities ranking in priority or equally to that liability. In the case of the
                             term ‘debenture’, only tangible property can be counted. The sufficiency
                             concept aims to ensure that the trustee has security over sufficient assets so
                             that holders of debentures and secured notes can be confident that all or a
                             high proportion of the funds owing to them will be repaid.

              RG 69.142      The extent by which the value of the property over which security is held
                             exceeds the quantum of money that has been or may be lent under the notes
                             is a key consideration in determining the sufficiency of the property
                             provided as security. In view of the policy underlying the requirement that
                             there be sufficient property, care needs to be taken to ensure that a practical
                             approach is taken to asset values, and it cannot be assumed that a best case
                             outcome will occur. For example, an issuer should consider:
                             (a)   the nature and condition of the relevant assets, particularly whether
                                   there has been any asset impairment (e.g. in the case of security over
                                   loan receivables, the extent to which the loans are in arrears);
                             (b)   the age of any valuations and whether anything has occurred that casts
                                   doubt on the accuracy of the valuation (e.g. delays in any applicable
                                   development process); and
                             (c)   the extent to which the assets reflect transactions made with related
                                   parties.

              RG 69.143      If an issuer intends to count intangible property in judging whether it is
                             entitled to call notes issued by it ‘secured notes’, we consider that the
                             intangible assets should be individually identifiable and considered as
                             separable intangibles under the Australian accounting standards. Issuers
                             should avoid ascribing too much value to intangible assets that may be
                             difficult to realise (e.g. intellectual property).

              RG 69.144      Also relevant in considering whether there is sufficient property are:
                             (a)   the capital base and surplus funds of the issuer (e.g. as discussed in the
                                   equity capital and liquidity benchmarks, including whether there is a
                                   sufficient ‘buffer’ of shareholders’ funds or liquid reserves to meet
                                   future obligations); and
                             (b)   the amount of likely liabilities that rank in priority or equally with the
                                   liability for the repayment of money lent under the notes (e.g. any
                                   statutory priorities on a winding-up), together with the assets that are
                                   likely to be available to meet these liabilities.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 40
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                               Example: Secured notes

                               Issuer XYZ Ltd operates a mortgage financing business and funds its
                               business by raising money from investors under a prospectus and using it
                               to on-lend to third parties. XYZ Ltd has a diverse loan book with a minimal
                               amount of arrears and one impaired loan totalling 0.25% of its loan book.
                               XYZ Ltd actively manages its loan book and takes appropriate action where
                               borrowers are not meeting their obligations. XYZ Ltd advances funds to
                               borrowers secured by a registered first mortgage and to no greater than a
                               70% loan-to-valuation ratio. XYZ Ltd has an equity ratio of 8% and the trustee
                               has a first ranking security interest over all of the assets of XYZ Ltd, which
                               are considerably in excess of the amount it is liable to repay to investors.

                               All of XYZ Ltd’s assets would be available to investors if the security was
                               enforced (subject to statutory priorities). XYZ Ltd’s directors have confirmed
                               in the prospectus that the property offered as security is sufficient and
                               reasonably likely to be sufficient to repay investors. They describe the
                               product as a ‘secured note’ for the purposes of s283BH and include the risk
                               statements in their advertisements.


                               Example: Unsecured notes or unsecured deposit notes

                               Like XYZ Ltd, issuer ABC Ltd also operates a mortgage financing business
                               and funds its business by raising money from investors under a prospectus
                               and using it to on-lend to third parties. ABC Ltd has a low level of equity
                               and carries on a lending business with a loan book that comprises a
                               substantial amount of past due loans, of which 10% have been assessed
                               as impaired. The unpaid principal and interest on a large number of the
                               loans has resulted in the amounts owing being greater than the original
                               loan-to-valuation ratio when the loans were advanced.

                               If the loan book was to be realised or valued today, ABC Ltd’s loan book
                               may only be valued or realised at a significant discount to the face value of
                               loans, together with accrued interest on its past due loans. There is a real
                               possibility that the value of the loan book along with other assets would not
                               be sufficient to repay investors based on an estimate of the market value at
                               the time. ABC Ltd describes the product as ‘unsecured notes’ in its prospectus.




Branding of products
              RG 69.145      We will not refuse lodgement of a prospectus which, in addition to using the
                             description prescribed in s283BH, also describes the product in another way,
                             provided that:
                             (a)   the description used is not false or misleadingfor example, the
                                   description of an unsecured note or an unsecured deposit note must not
                                   include the terms set out in items 1, 2 or 2A of s283BH(1);
                             (b)   the description does not result in an omission from the prospectusfor
                                   example, by being a half-truth; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 41
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             (c)   the prospectus clearly and prominently characterises the notes using the
                                   description prescribed by s283BHfor example, as an unsecured note
                                   or an unsecured deposit note.

                                   Note: Issuers should comply with the advertising standards described in RG 156.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                 Page 42
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AASB 107 (for             An Australian accounting standard made for the purposes
                               example)                  of the Corporations Act (in this example, numbered 107)

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001

                               ASIC Instrument           An ASIC instrument (in this example numbered 2022/61)
                               2022/61 (for example)

                               ‘as if complete’          An estimate of the market value of a property, assuming
                               valuation                 certain specified improvements are made

                               ‘as is’ valuation         An estimate of the market value of a property in its
                                                         current state (i.e. without any further improvements)

                               Australian accounting     Standards made for the purposes of the Corporations Act
                               standards

                               Ch 2M (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                         numbered 2M)

                               complying valuation       A valuation obtained under Benchmark 7(a) or value
                               and complying market      ascribed to a property (e.g. capital improved value) in a
                               valuation                 municipal rates valuation

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               CP 94 (for example)       An ASIC consultation paper (in this example, numbered 94)

                               legal proceeding          A proceeding in a court to recover a payment due under a
                                                         loan, or taking possession of property under a mortgage
                                                         or taking any other action to enforce a mortgage

                               market value              An estimate of the amount for which the property or asset
                                                         could exchange on the valuation date between a willing
                                                         buyer and a willing seller in an arm’s-length transaction

                               past due                  For a financial asset, this is when a counterparty has
                                                         failed to make a payment when contractually due

                               related party             The term ‘related party’ should be interpreted broadly,
                                                         taking into consideration the definitions of ‘related party’
                                                         in s228 and Australian Accounting Standard AASB 124
                                                         Related party disclosures

                               renegotiated loans        Loans where principal or interest was otherwise greater
                                                         than 30 days past due that have been restructured,
                                                         transferred or whose terms have been renegotiated within
                                                         the past six months




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                                Page 43
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               RG 156 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example, numbered 156)

                               rollover                  Where an existing investor keeps their money in the
                                                         existing note investment for an additional term (whether
                                                         on the same or slightly different terms)

                               s710 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                         numbered 710)

                               security interest         Has the meaning given by s51A
                                                           Note: This includes a charge.

                               unlisted notes            Notes that are not quoted on a financial market: see
                                                         RG 69.1–RG 69.3 for information on who this guide
                                                         applies to




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 44
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




Related information


                             Headnotes

                             advertising, auditors, benchmarks, debentures, disclosure, issuers, listed,
                             mortgage debentures, secured notes, prospectus, trustees, unsecured notes,
                             valuers


                             Legislative instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Describing Debentures—Secured Notes) Instrument
                             2022/61


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 156 Advertising of debentures and notes to retail investors

                             RG 198 Unlisted disclosing entities: Continuous disclosure obligations

                             RG 228 Prospectuses: Effective disclosure for retail investors

                             RG 254 Offering securities under a disclosure document


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Chs 2L, 2M and 6D, s313, 318, 283BE, 283BF, 283BH,
                             283DA, 283EB, 556, 675, 704, 708, 710, 711, 715A, 719, 723 and 739


                             Consultation papers

                             CP 89 Unlisted, unrated debentures: Improving disclosure for retail investors

                             CP 94 Debenture advertising

                             CP 123 Debentures: Strengthening the disclosure benchmarks

                             CP 151 Debt securities: Modifying the naming provisions and advertising
                             requirements


                             Reports

                             REP 38 High-yield debentures

                             REP 108 Report on submissions for CP 89 Unlisted, unrated debentures

                             REP 113 Report on submissions for CP 94 Debenture advertising




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 45
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 69: Debentures and notes: Improving disclosure for retail investors




                             REP 127 Debentures: Improving disclosure for retail investors

                             REP 173 Debentures: Second review of disclosure to investors

                             REP 276 Response to submissions on CP 151 Debt securities: Modifying the
                             naming provisions and advertising requirements


                             Investor guide

                             Investing in unlisted debentures and unsecured notes?


                             Pro forma

                             PF 223 Interim auditor’s benchmark report


                             Media and information releases

                             MR 08-82 ASIC acts to provide retail investors with better disclosure in
                             unlisted unrated debentures (23 April 2008)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2012                                               Page 46
