REGULATORY GUIDE 43

Financial reports and audit
relief

May 2011




About this guide
This is a guide for companies, registered schemes or disclosing entities; their
directors; and auditors.

It explains how ASIC may exercise its powers to grant relief from the financial
reporting and audit requirements of Pt 2M.2, 2M.3 and 2M.4 (other than Div 4)
of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act).

Note: From 27 July 2020, applications for relief should be submitted through the
ASIC Regulatory Portal. For more information, see how you apply for relief.
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This regulatory guide was issued in May 2011 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the issue date. The note on the front page was inserted on
                             27 July 2020.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 43, issued 9 October 1998
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 43, issued 18 January 1993, updated
                                     17 June 1996, rebadged as Regulatory Guide 43 on 5 July 2007
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 1, issued 8 March 1991.


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                 Page 2
                                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    The objectives of financial reporting ........................................................4
                                    Eligibility for relief .....................................................................................5
                                    Applying for relief .....................................................................................5
                                    Nature of relief .........................................................................................5
                             B      Eligibility for relief .................................................................................6
                                    Statutory pre-conditions ...........................................................................6
                                    Compliance would make the financial report or other reports
                                    misleading ................................................................................................6
                                    Compliance would be inappropriate in the circumstances ......................7
                                    Compliance would impose unreasonable burdens ..................................9
                                    Our discretion to grant relief or not ........................................................15
                             C      Applying for relief ................................................................................16
                                    Basic considerations with applying for relief ..........................................16
                                    Class order relief ....................................................................................17
                                    Individual relief .......................................................................................18
                             D      Nature of relief .....................................................................................21
                                    Conditions of relief .................................................................................21
                                    Duration of relief ....................................................................................21
                                    Relief cannot be retrospective ...............................................................21
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................22
                             Related information .....................................................................................23




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                                             Page 3
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




A          Overview


                               Key points

                               Chapter 2M of the Corporations Act contains the financial reporting and audit
                               requirements for companies, disclosing entities and registered schemes.
                               These requirements are directed at maintaining investor confidence,
                               enhancing market efficiency and ensuring the accountability of management.

                               ASIC has discretion to grant relief from the financial reporting provisions in the
                               Corporations Act.

                               This relief can only be granted if certain statutory preconditions are satisfied.
                               Even if they are satisfied, ASIC has an overriding discretion to decline the relief.

                               The relief can be granted subject to conditions and for a particular duration.



The objectives of financial reporting
              RG 43.1        Chapter 2M of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) contains the
                             financial reporting and audit requirements for companies, disclosing entities and
                             registered schemes:
                             (a)   The financial reporting provisions impose requirements about keeping
                                   financial records, annual financial reporting, half-yearly reporting and
                                   disclosure obligations.
                             (b)   The audit provisions provide users with an independent opinion on the
                                   information in the financial report.

                             These provisions are directed at maintaining investor confidence, enhancing
                             market efficiency and ensuring the accountability of management through the
                             provision of timely and reliable financial information.

              RG 43.2        The purpose behind requiring entities to prepare and lodge with ASIC financial
                             reports that comply with the requirements of Ch 2M is to make information
                             available that is useful to a wide range of users, to help them make economic
                             decisions. The legislative policy underlying these requirements indicates an
                             expectation that there are ‘users’ of the financial reports.

              RG 43.3        In Re Incat Australia Pty Ltd and Another and ASIC (1999) 33 ACSR 132
                             (Incat (1999)) the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) stated that ‘users’
                             should be given a wide interpretation, with the result that not only present and
                             prospective shareholders, present and prospective creditors and customers were
                             users, but that the term should also include employees of the company.

                                   Note: A wide interpretation of users of financial statements is also adopted in the Australian
                                   Accounting Standards Board’s (AASB) Framework for the preparation and presentation of



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                           Page 4
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                                   financial statements (Framework) at paragraphs 9–11. The Framework defines the users of
                                   financial reports at paragraph 9 to include present and potential investors, employees,
                                   lenders, suppliers and other trade creditors, customers, governments and their agencies and
                                   the public.

              RG 43.4        Each of the different types of users may have varying information requirements.



Eligibility for relief
              RG 43.5        We can grant relief from the requirements of Pts 2M.2, 2M.3 and 2M.4 (other
                             than Div 4) to:
                             (a)   a company, registered scheme or disclosing entity;
                             (b)   its directors; and/or
                             (c)   its auditor.

              RG 43.6        This relief can be granted by class order (s341(1)) or on a case-by-case basis
                             (s340(1)).


                             Statutory pre-conditions for relief

              RG 43.7        We can only grant relief if we are satisfied that complying with the
                             Corporations Act would:
                             (a)   render the financial report or other reports misleading (see RG 43.13–RG
                                   43.14);
                             (b)   be inappropriate in the circumstances (see RG 43.15–RG 43.21); or
                             (c)   impose unreasonable burdens (see RG 43.22–RG 43.53): s342(1).


                             Our discretion to grant relief or not

              RG 43.8        We can still decline to grant relief even if we are satisfied that one or more of
                             the statutory preconditions are met: see RG 43.54.



Applying for relief
              RG 43.9        If you are not able to take advantage of class order relief (see RG 43.59 and
                             Table 1) from financial reporting and audit requirements, you may make an
                             individual application to ASIC for relief: see RG 43.60–RG 43.73.



Nature of relief
              RG 43.10       Both class order relief and relief granted to an individual entity can be granted
                             subject to conditions (see s340(2), 341(2), and RG 43.74–RG 43.75) and can be
                             indefinite or for a limited period (see RG 43.76–RG 43.78).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                         Page 5
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




B          Eligibility for relief


                               Key points

                               Before we can grant relief under Ch 2M of the Corporations Act we must be
                               satisfied that compliance with the Act would:
                               • render the financial report or other reports misleading (see RG 43.13–RG
                                 43.14);
                               • be inappropriate in the circumstances (see RG 43.15–RG 43.21); or
                               • impose unreasonable burdens (see RG 43.22–RG 43.53): s342(1).

                               However, we are not obliged to grant relief merely because one or more of the
                               pre-conditions in s342(1) have been met: see RG 43.54.




Statutory pre-conditions
              RG 43.11       We can grant relief from all or some of the requirements of Pt 2M.2 ‘Financial
                             records’, Pt 2M.3 ‘Financial reporting’ or Pt 2M.4 ‘Appointment and removal
                             of auditors’ (other than Div 4) to:
                             (a)   a company, registered scheme or disclosing entity;
                             (b)   its directors; and/or
                             (c)   its auditor.

              RG 43.12       We can only grant relief if we are satisfied that the applying entity meets at least
                             one of three statutory preconditions in s342(1) for relief. That is, that requiring
                             the entity to comply with the Corporations Act would:
                             (a)   render the financial report or other reports misleading (s342(1)(a));
                             (b)   be inappropriate in the circumstances (s342(1)(b)); or
                             (c)   impose unreasonable burdens (s342(1)(c)).



Compliance would make the financial report or other reports
misleading
              RG 43.13       To satisfy the criterion in s342(1)(a), you must show that:
                             (a)   strict compliance would make the financial report or other reports
                                   misleading. For example, that it would lead readers to an incorrect
                                   conclusion about the entity’s financial position. The fact that the disclosure
                                   is uninformative or irrelevant is not of itself sufficient; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                Page 6
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                             (b)   the problem could not reasonably be remedied through explanations in the
                                   notes to the financial statements necessary to give a true and fair view in
                                   accordance with s295(3)(c) of the Corporations Act.

              RG 43.14       We envisage that this criterion will rarely be satisfied.



Compliance would be inappropriate in the circumstances
              RG 43.15       Section 342(1)(b) will normally only apply where there is an anomaly in the law
                             or when compliance with the law gives rise to consequences not intended by the
                             legislature: see Re Mazda Australia Pty Ltd and ASC (1992) 8 ACSR 613. For
                             example, s342(1)(b) would apply if a requirement of Ch 2M is in conflict with
                             other legislative financial reporting requirements, and there is a clear legislative
                             intent that the latter should take precedence.


                             No purpose to disclosure

              RG 43.16       It is not sufficient for you to show that the requirement is irrelevant or of no
                             benefit to some users of the financial report or auditor’s report, or that those
                             who need particular information already have access to it, so that there is no
                             need for it to be publicly disclosed. For example:
                             (a)   The fact that shareholders of a subsidiary company already have access to
                                   the information required to be disclosed, through their board of directors, is
                                   not sufficient if the shareholders of the ultimate holding company do not
                                   also have access to the information: Re Australian Newsprint Mills Ltd
                                   (1988) 6 ACLC 1205 (Australian Newsprint) at 1207.
                             (b)   The needs of other users of the accounts—for example, creditors and
                                   prospective shareholders—must also be taken into account.
                             (c)   In Incat (1999) the AAT held (at 143) that the practice of providing special
                                   purpose financial information, which was not available to other smaller
                                   creditors or potential investors of the company, on a discretionary basis to
                                   ‘selected groups’ such as financiers, major creditors and credit agencies
                                   was ‘inconsistent with the intent of the legislation’. On appeal, the Federal
                                   Court in Incat Australia Pty Ltd v ASIC (2000) 33 ACSR 462 (Incat
                                   (2000)) confirmed that reasoning.
                             (d)   In Re SRKKK and Another and ASIC (2002) 42 ACSR 551 (SRKKK), the
                                   AAT confirmed ASIC’s decision not to grant relief from the various
                                   financial reporting requirements even though the applicant had no
                                   employees, customers or unsecured creditors. It was determined that this
                                   was not sufficient reason to undermine the overall public policy objective
                                   that large proprietary companies have reached a level of economic
                                   significance and therefore must report in accordance with statutory
                                   financial reporting requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                Page 7
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                             Large proprietary companies

              RG 43.17       The fact that a company must prepare financial reports only because of its
                             classification as a large proprietary company under the Corporations Act is not
                             of itself sufficient to satisfy the ‘inappropriate in the circumstances’ criterion.

              RG 43.18       Companies that meet the criteria in the Corporations Act to be classified as
                             large proprietary companies (even though they may be privately owned) are
                             considered by legislation to be economically significant, and therefore are
                             required to comply with statutory financial reporting requirements.

              RG 43.19       The policy objective underlying the requirement that large proprietary
                             companies lodge financial reports was described by the AAT in SRKKK at 559
                             as:
                                   intended to ensure that once companies reach a certain level of turnover,
                                   presumably considered to be of economic significance, then those companies
                                   should provide fuller financial accounts. Obviously, the provision of fuller
                                   accounts facilitates oversight by regulatory bodies as well as providing useful
                                   information for those conducting business or in a contractual relationship with
                                   such companies.

              RG 43.20       In Incat (1999), Incat sought relief in part under the ‘inappropriate to the
                             circumstances’ criterion on the basis that it was not a ‘reporting entity’ under
                             accounting standards and that the reporting entity test should be applied rather
                             than the large proprietary company test. The AAT said at 136:
                                   At the end of the day it is not a question of whether a company is a reporting
                                   entity but whether or not it is a large proprietary company … The obligation to
                                   lodge accounts flows from its status as a large proprietary company following
                                   the legislative distinction made between small and large proprietary companies
                                   not whether it is a reporting entity … Furthermore the legislative policy
                                   underlying the requirement to lodge accounts is indicative of the expectation
                                   that there are users of the accounts.

                                   Note: On appeal from the AAT, the Federal Court (Heerey J) in Incat (2000) concluded that
                                   the status of a company as a reporting entity was not definitive as to its obligations to lodge
                                   accounts. Heerey J held at 471 that ‘the ultimate question is whether a company is a ‘large
                                   proprietary company’’.


                             Grandfathered large proprietary companies

              RG 43.21       As a result of s1408(6) of the Corporations Act, some large proprietary
                             companies are not required to lodge financial reports regardless of their
                             economic significance. These companies are commonly referred to as
                             ‘grandfathered’ large proprietary companies. This is a limited exemption
                             provided by Parliament to companies that meet specific criteria. This should not
                             be taken as a basis for granting relief to companies that do not meet the criteria.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                            Page 8
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




Compliance would impose unreasonable burdens
              RG 43.22       Compliance with the Corporations Act may be burdensome in one of two ways:
                             (a)   there may be a burden associated with complying with a particular
                                   requirement; or
                             (b)   a burden may result from having complied with the requirement.

              RG 43.23       The burden may be imposed on the entity, an officer of the entity or the auditor
                             of the entity.

              RG 43.24       Before we will grant relief it must be demonstrated not only that compliance
                             with the relevant requirement of Pts 2M.2, 2M.3 and 2M.4 would impose a
                             burden, but also that the burden is unreasonable.

              RG 43.25       Section 342(1)(c) requires that a causal connection be established between
                             compliance with the relevant requirement and the ‘detriment’ that might
                             constitute an unreasonable burden. The mere potential for a detriment to occur
                             is not an unreasonable burden—there must be some reasonable prospect or
                             likelihood of the detriment occurring: see Brightstar Logistics Pty Ltd v
                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission (No 2) [2010] FCA 435 (7
                             May 2010) at paragraphs 59–67.


                             What is an ‘unreasonable’ burden?

              RG 43.26       Incat (1999) gives the following interpretation of an ‘unreasonable’ burden at
                             paragraph 20:
                                   while a burden that is overwhelming is an unreasonable one the converse is not
                                   necessarily true. Whether a burden may fairly be described as ‘unreasonable’
                                   is essentially one of fact requiring an evaluation of the evidence, having regard
                                   to the nature of the requirements to be performed, keeping in mind the policy
                                   objective of the legislation that companies of economic significance lodge
                                   accounts and the extent of economic detriment (if any) likely to flow to the
                                   applicants as a result of compliance.

                             This interpretation was approved by Heerey J in Incat (2000) at 465.

              RG 43.27       Factors that are relevant in determining whether the requirements of Pts 2M.2,
                             2M.3 and 2M.4 would impose an unreasonable burden include the:
                             (a)   information needs of users and potential users of the financial report;
                             (b)   objectives of the financial reporting and audit provisions; and
                             (c)   intentions of the AASB and the Auditing and Assurance Standards Board
                                   (AUASB).


                             Users and their information needs

              RG 43.28       A burden would be unreasonable if complying with the requirement will cause
                             the entity serious economic detriment with little or no compensating benefit to



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                 Page 9
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                             users of the financial reports: see Directors of Liquid Air (WA) Pty Ltd v
                             Commissioner for Corporate Affairs (1989) 15 ACLR 29 (Liquid Air).

              RG 43.29       We will consider who the users of the financial report are likely to be, what
                             their information needs are, and how those users are likely to be impacted if
                             relief is granted.

              RG 43.30       Before granting relief, we will take into account the fact that financial reports
                             provide information about the financial position, financial performance and
                             cash flows of an entity that is useful to a wide range of users in making
                             economic decisions. They also provide information for those users who wish to
                             assess the accountability of management in order that they make economic
                             decisions.

              RG 43.31       The administrative cost of preparing and lodging financial reports or complying
                             with a particular requirement (including paying for expert assistance) would
                             rarely of itself be an unreasonable burden. It is a cost of doing business using a
                             corporate structure. You must demonstrate that the administrative burden is out
                             of all proportion to the value of the resultant disclosure to users of the financial
                             report.


                             The objectives of financial reporting

              RG 43.32       We will consider the impact that granting relief would have on the objectives of
                             the financial reporting and audit provisions. These objectives are discussed at
                             RG 43.1–RG 43.4.

              RG 43.33       For example, we would refuse to grant relief to dormant companies, on the basis
                             that it would be inconsistent with the intention of the legislature. Amendments
                             to the Corporations Act arising under the Corporate Law Reform Act 1988
                             specifically removed the distinction between dormant companies and other
                             companies. Dormant companies are now expected to comply with the same
                             financial reporting requirements as other companies and therefore we will not
                             generally grant relief to dormant companies from complying with the reporting
                             and audit requirements of the Corporations Act.


                             The intentions of the AASB and the AUASB

              RG 43.34       Our general policy is that we will not grant relief that is inconsistent with any
                             standards made by the AASB or the AUASB. Where either of these bodies have
                             considered, but expressly declined to adopt a particular approach, we will
                             generally not grant relief allowing an entity to adopt that approach.

              RG 43.35       We are unlikely provide relief from compliance with Australian accounting
                             standards based on International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), for
                             example. For periods beginning on or after 1 January 2005, Australia has
                             adopted Australian equivalents to IFRS. The adoption of IFRS is aimed at



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                              Page 10
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                             ensuring consistency and comparability of financial reporting across global
                             financial markets; providing relief from compliance with these standards would
                             be inconsistent with the intentions of the AASB.


                             When relief will not be granted

              RG 43.36       We will not grant relief solely because:
                             (a)   there are difficulties arising from the way in which a company has
                                   structured its operations (particularly its group structure) or as a result of a
                                   policy determined by the directors; or
                             (b)   the ultimate holding company, incorporated outside Australia, is not
                                   required to provide similar disclosure.


                             Examples of an unreasonable burden

              RG 43.37       The following are examples of when relief from the financial reporting and
                             audit requirements of Pts 2M.2, 2M.3 and 2M.4 may or may not be appropriate
                             on the basis that compliance would impose an unreasonable burden.

                             Competitive advantage or disadvantage

              RG 43.38       Only in rare circumstances will we grant relief because a particular disclosure
                             requirement might impose an unreasonable burden by allowing customers,
                             competitors or suppliers to use the information disclosed to the applicant’s
                             competitive disadvantage.

              RG 43.39       An application for relief would need to demonstrate that if the disclosure
                             requirement is complied with, competitors, suppliers or customers will be able
                             to extract precise information of a specific nature—for example, profit per unit
                             sold—from the financial statements, and that this information can then be used
                             to gain an advantage over the applicant company, giving rise to detrimental
                             consequences. Based on the decision in Liquid Air, this might happen where, for
                             example, the company has only one customer, or the company provides a single
                             service or product and information about the physical level of the applicant’s
                             output is available to competitors.

              RG 43.40       In considering whether to grant relief, the ability to calculate information such
                             as profit per unit sold is only one consideration. We will consider all relevant
                             circumstances, including the likelihood of the information being used to the
                             company’s disadvantage and the factors outlined in RG 43.27–RG 43.35. For
                             example, since Liquid Air there have been changes to the reporting
                             requirements, which reflect the intention of the AASB that all reporting entities
                             preparing financial reports under Ch 2M of the Corporations Act are
                             specifically required to report information that enables the calculation of
                             expenses and operating margins.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                Page 11
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




              RG 43.41       We will generally not grant relief from a requirement to disclose information in
                             the financial report because the information will enable competitors to derive
                             unit costs of production (thus giving rise to competitive disadvantage), unless
                             you can demonstrate that you meet the following requirements:
                             (a)   you are a one-product or one-service entity. The product or service must be
                                   homogenous. A product sold in both small and large quantities will not be
                                   homogenous for this purpose;
                             (b)   there is no significant means of product differentiation compared to
                                   competitors’ products (including reputation of the company, use of brand
                                   names, differences in quality and differences in styles);
                             (c)   a very large majority of business is with one economically powerful
                                   customer supplier, or you are a very small participant in an industry
                                   dominated by one or two major and large competitors, who it is reasonable
                                   to conclude would be willing and able to wage a price war. You must
                                   consider factors such as:
                                   (i)     protection provided by other legislation;
                                   (ii)    price setting in the market;
                                   (iii)   the willingness and ability of competitors to suffer losses in a price
                                           war;
                                   (iv)    the company’s margin relative to that of its competitors;
                                   (v)     possible support for the company from a parent or other source; and
                                   (vi)    whether customers would be willing to put sources of supply at risk or
                                           risk the quality of their purchases;
                             (d)   the only source of reliable information that competitors, suppliers and other
                                   interested parties can use to estimate your production costs is your
                                   financial reports. For example, competitors’ production or engineering staff
                                   or consultants may be able to make estimates from:
                                   (i)     knowledge of production techniques;
                                   (ii)    size of operations;
                                   (iii)   production volumes;
                                   (iv)    grade or quality of inputs;
                                   (v)     number of employees required for a given production level;
                                   (vi)    costs of employees, machinery and goods or services needed for the
                                           production process;
                                   (vii) location; and

                                   (viii) assessment of product characteristics and quality;

                             (e)   you will suffer serious economic detriment as a consequence of the
                                   competitors or customers being able to make the calculations and that
                                   detriment is unlikely to occur if the financial report information is not



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                  Page 12
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                                   available. We will consider whether the information can be ascertained
                                   from sources other than the financial report;
                             (f)   no small competitors, customers, suppliers or possible new market entrants
                                   may be disadvantaged by the relief sought, or are required to comply with
                                   the disclosure requirement in question; and
                             (g)   the economic detriment to the entity far outweighs the value to users of the
                                   financial reports and the legislature’s policy objective that certain
                                   companies lodge financial reports.

              RG 43.42       Even if the above circumstances can be demonstrated, relief may not be
                             appropriate for other reasons, such as the following:
                             (a)   ASIC is not the competition regulator. Our relief power will not be used as
                                   a substitute for protections provided by other legislation intended to deal
                                   with unfair competition. We will not give relief as a substitute for, or
                                   supplement to, protection intended under the Trade Practices Act 1974.
                             (b)   If the company has previously complied with the disclosure requirement
                                   that is the subject of an application for relief, it would need to provide clear
                                   evidence that it suffered severe economic detriment.

              RG 43.43       We will also consider whether relief is likely to undermine the purpose of the
                             statutory requirement that financial reports of economically significant
                             proprietary companies be prepared in accordance with the financial reporting
                             requirements of Ch 2M and be lodged with us.

                             Disclosure of director and executive remuneration

              RG 43.44       We will not grant relief from the disclosure of directors’ and executive
                             remuneration, option details and loans based on the argument that compliance
                             imposes an unreasonable burden on directors because the disclosure invades
                             their privacy. This proposition has been considered in a number of cases and it
                             has been held that the disclosure should be regarded as ‘an incident of
                             commercial life’ and a cost of using a corporate structure to conduct business:
                             see Australian Newsprint and SRKKK.

              RG 43.45       We will also take into account the factors listed at RG 43.27–RG 43.35.
                             Granting relief would be contrary to the purpose of the legislation and the
                             accounting standards, given that Parliament and the AASB would have been
                             aware of the arguments about privacy when the legislation was enacted and the
                             standards were made.

              RG 43.46       Similarly, arguments that disclosure would be prejudicial to the remuneration
                             policies of the particular company or its holding company by enabling other
                             entities to make offers to officers do not provide a sufficient basis for satisfying
                             the unreasonable burdens criteria.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                Page 13
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                             Adverse market conditions or poor financial condition

              RG 43.47       We are unlikely to grant relief because an entity faces uncertainties in adverse
                             market conditions or because the cost of complying with a financial reporting
                             requirement would impose an unreasonable burden by reducing returns to
                             members due to an entity’s poor financial condition. In these circumstances, it
                             is important that the users of financial reports are fully informed of the
                             circumstances through the information included in the report, which will assist
                             them in making economic decisions and assessing the accountability of
                             management.

                             Relief from audit requirements for charitable and other not-for-profit
                             organisations

              RG 43.48       We are unlikely to grant relief to charitable or other not-for-profit organisations
                             that argue that the requirement to have their financial report audited is an
                             unreasonable burden because:
                             (a)   they are not-for-profit and cannot afford to pay the audit fee; or
                             (b)   their funds could be better used elsewhere.

              RG 43.49       The cost of preparing and lodging audited financial reports with ASIC is a cost
                             of doing business using a corporate structure, and while it may be a burden,
                             such costs would rarely be considered to be an unreasonable one. Audited
                             financial reports from these types of entities provide users, such as donors or
                             potential donors, with a source of reliable information about the entities’
                             operations and are an important part of the accountability of the directors of
                             those entities.

                             Extension of time to lodge a statutory financial report

              RG 43.50       The Corporations Act sets out specific deadlines in which a statutory financial
                             report must be lodged with ASIC. Only in rare circumstances will we grant an
                             extension of this time on the basis that it is an unreasonable burden. We expect
                             that entities will plan their financial reporting processes in a manner that allows
                             the external auditor sufficient time to complete the audit and to meet the
                             company’s reporting deadlines under the Corporations Act. In the case of a
                             disclosing entity any relief is unlikely to be for more than four weeks: see
                             RG 95.40(h).

              RG 43.51       The following are examples where an extension of time is unlikely to be
                             granted:
                             (a)   if directors are absent from Australia. Suitable alternative arrangements
                                   should be made to enable the financial report to be authorised by a
                                   resolution of directors and signed by a director. In any event, any
                                   application would need to be signed by a director (see s340(3)(a) and (b) of
                                   the Corporations Act);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                               Page 14
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                             (b)   if an auditor states it cannot complete the audit work within the timeframe
                                   set down in the Corporations Act; and
                             (c)   if an entity wishes to await the outcome of future transactions or
                                   agreements before lodging its financial report. If information about future
                                   events is material, additional disclosure may be included in the financial
                                   report, in accordance with Australian Accounting Standard AASB 110
                                   Events after the balance sheet date.

              RG 43.52       If a financial services licensee is required to lodge financial reports under s989B
                             and Ch 2M of the Corporations Act, a separate extension of time may need to
                             be sought under s989D(3).

              RG 43.53       Where necessary, a separate application for extension of time to hold an annual
                             general meeting must also be sought in accordance with s250P(2) of the
                             Corporations Act: see also Regulatory Guide 44 Annual general meeting—
                             extension of time (RG 44).



Our discretion to grant relief or not
              RG 43.54       We are not obliged to grant relief even if one or more of the pre-conditions in
                             s342(1) have been met. We will take into account all of the relevant
                             circumstances of the application when considering whether to exercise our
                             discretion to grant relief under s340.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                              Page 15
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




C          Applying for relief


                               Key points

                               Some entities may be entitled to rely on existing class order relief from
                               financial reporting and audit requirements. However, entities not covered by
                               class orders may still apply for individual relief. These applications are
                               considered on a case-by-case basis.

                               An application for relief must include all of the information set out in RG 43.62
                               and be accompanied by the appropriate fee.

                               This section also sets out the minimum information we would require for an
                               application for relief:
                               • for a change in financial year (see RG 43.64–RG 43.68);
                               • by group companies (see RG 43.70–RG 43.71); and
                               • by disclosing entities (see RG 43.72–RG 43.73).



Basic considerations with applying for relief
              RG 43.55       Relief from the reporting requirements in Ch 2M can be granted by class order
                             (s341(1)) or on a case-by-case basis (s340(1)). We consider individual
                             applications for relief on a case-by-case basis.

              RG 43.56       You should first check whether you can claim relief under an existing class
                             order. If not, you will need to make an individual application asking ASIC to
                             grant you relief.


                             Sufficient time

              RG 43.57       You should ensure that there will be sufficient time for us to consider the
                             application and serve notice of any order on the company, registered scheme or
                             disclosing entity before any statutory timeframe for which the relief is required
                             has expired. Section 340 applications should normally be lodged no later than one
                             month before the end of the financial period for which the relief is being sought.

              RG 43.58       Additional time should be allowed for applications that are novel or outside the
                             scope of existing policy.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                               Page 16
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




Class order relief
              RG 43.59       Table 1 lists some of the entities that may be eligible for class order relief and
                             where further information may be found. This is not an exhaustive list.

Table 1:    Entities that may be eligible for class order relief

Disclosing entities          Class Order [CO 08/15] Disclosing entities—half-year financial reporting relief relieves a
                             disclosing entity from the requirement to prepare and lodge a half-year financial report
                             and directors’ report during the first financial year of the entity, where that first financial
                             year lasts for eight months or less.
                             Regulatory Guide 95 Disclosing entity provision relief (RG 95) discusses relief from the
                             disclosing entity provisions as defined in s111AR of the Corporations Act.

Externally administered      Class Order [CO 03/392] Externally administered companies: Financial reporting relief
companies                    grants relief from the financial reporting obligations for companies subject to certain
                             forms of external administration.
                             Regulatory Guide 174 Externally administered companies: Financial reporting and AGM
                             (RG 174) outlines what relief is available under the Corporations Act for externally
                             administered companies from the financial reporting obligations in Pt 2M.3.

Foreign companies            Regulatory Guide 58 Reporting requirements—registered foreign companies and
                             Australian companies with foreign shareholders (RG 58) describes the relief from
                             reporting obligations in the Corporations Act that may be granted to registered foreign
                             companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders. In particular, lodgement
                             relief is available to certain registered foreign companies: see Class Order [CO 02/1432]
                             Registered foreign companies—financial reporting requirements.

                             Class Order [CO 98/96] Synchronisation of financial year with foreign parent company
                             permits a company, registered scheme or disclosing entity to synchronise its financial
                             year with that of its ultimate foreign parent entity in certain instances.

Proprietary companies        Proprietary companies may seek relief from the requirement in the Corporations Act to
                             have their financial report audited under Class Order [CO 98/1417] Audit relief for
                             proprietary companies.

                             They should consult Regulatory Guide 115 Audit relief for proprietary companies
                             (RG 115).

                             Lodgement relief is also available to certain small proprietary companies that are
                             controlled by foreign companies: see Class Order [CO 98/98] Small proprietary
                             companies which are controlled by a foreign company but which are not part of a large
                             group.

Wholly owned entities        Wholly owned companies seeking relief from the requirement in the Corporations Act to
                             prepare and lodge a financial report should refer to Class Order [CO 98/1418] Wholly-
                             owned entities.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                      Page 17
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




Individual relief

                             Form and fees

              RG 43.60       There is no prescribed application form for s340 applications.

              RG 43.61       Each application must be accompanied by the appropriate fee, which is set out
                             in Item 24 of the Schedule to the Corporations (Fees) Regulations 2001.


                             Application requirements

              RG 43.62       An application for relief under s340 must:
                             (a)   be in writing and signed by at least one director (s340(3)(b));
                             (b)   state that it is made in accordance with the authorisation of directors
                                   (s340(3)(a));
                             (c)   provide the reasons for seeking the relief and sufficient relevant
                                   information to enable assessment of the merits of the application;
                             (d)   state the legislative provision(s) from which relief is sought;
                             (e)   state which of the three criteria in s342(1) has been met; and
                             (f)   candidly address how any relief granted may affect the needs of users of
                                   financial reports.

              RG 43.63       Applicants and their advisers are responsible for:
                             (a)   applying to ASIC for all appropriate relief; and
                             (b)   including all the relevant information to support their application (see
                                   Regulatory Guide 51 Applications for relief (RG 51) at RG 51.12–
                                   RG 51.15).


                             Specific considerations for some applications

                             Change of financial year end

              RG 43.64       Section 323D(2A) allows a financial year of an entity to be less than 12 months
                             if there has not been a financial year of less than 12 months in the last five years
                             and the change is made in good faith in the best interests of the entity.

              RG 43.65       Since s323D(2A) provides entities with flexibility to change their financial
                             years, we will rarely grant relief in connection with changes of financial year.
                             However, we may consider granting relief where, for example:
                             (a)   an entity wishes to change its financial year by way of a transitional period
                                   of 14 months or less; or
                             (b)   an entity wishes to synchronise its financial year with that of a foreign parent
                                   but cannot rely on [CO 98/96] or s323D(2A) to do so (addressed in RG 58).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                               Page 18
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




              RG 43.66       In some circumstances, s323D(2A) may impose unreasonable burdens on an
                             entity by requiring it to change its financial year by way of a short transitional
                             period of two months or less. We may grant case-by-case relief so an entity can
                             change its financial year by way of a transitional period of 14 months or less.
                             We will usually not grant relief so an entity can change its financial year by way
                             of a transitional period longer than 14 months. We are also very unlikely to
                             grant relief so that a change of financial year to end on 30 June rather than
                             31 December (or vice versa) can be made by way of an 18 month transitional
                             period. This is because s323D(2A) expresses a legislative preference for
                             transitional periods to be less than 12 months.

              RG 43.67       All applications for a change in financial year (except those by registered
                             foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders, which
                             are specifically addressed in RG 58) must address the following:
                             (a)   why complying with the requirement for the entity’s financial year to be a
                                   period of 12 months would impose unreasonable burdens;
                             (b)   if a financial year of greater than 12 months is requested, the reasons why
                                   the entity’s directors believe users of the financial report—such as present
                                   and prospective shareholders, present and prospective creditors, customers
                                   and employees—will not be disadvantaged;
                             (c)   if a financial year of greater than 12 months is requested, whether that
                                   entity has been, or is expected to be, affected by any material unusual
                                   transactions or events, extraordinary items, significant operating losses,
                                   acquisitions or sales of major assets (including businesses and controlled
                                   entities), and any factors which significantly affect the financial condition
                                   of the entity;
                             (d)   whether, in the director’s opinion, there are reasonable grounds to believe
                                   that the entity will be able to pay its debts as and when they become due
                                   and payable;
                             (e)   if the entity is a proprietary company, whether the change in financial year
                                   will result in the company being treated as a small proprietary company
                                   when it would otherwise be a large proprietary company (we will not grant
                                   unconditional relief in these circumstances because then the company
                                   would not be required to prepare and lodge an audited financial report or a
                                   director’s report);
                             (f)   whether the new financial year end would differ from that of a controlling
                                   entity or an entity that has significant influence over the entity. The terms
                                   ‘control’ and ‘significant influence’ are defined in Australian Accounting
                                   Standard AASB 127 Consolidated and separate financial statements and
                                   Australian Accounting Standard AASB 128 Investments in associates; and
                             (g)   any other information that may be relevant to our decision to grant relief.

              RG 43.68       It may be a condition of relief that a proprietary company that is considered
                             ‘small’ under s45A(2) of the Corporations Act, because it has a financial year of



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                               Page 19
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                             less than 12 months, must prepare a financial report as if it were a large
                             proprietary company for that financial year.

              RG 43.69       We will not generally grant relief that allows an entity to have a financial year
                             in excess of 18 months.

                             Group companies

              RG 43.70       Each company in a group seeking relief must make individual applications,
                             although these applications may be in the same letter. The appropriate fee must
                             accompany each application.

              RG 43.71       The directors of a holding company cannot apply on behalf of the directors of
                             its subsidiary companies. However, if the grounds for seeking relief are
                             identical, the directors of a subsidiary company may adopt the reasons stated by
                             the directors of the holding company.

                             Disclosing entities

              RG 43.72       Where relief from the financial reporting and audit provisions in Pts 2M.2,
                             2M.3 and 2M.4 can be provided to disclosing entities under s340(1) or
                             s111AT(1), it will be granted under s340(1) and not s111AT(1). Relief under
                             s111AT(1) will only be given if we are satisfied that one of the criteria under
                             s342(1) is satisfied. We will grant relief under s340(1) rather than s111AT(1)
                             even if you originally made such an application under s111AT(1).

              RG 43.73       For further examples of when relief under s340(1) will be granted to disclosing
                             entities, refer to RG 95; in particular, see RG 95.40–RG 95.43.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                              Page 20
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




D          Nature of relief


                               Key points

                               ASIC has the discretion to impose conditions on relief and relief may be
                               granted for a limited period.



Conditions of relief
              RG 43.74       Any conditions imposed will depend on the circumstances of the application and
                             the nature of the relief granted. It is likely that we will impose a condition that the
                             directors’ report include a statement that explains the relief that has been granted
                             by ASIC. This alerts users of the report that information has been omitted from the
                             financial report.

              RG 43.75       We may decide to grant relief with the condition that there is no change in the
                             circumstances or facts on which the relief is based. We will impose this condition
                             if we are of the view that a change in these circumstances or facts would
                             significantly affect the need for relief or would have an adverse effect on the
                             interests of users of the financial reports.



Duration of relief
              RG 43.76       Relief is not usually granted for an indefinite period. This is because changes in
                             your circumstances or external factors (such as financial reporting requirements or
                             legislation) could render the relief inappropriate in the circumstances or one of the
                             criteria in s342(1) inapplicable.

              RG 43.77       If relief has been granted for a limited period and further relief is required, you
                             must submit a fresh application. An application that merely refers to the existence
                             of the present order and the application that gave rise to that order will be
                             insufficient to enable us to make a decision.

              RG 43.78       We may, on application or of our own volition, revoke or suspend the operation of
                             an order made under s340(1) or s341(1).



Relief cannot be retrospective
              RG 43.79       ASIC’s powers under s340 of the Corporations Act are prospective. ASIC has no
                             power to grant retrospective relief. Relief will not remedy any past breach of the
                             Corporations Act: see RG 51.54–RG51.62 for further details. In very limited
                             circumstances, we may grant a no-action letter in relation to past breaches of the
                             Corporations Act: see Regulatory Guide 108 No-action letters (RG 108).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                              Page 21
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




Key terms

                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AASB                      Australian Accounting Standards Board

                               AASB 110 (for             An Australian accounting standard made for the purposes
                               example)                  of the Corporations Act (in this example number 110)

                               AAT                       Administrative Appeals Tribunal

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               AUASB                     Auditing and Assurance Standards Board

                               Ch 2M (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 2M)

                               [CO 98/55] (for           An ASIC class order (in this example numbered 98/55)
                               example)

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               Framework                 Framework for the preparation and presentation of
                                                         financial statements

                               Pt 2M.2 (for example)     A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                         2M.2)

                               RG 95 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 95)

                               s340 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 340)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                                   Page 22
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




Related information


                             Headnotes

                             application procedure; conditions, revocation or suspension of order; criteria to
                             be satisfied; s340, 341 and 342; where relief may be given


                             Class orders

                             [CO 98/96] Synchronisation of financial year with foreign parent company

                             [CO 98/98] Small proprietary companies which are controlled by a foreign
                             company but which are not part of a large group

                             [CO 98/1417] Audit relief for proprietary companies

                             [CO 98/1418] Wholly-owned entities

                             [CO 02/1432] Registered foreign companies—financial reporting requirements

                             [CO 03/392] Externally administered companies: Financial reporting relief

                             [CO 08/15] Disclosing entities—half-year financial reporting relief


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 44 Annual general meeting: Extension of time

                             RG 58 Reporting requirements: Registered foreign companies and Australian
                             companies with foreign company shareholders

                             RG 95 Disclosing entity provisions relief

                             RG 108 No-action letters

                             RG 115 Audit relief for proprietary companies

                             RG 174 Externally administered companies: Financial reporting and AGMs


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act 2001, Ch 2M, Pts 2M.2, 2M.3, 2M.4 and 2M.6, s111AT;
                             Corporate Law Reform Act 1988; Corporations (Fees) Regulations 2001

                             Trade Practices Act 1974




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                              Page 23
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 43: Financial reports and audit relief




                             Cases

                             Australian Newsprint Mills Ltd, Re (1988) 14 ACLR 355

                             Incat Australia Pty Ltd and Another and ASIC, Re (1999) 33 ACSR 132

                             Incat Australia Pty Ltd v ASIC (2000) 33 ACSR 462

                             Liquid Air (WA) Pty Ltd, Directors of v Commissioner for Corporate Affairs
                             (1989) 15 ACLR 29

                             Mazda Australia Pty Ltd and ASC, Re (1992) 29 ALD 57; (1992) 8 ACSR 613;

                             SRKKK and Another and ASIC , Re (2002) 68 ALD 671; (2002) 42 ACSR 551


                             Standards

                             AASB 110 Events after the balance sheet date

                             AASB 127 Consolidated and separate financial statements

                             AASB 128 Investments in associates




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission May 2011                                              Page 24
