REGULATORY GUIDE 16

External administrators and
controllers: Reporting of
possible offences and
misconduct

July 2025




About this guide
This guide is for liquidators, voluntary administrators, receivers and
managing controllers.

It provides guidance on their reporting obligations under s422, 438D, 500AE
and 533 of the Corporations Act and reg 5.5.05 of the Corporations
Regulations.
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                                  About ASIC regulatory documents

                                  In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                  documents.
                                  Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                  is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                  Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                  Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                  compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                  Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                  research project.



                              Document history
                              This guide was issued in July 2025 and is based on legislation and
                              regulations as at the date of issue.

                              Previous versions:
                                     Superseded Regulatory Guide 16 External administrators: Reporting
                                      and lodging, issued on 1 July 2008, reissued September 2024.
                                     Practice Note 50 rebadged as Regulatory Guide 16 on 5 July 2007.


                              Disclaimer
                              This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                              own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                              applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                              obligations.

                              Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                              are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                    Page 2
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




Contents


                              A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                     Who this guide applies to................................................................... 4
                                     Purpose of the reporting obligations .................................................. 5
                                     Overview of the reporting obligations ................................................ 5
                              B      Initial statutory report ...................................................................... 7
                                     In what circumstances is an initial statutory report required to be
                                     lodged with ASIC? ............................................................................. 7
                                     Guidance for preparing the initial statutory report ............................. 9
                              C      Supplementary statutory report ................................................... 14
                                     In what circumstances is a supplementary statutory report required
                                     to be lodged with ASIC? .................................................................. 14
                                     Guidance for preparing the supplementary statutory report ............ 15
                              D      Lodging an initial statutory report or supplementary statutory
                                     report with ASIC ............................................................................. 18
                                     Timeframes for lodging reports ........................................................ 18
                                     How to lodge the reports .................................................................. 20
                              E      How ASIC uses initial statutory reports and supplementary
                                     statutory reports ............................................................................ 21
                                     How we use information in reports lodged under this guide............ 21
                                     Use of the information for enforcement or regulatory action ........... 21
                                     Use of information for intelligence and statistical purposes ............ 22
                                     Release of information ..................................................................... 23
                              Key terms ............................................................................................... 24
                              Related information ............................................................................... 25




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                                           Page 3
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




A          Overview


                               Key points

                               External administrators and controllers are required to report to ASIC if it
                               appears to them that a person may have committed an offence or engaged
                               in misconduct in relation to the company.

                               This guide explains:
                               • our expectations for preparing the initial statutory report (see Section B);
                               • when and how to prepare a supplementary statutory report (see
                                 Section C);
                               • how to lodge reports with ASIC (see Section D); and
                               • how we deal with the reports we receive and the information we will
                                 publish about your reports (see Section E).




Who this guide applies to
               RG 16.1        This guide applies to liquidators, voluntary administrators, receivers and
                              managing controllers.

                                   Note: In this guide, we refer collectively to liquidators, voluntary administrators,
                                   receivers and managing controllers as ‘external administrators and controllers’.

               RG 16.2        It explains the process for complying with the obligation to report possible
                              offences and misconduct to ASIC under s422, 438D, 500AE and 533 of the
                              Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) and reg 5.5.05 of the
                              Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations), referred to in
                              this guide as the ‘reporting obligations’.

               RG 16.3        External administrators and controllers have a range of other obligations
                              under the Corporations Act. This guide focuses on the reporting obligations.

                                   Note: For additional resources on the obligations of external administrators and
                                   controllers, see Information Sheet 29 External administration, controller appointments
                                   and schemes of arrangement: Most commonly lodged forms (INFO 29), Regulatory
                                   Guide 258 Registered liquidators: Registration, ongoing obligations, disciplinary
                                   actions and insurance requirements (RG 258) and the Insolvency information on the
                                   ASIC website.
               RG 16.4        As part of their duties and functions, an external administrator or controller
                              will investigate the company’s affairs to identify property that may be
                              recovered to form part of the funds in the administration to be distributed in
                              accordance with the law. As part of these investigations, information or
                              evidence may be identified that enables them to form a view that it appears
                              an offence has been committed or misconduct has occurred that must be
                              reported.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                              Page 4
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




Purpose of the reporting obligations
               RG 16.5        The reporting obligations are an important source of ‘front line’ information
                              for ASIC about possible breaches of the Corporations Act and the Australian
                              Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act) by persons
                              involved with the company. If other breaches of the law are identified, we
                              can also share this information with relevant agencies, as appropriate. The
                              reports we receive further provide us with key information to identify
                              systemic issues and risks and to enable us to provide transparency to
                              stakeholders through our ability to publish aggregated information.

               RG 16.6        The reporting obligations contribute to:
                              (a)   maintaining the integrity of the marketplace; and
                              (b)   promoting investor and consumer confidence.

               RG 16.7        For the reporting obligations to be effective, external administrators and
                              controllers should assess the appropriate level of inquiries to undertake,
                              according to the circumstances of the company. Information provided about
                              possible offences and misconduct should be specific and timely.



Overview of the reporting obligations
               RG 16.8        An external administrator or controller may be required to lodge the
                              following reports with ASIC to comply with the reporting obligations:
                              (a)   an initial statutory report after forming a view that possible offences or
                                    misconduct occurred (s422(1), 438D(1) and 533(1), or s500AE(3)(f)
                                    and reg 5.5.05(2)) (see Section B);
                              (b)   an initial statutory report by the liquidator of an insolvent company after
                                    forming a view that the company may be unable to pay its unsecured
                                    creditors more than 50 cents in the dollar (s533(1)(c)) (see Section B); and
                                    Note: Data obtained from final returns (Form 5603 End of administration return) shows
                                    over 95% disclose actual dividends paid to unsecured creditors in insolvent liquidations
                                    of 50 cents in the dollar or less.

                              (c)   a supplementary statutory report with greater detail of possible offences
                                    and misconduct when, in the opinion of the external administrator or
                                    controller, it is desirable to bring a matter to the notice of ASIC
                                    (s422(2), 438D(2) and 533(2), or s500AE(3)(f) and reg 5.5.05(3)) (see
                                    Section C).

               RG 16.9        The reporting obligations, as outlined in RG 16.8, apply to:
                              (a)   a receiver of property of a corporation (s422);
                              (b)   a managing controller of property of a corporation (s422);
                              (c)   an administrator of a company under administration (s438D);



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                         Page 5
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                              (d)   a liquidator of a company (s533); and
                              (e)   a liquidator of a simplified liquidation process (s500AE(3)(f) and
                                    reg 5.5.05).

                                    Note: If the external administrator is the liquidator of a pooled group of companies, they
                                    must lodge a report in respect of each company in the group, unless the court makes an
                                    order to the contrary. This is because the obligation in s533 to lodge a report on possible
                                    misconduct refers to a particular company in the singular, not a pooled group of
                                    companies.

               RG 16.10       The Corporations Act does not require reports of possible offences and
                              misconduct to be lodged by:
                              (a)   a controller who is neither a receiver nor a managing controller;
                              (b)   a provisional liquidator;
                              (c)   a restructuring practitioner for a company;
                              (d)   the restructuring practitioner for a restructuring plan that has been made
                                    in relation to the company; or
                              (e)   an administrator of a deed of company arrangement.

               RG 16.11       Initial statutory reports and supplementary statutory reports are to be lodged
                              using the ASIC Regulatory Portal. For information on the timeframes and
                              process for lodging the reports, see Section D.

               RG 16.12       ASIC may use the information from initial statutory reports and
                              supplementary statutory reports to commence an investigation and take
                              further action in relation to identified breaches. For information on the way
                              that ASIC uses information in the reports: see Section E.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                            Page 6
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




B          Initial statutory report


                               Key points

                               Extensive investigations are not required to be undertaken, or significant
                               costs incurred, in completing the initial statutory report.

                               An initial statutory report is required to be lodged with ASIC by:
                               • external administrators and controllers—after forming a view that a
                                 person may have committed an offence in relation to the company or
                                 engaged in misconduct;
                               • liquidators—after forming a view that the company may be unable to
                                 pay its unsecured creditors more than 50 cents in the dollar; and
                               • liquidators in a simplified liquidation process—after forming an opinion
                                 that an offence has occurred that may have a material adverse effect on
                                 the interests of creditors.

                               External administrators and controllers must use their reasonably formed
                               professional judgement in investigating and reporting possible offences and
                               misconduct.




In what circumstances is an initial statutory report required to be
lodged with ASIC?

                              Obligation on liquidators

               RG 16.13       A liquidator of a company (other than a liquidator in a simplified liquidation
                              process) must:
                              (a)   lodge an initial statutory report with ASIC as soon as practicable, and in
                                    any event within six months, after it appears to the liquidator that:
                                    (i)    a past or present officer or employee, or a member or contributory,
                                           of the company may have been guilty of an offence under
                                           Australian law in relation to the company; or
                                    (ii)   a person who has taken part in the formation, promotion,
                                           administration, restructuring, management or winding up of the
                                           company may have:
                                           (A)   misapplied or retained, or become liable or accountable for,
                                                 money or property of the company; or
                                           (B)   been guilty of any negligence, default, breach of duty or
                                                 breach of trust in relation to the company; or




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                    Page 7
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                                    (iii)   the company may be unable to pay its unsecured creditors more
                                            than 50 cents in the dollar (see s533(1)); and
                              (b)   state in any initial statutory report lodged whether they propose to make
                                    an application for an examination or order under s597 (see s533(1)(d)).

               RG 16.14       A liquidator of a company in a simplified liquidation process must lodge an
                              initial statutory report with ASIC as soon as practicable, and in any event
                              within six months, after first forming the opinion that there are reasonable
                              grounds to believe that a person may have engaged in conduct constituting
                              an offence that has had, or is likely to have, a material adverse effect on the
                              interests of creditors as a whole, or a class of creditors as a whole: see
                              s500AE(3)(f) and reg 5.5.05(2).


                              Obligation on voluntary administrators, receivers and
                              managing controllers

               RG 16.15       Voluntary administrators, receivers and managing controllers must lodge an
                              initial statutory report with ASIC as soon as practicable after forming an
                              opinion that:
                              (a)   a past or present officer or employee, or a member, of the company may
                                    have been guilty of an offence under Australian law in relation to the
                                    company; or
                              (b)   a person who has taken part in the formation, promotion,
                                    administration, management or winding up of the company may have:
                                    (i)     misapplied, retained, or become liable or accountable for, money
                                            or property of the company; or
                                    (ii)    been guilty of any negligence, default, breach of duty or breach of
                                            trust in relation to the company: see s422(1) and 438D(1).


                              Court direction for lodgement

               RG 16.16       The court may also, on the application of an interested person, direct an
                              external administrator or controller to lodge a report if:
                              (a)   it appears to the court that an offence may have been committed or a
                                    person has engaged in misconduct in relation to the company; and
                              (b)   the external administrator or controller has not lodged a report about the
                                    matter: see s422(3)–(4), 438D(3) and 533(3), or s500AE(3)(f) and
                                    reg 5.5.05(4).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                    Page 8
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




Guidance for preparing the initial statutory report
               RG 16.17       The Corporations Act does not specify the information to be included in the
                              initial statutory report other than to require the external administrator or
                              controller to report and to give ASIC such information, and such access to—
                              and facilities for—inspecting and taking copies of any documents required:
                              see s422(1)(d), 438D(1)(d) and 533(1)(e), or s500AE(3)(f) and
                              reg 5.5.05(2)(d).

               RG 16.18       We have set out in RG 16.19–RG 16.41 our expectations about the exercise
                              of professional judgement and the minimum steps required to complete and
                              lodge the initial statutory report.


                              What inquiries are required?

               RG 16.19       An external administrator or controller is not required to carry out extensive
                              investigations prior to lodging the initial statutory report. It is also not
                              necessary for the external administrator or controller to have completed all
                              inquiries or to have formed definitive views for the initial statutory report.

               RG 16.20       We expect that external administrators and controllers will complete the
                              following steps:
                              (a)   Exercise professional judgement in deciding what investigations to
                                    undertake, taking into account available information on the size and
                                    nature of the company’s business and the extent of company property.
                                    The use of available funds to complete inquiries should be carefully
                                    considered against the use of funds for other purposes—including, the
                                    potential for returns to creditors and members.
                              (b)   Seek access to the books and records of the company.
                              (c)   Interview the director(s) and staff holding key roles (if within
                                    jurisdiction) and maintain a written record of the information obtained.
                              (d)   Consider whether any offences or misconduct have occurred and
                                    whether evidence exists, or is likely to be obtained, to support further
                                    action by ASIC.

                                    Note: An external administrator or controller may consider that more extensive inquiries
                                    are required to be undertaken in the circumstances following receipt of the books and
                                    records and information gained in the interviews.

               RG 16.21       In complying with the reporting obligations, the courts have held the
                              following in respect of the obligation on liquidators under s533(1) (which is
                              similar to the obligation on other external administrators and controllers
                              under s422(1) and 438D(1)):
                              (a)   It is not necessary for a liquidator to form a ‘concrete opinion’ before
                                    reporting—only to report if it appears certain things may have occurred.
                                    Further, it is not necessary to express any view or opinion in the report,



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                         Page 9
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                                    or to set out the basis for the view or opinion expressed. Nor is the
                                    liquidator required to have reasonable grounds for holding the opinions
                                    or views. However, a liquidator is obliged to act bona fide and must not
                                    express views which are not genuinely held.

                                    Note 1: See Murdaca v Australian Securities and Investments Commission [2009]
                                    FCAFC 92 at [100].

                                    Note 2: In considering whether an offence or misconduct should be reported, we
                                    encourage external administrators to have regard to the guidance relating to reports
                                    funded under the Assetless Administration Fund in Annexure A to Grant Guidelines:
                                    Allegations of possible misconduct—Substantiation guide (PDF 495 KB) on the ASIC
                                    website. However, it is not necessary to hold the evidence set out in the guidance when
                                    reporting a matter in the initial statutory report, as long as the view expressed is
                                    genuinely held.

                              (b)   If a liquidator has suspicions rather than opinions this should be made
                                    clear in the report. If a liquidator expresses an opinion based on
                                    supporting evidence, they should believe the evidence is reliable.

                                    Note: See Joubert and Members of the Companies Auditors and Liquidators
                                    Disciplinary Board [2018] AATA 944 at 94.

                              (c)   A liquidator may form a view before they obtain all the books and
                                    records of the company. The liquidator is required to investigate the
                                    affairs of the company in liquidation, but the extent of investigation
                                    undertaken will be constrained by the available resources.

                                    Note: See Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Bettles [2023] FCA 975
                                    at 745 to 746.

                              (d)   A liquidator is not required to incur significant expense in getting the
                                    books for the purpose of preparing a report.

                                    Note: See the cases cited in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Wily &
                                    Hurst [2019] NSWSC 521 at 83 to 87.

                              (e)   A liquidator is required to perform their duties in accordance with high
                                    standards of impartiality, probity and competence.

                                    Note: See Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Robert John Edge
                                    [2007] VSC 170 at 639.


                              How do I complete the initial statutory report?

               RG 16.22       ASIC has a form (also referred to as a ‘transaction’) available on the
                              ASIC Regulatory Portal that external administrators and controllers must use
                              to complete the initial statutory report. The form uses conditional logic, with
                              ongoing questions dependent on the answers to earlier questions. There is an
                              option to provide attachments, if required.

                                    Note: See Section D for further information on lodging the initial statutory report.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                          Page 10
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




               RG 16.23       Our user guide, Completing an initial statutory report through the ASIC
                              Regulatory Portal (PDF 6.4 MB), provides details on how to answer each
                              question and the level of investigation a liquidator might need to perform,
                              noting that the liquidator must exercise their own professional judgment as
                              to the appropriate level of investigation.

               RG 16.24       We encourage external administrators and controllers to select from the
                              standard response options where possible and to keep any free text responses
                              brief (i.e. a maximum of two paragraphs). The information gathered through
                              this form, together with other information known to ASIC, is used to
                              consider what action, if any, will be taken in response to the report.


                              What if no possible offences or misconduct are identified
                              (or the only issue is that the company may be unable to
                              pay unsecured creditors more than 50 cents in the dollar)?

               RG 16.25       We do not expect that an external administrator or controller will identify
                              possible reportable offences or misconduct in all appointments requiring
                              them to lodge an initial statutory report. We consider that the mere fact that a
                              company has failed does not in and of itself create evidence that an offence
                              or misconduct has occurred.

               RG 16.26       If the only issue identified by a liquidator is that the company may be unable
                              to pay its unsecured creditors more than 50 cents in the dollar, the liquidator
                              will need to lodge an initial statutory report only selecting this option (i.e.
                              not selecting any offences) and complete the relevant questions. For further
                              explanation, see Completing an initial statutory report through the ASIC
                              Regulatory Portal (PDF 6.4 MB).


                              What if there are no company books?

               RG 16.27       An external administrator or controller has powers under the Corporations
                              Act to obtain and inspect the books of a company to which they have been
                              appointed: see s431, 438B, 477(3) and 530A–530C.

               RG 16.28       An external administrator or controller should take steps to obtain and
                              conduct preliminary investigations into the company’s books and affairs
                              before lodging an initial statutory report that alleges possible offences or
                              misconduct. However, it is not necessary to have reviewed all of the books
                              and records prior to reporting.

                                   Note: The level and nature of the investigations conducted will depend on the type of
                                   appointment, the company’s circumstances and the extent of company property: see
                                   RG 16.20–RG 16.21.

               RG 16.29       If an external administrator or controller needs assistance to obtain a
                              report on company activities and property or the company books, they can
                              submit a Request assistance for external administration transaction through



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                       Page 11
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                              the ASIC Regulatory Portal. For assistance with preparing this transaction,
                              see: request assistance for external administration on the ASIC website.

               RG 16.30       Any failure of the company to maintain adequate books and records is an
                              offence and should be reported to ASIC in the initial statutory report.

                                   Note: A person commits an offence if they fail to keep written financial records that:
                                   •   correctly record and explain the company’s transactions and financial position and
                                       performance; and
                                   •   would enable true and fair financial statements to be prepared and audited: see s286.


                              What if there are insufficient assets?

               RG 16.31       In many external administration or controller appointments there may be
                              insufficient property available to pay the expenses and remuneration of the
                              external administrator or controller (an unfunded appointee). An unfunded
                              appointee must still comply with their statutory obligation to prepare and
                              lodge an initial statutory report of possible offences or misconduct.

               RG 16.32       Where there is finite property available, the level of inquiries that are
                              required to be undertaken will be more limited: see RG 16.20–RG 16.21.

                                   Note: Nothing in s545(1) relieves a liquidator of the obligation to report under any
                                   provision of the Corporations Act, even if the liquidator is unfunded: see s545(3).


                              What if there are concurrent or subsequent appointments?

               RG 16.33       Multiple external administrators or controllers can be appointed to a
                              company, either concurrently or at different times.

               RG 16.34       Each external administrator or controller must report possible offences. For
                              joint and several appointments, the external administrators or controllers can
                              report jointly and severally.

               RG 16.35       If a first appointee is subsequently replaced, the incoming external
                              administrator or controller should consider whether they need to lodge a
                              report to comply with the reporting obligations. The reporting obligations do
                              not provide that an incoming external administrator or controller can rely on
                              a report lodged by the first appointee. It will be necessary for the incoming
                              external administrator to lodge their own report if required: see s422(1),
                              438D(1) and 533(1), or s500AE(3)(f) and reg 5.5.05.

               RG 16.36       We consider it is appropriate for the incoming appointee to take into account
                              the information in any prior report submitted and any available work papers
                              as a starting point for their reporting to ASIC. The incoming appointee
                              should then exercise their discretion to determine whether any further
                              inquiries are necessary, or would be duplicative or costly.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                        Page 12
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                              What happens after an initial statutory report is lodged?

               RG 16.37       We will acknowledge lodgement of the initial statutory report. The
                              automated acknowledgement email will ask registered liquidators to apply
                              their professional judgment to determine whether to submit a supplementary
                              statutory report and provide information to assist with making that
                              assessment. An example of this email can be accessed on our website: New
                              ISR acknowledgement email (PDF 94.4 KB).

               RG 16.38       ASIC will use the information in the initial statutory report for the purposes
                              outlined in Section E. In a small number of cases, ASIC may make a
                              proactive request that further information be submitted in a supplementary
                              statutory report through the ASIC Regulatory Portal (see Section D).

               RG 16.39       If ASIC does not request a supplementary statutory report do not assume that
                              a supplementary statutory report is not of value to ASIC.

               RG 16.40       We consider that, in most cases, external administrators and controllers who
                              submit an initial statutory report will have complied with their obligation to
                              report possible offences and misconduct and that no further steps are required.

               RG 16.41       An external administrator or controller may consider that, after completing and
                              submitting the initial statutory report through the ASIC Regulatory Portal, there are
                              other matters that should be brought to ASIC’s attention. In these circumstances,
                              the external administrator or controller should consider submitting either:
                              (a)   another initial statutory report focusing on possible offences or
                                    misconduct; or
                              (b)   a supplementary statutory report: see Section D.

                                    Note: External administrators and controllers may lodge multiple initial statutory reports
                                    with ASIC if they identify possible offences or misconduct that must be reported.


                              What if I have further questions in relation to preparing an
                              initial statutory report?

               RG 16.42       If you have additional questions in relation to the preparation of an initial
                              statutory report, you can email ISRandSSR.Questions@asic.gov.au.


                              Qualified privilege

               RG 16.43       In the absence of malice on their part, an external administrator or controller
                              who lodges a report of possible offences or misconduct for the purpose of
                              satisfying the reporting obligations will have statutory immunity (qualified
                              privilege) from liability for defamation in respect of statements made or
                              matters contained in the report: see s426, 442E or 535.

               RG 16.44       Only external administrators, controllers and provisional liquidators have
                              statutory qualified privilege.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                         Page 13
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




C          Supplementary statutory report


                               Key points

                               A supplementary statutory report expands upon the information provided in
                               the initial statutory report.

                               An external administrator or controller may lodge a supplementary statutory
                               report about matters desirable to bring to our attention or may be directed
                               to lodge the report by the court.

                               In most cases, we do not expect that it will be necessary for an external
                               administrator or controller to lodge a supplementary statutory report.

                               We may request lodgement of a supplementary statutory report. We expect
                               external administrators and controllers to critically assess any request from
                               ASIC to lodge a supplementary statutory report and notify us if there are
                               grounds that the report should not be lodged.




In what circumstances is a supplementary statutory report required
to be lodged with ASIC?
               RG 16.45       An external administrator or controller may lodge a supplementary statutory
                              report specifying any other matter that, in their opinion, is desirable to bring
                              to our notice: see s422(2), 438D(2) and 533(2), or s500AE(3)(f) and
                              reg 5.5.05(3). If there are concurrent or subsequent appointments, the
                              external administrators or controllers of each appointment must assess
                              whether a supplementary statutory report is required.

               RG 16.46       A supplementary statutory report may be lodged:
                              (a)   at the exercise of the external administrator’s or controller’s discretion
                                    (which may be informed by a request from ASIC); or
                              (b)   when a court, on the application of an interested person, directs an
                                    external administrator or controller to lodge a report: see s422(3)–(4),
                                    438D(3)and 533(3), or s500AE(3)(f) and reg 5.5.05(4).

                                    Note: An external administrator or controller may lodge multiple supplementary statutory
                                    reports if they form the view that there are other matters to bring to ASIC’s attention.

               RG 16.47       We do not generally expect that it will be necessary for external administrators
                              and controllers to lodge a supplementary statutory report with ASIC.

               RG 16.48       The exceptions are where the court has directed lodgement of a report on a
                              matter not covered in any earlier report, or the external administrator or
                              controller considers there are additional matters that in their opinion are
                              desirable to bring to ASIC’s attention.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                      Page 14
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




               RG 16.49       We may assess the information provided in the initial statutory report and/or
                              other intelligence available to ASIC, and may request further information in
                              the form of a supplementary statutory report. This request may also inform
                              the decision of an external administrator or controller to lodge a report.
                                    Note 1: When we request a supplementary statutory report, an external administrator or
                                    controller may submit a notice of intention not to lodge a supplementary report
                                    transaction: see RG 16.53–RG 16.55.

                                    Note 2: It may be appropriate for an external administrator or controller to lodge a
                                    supplementary statutory report even when we have not requested a report and have
                                    advised that we will take no further action in relation to the initial statutory report. An
                                    external administrator or controller may still conclude that it is desirable to bring any
                                    other matter to the notice of ASIC, by lodging a supplementary statutory report.




Guidance for preparing the supplementary statutory report
               RG 16.50       If an external administrator or controller decides to lodge a supplementary
                              statutory report, we request that the report focus on providing additional
                              information on possible offences and misconduct and supporting evidence.
                              We cannot act on every report of possible offences and misconduct and a
                              concise report that focuses on information that is likely to support the
                              existence of a breach will assist us to take further action where appropriate.
                              If we require additional information to assist our assessment, we will contact
                              the external administrator or controller. We do not expect that extensive time
                              and costs should be incurred in preparing the report.

               RG 16.51       In deciding whether to report, external administrators and controllers should
                              carefully assess:
                              (a)   the costs associated with undertaking any additional investigations required
                                    to prepare the report. The use of available funds to complete further
                                    inquiries should be carefully considered against the use of funds for other
                                    purposes—including the potential for returns to creditors and members;
                              (b)   whether there is significant new information to report, given the content
                                    of the initial statutory report;
                              (c)   whether there is sufficient supporting evidence in relation to the
                                    possible misconduct; and
                              (d)   if unfunded, whether to apply for a grant under the Assetless Administration
                                    Fund for funding to carry out investigations and report (see RG 16.56).
                                    Note 1: In considering whether to prepare a supplementary statutory report, we encourage
                                    external administrators and controllers to consider the guidance relating to reports funded
                                    under the Assetless Administration Fund in Annexure A to Grant Guidelines: Allegations
                                    of possible misconduct—Substantiation guide (PDF 495 KB) on the ASIC website.

                                    Note 2: Information Sheet 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement (INFO 151) sets out
                                    guidance for people who report misconduct to ASIC and may also assist external
                                    administrators and controllers in assessing whether to complete a supplementary
                                    statutory report.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                             Page 15
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                              Qualified privilege
               RG 16.52       Qualified privilege will also generally attach to the supplementary statutory
                              report: see RG 16.43–RG 16.44.


                              What if ASIC requests a supplementary statutory report
                              and no grounds exist to lodge one, or there are no funds to
                              prepare it?

               RG 16.53       If we request that a supplementary statutory report be lodged, we recognise
                              that an external administrator or controller may take the view that:
                              (a)   they hold no further information or evidence to support the matters
                                    reported in their initial statutory report and the matters do not warrant
                                    further inquiries by ASIC;
                              (b)   they have insufficient funds to meet the cost of preparing the
                                    supplementary statutory report; or
                              (c)   for other reasons, it is not appropriate for the supplementary statutory
                                    report to be prepared.

               RG 16.54       In those cases, we request that an external administrator or controller submit
                              a Notice of intention not to lodge a supplementary report transaction through
                              the ASIC Regulatory Portal as soon as practicable (and prior to commencing
                              any work on preparing the supplementary statutory report). This notice
                              should clearly specify the reasons why they do not propose to lodge a
                              supplementary statutory report.
                                    Note: For assistance with preparing this transaction, see Notice of intention not to lodge
                                    an insolvency supplementary report on the ASIC website.

               RG 16.55       Where there are insufficient funds, an unfunded appointee (but not a
                              voluntary administrator or controller) should consider whether it is
                              appropriate to apply for grant funding from the Assetless Administration
                              Fund to investigate and prepare a supplementary statutory report. To be
                              eligible for funding, the initial statutory report must have been lodged with
                              ASIC. If an unfunded appointee’s application for funding is approved, we
                              may have specific requests regarding the content of the report, which we will
                              discuss with them separately.
                                    Note: See the guidance relating to the Assetless Administration Fund on the ASIC
                                    website for further details. If you have questions in relation to making an application to
                                    the Assetless Administration Fund, you can email AAF@asic.gov.au.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                           Page 16
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                              What happens after a supplementary statutory report is
                              lodged?
               RG 16.56       We will assess the supplementary statutory report once it is lodged.

               RG 16.57       Following our assessment, we may:
                              (a)   use the information in the report for the purposes outlined in Section E; or
                              (b)   advise that we propose to take no further action.


                              What if I have further questions in relation to preparing a
                              supplementary statutory report?

               RG 16.58       If you have additional questions in relation to the preparation of a
                              supplementary statutory report, you can email.
                              ISRandSSR.Questions@asic.gov.au.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                   Page 17
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




D          Lodging an initial statutory report or
           supplementary statutory report with ASIC


                               Key points

                               External administrators and controllers (other than liquidators) are required
                               to lodge the initial statutory report as soon as practicable after forming the
                               view that a possible offence or misconduct has occurred. Specific
                               timeframes apply to lodgements by liquidators.

                               We strongly encourage external administrators and controllers to lodge the
                               initial statutory report within four months of their appointment to assist our
                               timely assessment of the issues raised in the report.

                               There is no specific timeframe for lodgement of the supplementary
                               statutory report. However, we strongly encourage external administrators
                               and controllers to lodge the report within three months of lodging the initial
                               statutory report or receiving a request to lodge from ASIC.

                               Initial statutory reports and supplementary statutory reports should be
                               lodged through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.




Timeframes for lodging reports

                              Timeframe for lodging the initial statutory report

               RG 16.59       The statutory timeframe for lodging the initial statutory report is as follows:
                              (a)   For external administrators and controllers that are not liquidators—as
                                    soon as practicable after forming an opinion that a possible offence or
                                    misconduct has occurred.
                              (b)   For liquidators (other than a simplified liquidation process)—as soon as
                                    practicable and in any event within six months after forming an
                                    opinion that a possible offence or misconduct has occurred, or it
                                    appears that the company may be unable to pay its unsecured creditors
                                    more than 50 cents in the dollar.
                              (c)   For liquidators in a simplified liquidation process—as soon as
                                    practicable and in any event within six months after first forming the
                                    opinion that a person may have engaged in conduct that constitutes an
                                    offence that has, or is likely to have, a material adverse effect on the
                                    interests of creditors as a whole, or a class of creditors as a whole.

               RG 16.60       Notwithstanding the statutory timeframes, we strongly encourage liquidators
                              to lodge the initial statutory report within four months of the date of
                              appointment. We also encourage voluntary administrators, receivers and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                   Page 18
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                              managing controllers, to report within four months of the date of
                              appointment if their appointment will extend beyond four months.

                                    Note: We consider this timeframe is appropriate for liquidators given their separate
                                    obligation to report to creditors within three months of appointment: see s70-50 of Sch 2.

               RG 16.61       Lodging within four months enables us to promptly receive information
                              about possible offences and misconduct and, where appropriate, either
                              request a supplementary statutory report, commence an investigation or take
                              further action.

               RG 16.62       When we decide whether to investigate or take further action in relation to a
                              report, we consider:
                              (a)   the passage of time since the misconduct occurred;
                              (b)   the availability of witnesses to give evidence; and
                              (c)   whether documentary evidence is in our possession, or likely to become
                                    available, to prove the alleged misconduct.

                                    Note: INFO 151 sets out our approach to enforcement.

               RG 16.63       Our ability to take action for older misconduct can be limited or have less
                              impact simply due to the passage of time. Further, with the passage of time
                              the reliability of witnesses to give accurate evidence can also be impacted.

               RG 16.64       Timely lodgement may also assist external administrators and controllers to
                              manage the cost of investigation and reporting.


                              Timeframe for lodging the supplementary statutory report

               RG 16.65       There is no specific timeframe specified in the Corporations Act for lodging
                              the supplementary statutory report.

               RG 16.66       We strongly encourage an external administrator or controller to lodge the
                              report within three months of:
                              (a)   lodging the initial statutory report; or
                              (b)   receiving a request from ASIC to prepare the supplementary statutory
                                    report, if applicable.

                                    Note: If a report is prepared with funding from the Assetless Administration Fund, the
                                    report should be prepared within the timeframe specified in the grant agreement.

               RG 16.67       We consider that this timeframe will generally be achievable for an external
                              administrator or controller based on the level of inquiries expected to be
                              undertaken. Again, the timely provision of information to ASIC is important
                              and assists us to commence an investigation or take further action, where
                              appropriate.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                           Page 19
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




               RG 16.68       We recognise that in some cases external administrators and controllers may
                              need additional time to lodge the report. For example, public examinations
                              or litigation may result in further information and a decision to lodge the
                              report at a later time. It may be appropriate to report to ASIC as and when
                              information becomes available.



How to lodge the reports
               RG 16.69       Initial statutory reports and supplementary statutory reports should be
                              submitted electronically through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.

               RG 16.70       Electronic lodgement allows us to:
                              (a)   capture data in a consistent, structured and timely manner; and
                              (b)   quickly analyse information provided by external administrators and
                                    controllers and initiate regulatory and enforcement responses where
                                    appropriate.

               RG 16.71       Where an external administrator or controller is, for good reason, unable to
                              lodge through the ASIC Regulatory Portal, we may accept a report in paper
                              form if it includes the same information as requested in the online report.
                              A copy of the paper form should be sent to ISRandSSR.Questions@asic.gov.au.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                   Page 20
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




E          How ASIC uses initial statutory reports and
           supplementary statutory reports


                               Key points

                               We may investigate matters raised in reports of possible offences and
                               misconduct lodged by external administrators and controllers.

                               We cannot act on every report of possible offences and misconduct. We
                               consider a range of factors when deciding whether to investigate, and what
                               enforcement action to take, if any, in relation to reports lodged by external
                               administrators and controllers.

                               We also use information from these reports for other regulatory, statistical
                               and intelligence purposes.




How we use information in reports lodged under this guide
               RG 16.72       We use the information in reports of possible offences and misconduct to:
                              (a)   decide whether further action is required in relation to the affairs of an
                                    insolvent company;
                              (b)   identify areas for future regulatory action or to provide information
                                    and/or guidance; and
                              (c)   collate information and use it for statistical purposes. We publish these
                                    insolvency statistics on our website.

               RG 16.73       Our decision about whether further action is required in relation to the affairs
                              of a company is assisted by the provision of specific and timely information.



Use of the information for enforcement or regulatory action
               RG 16.74       Under s13 or 15 of the ASIC Act, we may investigate matters raised in
                              reports of possible offences and misconduct lodged by external
                              administrators and controllers and may take one or more of the following
                              actions:
                              (a)   institute enforcement proceedings against a person (by commencing
                                    appropriate civil, criminal or administrative proceedings);
                              (b)   release information to a more appropriate law enforcement agency in
                                    accordance with s127 of the ASIC Act;
                              (c)   release (under s25 of the ASIC Act) copies of transcripts of relevant
                                    examinations conducted under s19 of the ASIC Act, and of related



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                   Page 21
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                                    books, to the lawyer of an external administrator or controller or
                                    another person who is conducting proceedings, or is contemplating
                                    them in good faith; or
                              (d)   having considered the report, inform the external administrator or
                                    controller that the matter is one in respect of which we do not intend to
                                    institute proceedings or release information.

                                    Note 1: An external administrator or controller can take action under the general law
                                    and/or s534 (if they are the liquidator of the company) by commencing legal
                                    proceedings in relation to the misconduct. In addition, they may apply under div 1 of
                                    Pt 5.9 (if they are an eligible applicant) for an officer or former officer of the company
                                    to which they have been appointed (or a person who may have been guilty of
                                    misconduct in relation to the company) to be examined in court about the company’s
                                    examinable affairs.

                                    Note 2: A liquidator may only begin a prosecution under s534 if ASIC has informed the
                                    liquidator that it appears to ASIC that the matter is not one in respect of which a
                                    prosecution ought to be begun. The liquidator must receive a statement from ASIC to
                                    this effect before proceeding.

               RG 16.75       We cannot act on every report of possible offences and misconduct. Factors
                              we consider when deciding whether to investigate, and what enforcement
                              action to take, if any, vary according to the nature and circumstances of the
                              suspected misconduct. Relevant factors are set out in INFO 151.

               RG 16.76       Information we receive in statutory reports from external administrators and
                              controllers, whether we take further action or not, may inform other
                              regulatory operations and be used to:
                              (a)   select future cases for investigation and enforcement action (including
                                    sharing of intelligence with other enforcement agencies and taskforces
                                    where appropriate and in accordance with the legislative requirements
                                    for sharing that information);
                              (b)   identify future targets for surveillance and inspection; and
                              (c)   shape future education campaigns or inform our public
                                    communications, warnings and guidance.



Use of information for intelligence and statistical purposes
               RG 16.77       We use the information we receive in initial statutory reports for intelligence
                              and statistical purposes. If we publish statistics based on the information we
                              receive in a report, the data is collated in an aggregated and anonymous form
                              and does not identify information about an individual company or person.

                                    Note: For example, information from the initial statutory reports is aggregated and
                                    published as Series 3 statistics on the ASIC website.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                           Page 22
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




               RG 16.78       The information we gather and publish from the initial statutory reports
                              provides valuable information to stakeholders about the size and nature of
                              company failures in Australia.

               RG 16.79       To ensure that the information we review and publish is accurate and
                              current, we encourage external administrators and controllers to lodge the
                              initial statutory report within four months from appointment: see Section D.

               RG 16.80       In addition to using supplementary statutory reports to decide whether
                              further regulatory or enforcement action is required, we also extract
                              information and use it for intelligence purposes.



Release of information
               RG 16.81       The statutory reports lodged with ASIC are not available on ASIC’s public
                              register and the fact that the reports may have been lodged is also not
                              publicly available.

               RG 16.82       However, reports and other documents that are not made available on ASIC
                              public registers may be disclosed to persons outside of ASIC in limited
                              circumstances, for example:
                              (a)   during ASIC-initiated enforcement proceedings;
                              (b)   where compelled by compulsory notice (e.g. by subpoena); or
                              (c)   in response to a request made under the Freedom of Information Act 1982
                                    (FOI request); or
                              (d)   a release otherwise permitted under the ASIC Act.

                                    Note 1: Before disclosing a report of possible misconduct under an FOI request, we will
                                    generally consult with the external administrator or controller to enable them to make
                                    submissions about the FOI request.

                                    Note 2: For further information on the release of information in accordance with the ASIC
                                    Act, see Regulatory Guide 103 Confidentiality and release of information (RG 103).

               RG 16.83       We will also share intelligence obtained from the statutory reports with other
                              agencies as appropriate and permitted under law.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                        Page 23
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




Key terms


                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               ASIC                       Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                   Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                          2001

                               ASIC public registers      The prescribed registers ASIC maintains under the
                                                          Corporations Act, including registers of companies,
                                                          auditors, liquidators and company charges, which are
                                                          accessible by the public

                               controller                 For the purposes of this guide, a receiver or managing
                                                          controller appointed in relation to property of a
                                                          corporation

                               controller                 Where a receiver or managing controller has been
                               appointment                appointed in relation to property of a corporation

                               Corporations Act           Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of the Act

                               external                   For the purposes of this guide, a voluntary administration,
                               administration             and liquidation (but not including a provisional liquidation)

                               external administrator     A voluntary administrator and liquidator (but not including
                                                          a provisional liquidator)

                               reg 5.5.05 (for            A provision of the Corporations Regulations 2001 (in this
                               example)                   example, number 5.5.05)

                               registered liquidator      A person registered by ASIC under Div 20-30 of Sch 2

                               RG 16 (for example)        A regulatory guide (in this example, numbered 16)

                               s422 (for example)         A section of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                          numbered 422), unless otherwise specified

                               Sch 2                      Schedule 2 of the Corporations Act

                               voluntary                  An administrator of a company but not of a deed of
                               administrator              company arrangement




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                    Page 24
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




Related information


                              Headnotes

                              external administrators, reporting obligations, initial statutory reports,
                              possible offences and misconduct by a company, dividends of 50 cents in the
                              dollar, supplementary statutory reports, controllers, managing controllers,
                              receivers, receivers and managers, voluntary administrators, administrators
                              of a deed of company arrangement, liquidators, provisional liquidators,
                              qualified privilege


                              Regulatory guides

                              RG 103 Confidentiality and release of information

                              RG 258 Registered liquidators: Registration, ongoing obligations,
                              disciplinary actions and insurance requirements


                              Information sheets

                              INFO 29 External administration, controller appointments and schemes of
                              arrangement: Most commonly lodged forms

                              INFO 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement


                              Consultation papers

                              CP 377 Guidance for reporting by external administrators and controllers:
                              Updates to RG 16


                              Reports

                              REP 793 Response to submissions on CP 377 Guidance for reporting by
                              external administrators and controllers


                              Legislation

                              Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001, s13, 15, 19, 25, 127

                              Corporations Act 2001, s286, 422, 426, 431, 438D, 442E, 477(3). 500AE,
                              530A–530C, 533, 534, 535, 545, 597

                              Corporations Regulations 2001, reg 5.5.05

                              Freedom of Information Act 1982




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                   Page 25
            REGULATORY GUIDE 16: External administrators and controllers: Reporting of possible offences and misconduct




                              Cases

                              Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Bettles [2023] FCA 975

                              Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Robert John Edge
                              [2007] VSC 170

                              Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Wily & Hurst [2019]
                              NSWSC 521

                              Joubert and Members of the Companies Auditors and Liquidators
                              Disciplinary Board [2018] AATA 944

                              Murdaca v Australian Securities and Investments Commission [2009]
                              FCAFC 92




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2025                                                   Page 26
