REGULATORY GUIDE 72


Foreign securities:
Disclosure relief

October 2025




About this guide
This guide is for foreign entities and their advisers involved in the offer of
foreign securities to Australian investors.

This guide outlines the relief we have granted from Chs 6D and 7 of the
Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) for offers of foreign securities and
interests.
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in October 2025 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 72, issued 2 September 2015, updated
                                     3 December 2021
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 72, issued 3 July 2007, reissued 18 June
                                     2009
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 72A, issued 15 January 1997, updated
                                     4 August 1997
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 72, issued 6 December 1993, updated
                                     23 January 1995 and 12 February 1996


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                Page 2
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




Contents

                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Relief from the disclosure provisions ................................................. 4
                                    Other relief and guidance on foreign offers ....................................... 5
                             B      Rights issues of foreign securities ................................................ 6
                                    Relief for the same class of securities ............................................... 6
                                    Case-by-case relief for a different class of securities ........................ 7
                                    Rationale for granting relief for rights issues ..................................... 7
                             C      Foreign scrip bids and schemes of arrangement ........................ 8
                                    Disclosure relief for foreign scrip bids................................................ 8
                                    Disclosure relief for schemes of arrangement ................................. 10
                                    Incidental relief for advisers and investors ...................................... 11
                                    Licensing relief ................................................................................. 11
                             D      Foreign entities making small-scale personal offers ................. 12
                                    Relief for small-scale personal offers .............................................. 12
                                    Case-by-case relief for securities about to be quoted ..................... 13
                             E      Advertising and publicity of offers .............................................. 14
                                    Relief for authors and publishers ..................................................... 14
                                    Relief for entities listed on an approved foreign market .................. 15
                             F      Other relief and guidance ............................................................. 16
                                    Employee share schemes ............................................................... 16
                                    Case-by-case procedural relief ........................................................ 16
                                    Other relevant regulatory guides ..................................................... 17
                             G      Approved foreign markets ............................................................ 18
                                    Current approved foreign markets ................................................... 18
                                    Criteria for approving other foreign markets .................................... 18
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 20
                             Related information ............................................................................... 22




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                                       Page 3
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               In general, foreign entities that offer securities in Australia need to comply
                               with Chs 6D or 7 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act): see
                               RG 72.1.

                               We have granted relief from these provisions in certain circumstances—in
                               particular, where the cost of compliance would be disproportionate to the
                               regulatory benefit: see RG 72.3–RG 72.4.




Relief from the disclosure provisions
              RG 72.1        The Corporations Act generally requires a prospectus or Product Disclosure
                             Statement (PDS) for an offer of securities received in Australia (unless an
                             exemption applies). This requirement applies regardless of the place of
                             incorporation of the offeror.

              RG 72.2        We consider that relief from the requirement to prepare an Australian
                             prospectus or PDS may be appropriate where:
                             (a)   a foreign offeror has complied with a disclosure regime offering similar
                                   levels of investor protection to the Australian disclosure requirements; or
                             (b)   very few offers are made to Australian investors.

              RG 72.3        We have granted conditional relief for:
                             (a)   rights issues by foreign companies where the securities are in the same
                                   class as those already held by Australian investors (see Section B);
                             (b)   foreign scrip bids and schemes of arrangement (see Section C); and
                             (c)   foreign entities making 20 or fewer offers in Australia in any 12-month
                                   period (see Section D).

              RG 72.4        Much of the relief referred to in this guide applies where the relevant foreign
                             securities are quoted on an ‘approved foreign market’. This definition is
                             notionally inserted in the Corporations Act by ASIC Corporations
                             (Definition of Approved Foreign Market) Instrument 2017/669. Section G
                             sets out the criteria for approving a market as an approved foreign market.


                             Rationale for relief

              RG 72.5        Disclosure relief for offers of foreign securities enables Australian investors
                             to participate in offers that might not otherwise be extended to them because
                             of the time and expense involved in complying with the regulatory
                             requirements of multiple jurisdictions.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                Page 4
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




              RG 72.6        We have granted relief for rights issues by foreign companies and scrip
                             offers under foreign bids and schemes of arrangement because, after a
                             person acquires an interest in a foreign entity, they accept that foreign law
                             largely governs their relationship with the entity. Given the potential
                             disadvantage to Australian investors if they are excluded from such
                             transactions, we think it is appropriate to grant relief provided that suitable
                             investor protection measures are in place.



Other relief and guidance on foreign offers
              RG 72.7        We have also granted relief from the advertising restrictions for
                             advertisements and other notices that are aimed at foreign markets and only
                             incidentally published in Australia: see Section E.

              RG 72.8        Section F sets out other regulatory guidance and relief we have granted that
                             may be relevant for offers of foreign securities. This includes relief for
                             foreign collective investment schemes and employee share schemes.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                Page 5
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




B          Rights issues of foreign securities

                               Key points

                               We have granted conditional relief from the prospectus provisions for a
                               foreign company to issue securities in the same class as those already held
                               by Australian investors: see RG 72.9–RG 72.11.

                               We have also granted relief so that investors may on-sell these securities
                               without restriction: see RG 72.12.

                               We may grant case-by-case relief for foreign companies to issue securities
                               in a different class: see RG 72.13.



Relief for the same class of securities
              RG 72.9        ASIC Corporations (Foreign Rights Issues) Instrument 2025/611 grants
                             relief from Pts 6D.2 and 6D.3 of the Corporations Act to foreign companies
                             conducting renounceable or non-renounceable rights issues of securities of the
                             same class as those held by their Australian shareholders. The instrument also
                             exempts shortfall offers. These are offers of the securities that were not taken
                             up under the rights issue and which are offered to holders within two months.

              RG 72.10       Relief under this instrument is subject to the following conditions:
                             (a)   the company must reasonably believe that the offer is made in accordance
                                   with regulatory requirements in the primary foreign jurisdiction;
                                   Note: ‘Primary foreign jurisdiction’ means the place of the approved foreign market on
                                   which the securities in the offer class are quoted or, if the securities in the offer class are
                                   quoted on more than one approved foreign market, the place of the approved foreign
                                   market where it is reasonably expected the largest number of offers will be received.

                             (b)   the rights issue must be a pro rata offer, although fractional entitlements
                                   may either be rounded up or down;
                             (c)   the terms and conditions of the offers made to Australian offerees must
                                   be no less favourable than those made to other offerees in the same class;
                             (d)   the securities must have been quoted on an approved foreign market at
                                   all times in the three months before the offer, and must not have been
                                   suspended from trading on that market for more than five trading days;
                                   Note: See ASIC Instrument 2017/669 for the definition of ‘approved foreign market’.

                             (e)   the number of securities offered to Australian residents must be no more
                                   than 10% of the number of securities offered to all offerees; and
                             (f)   Australian offerees must be given disclosure for the offer at or before
                                   the time the offer is made. The disclosure must be in English (if
                                   available) or it must be a version of the document that is given or made
                                   available to offerees in the primary foreign jurisdiction.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                           Page 6
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




              RG 72.11       Whether securities are held by Australian residents for the purposes of the
                             10% limit will be determined by reference to:
                             (a)   the address of the beneficial owner (as included in publicly available
                                   reports that have been given to a relevant regulator or market operator
                                   of the approved foreign market) or as otherwise known to the foreign
                                   company; or
                             (b)   the address of the registered holder as recorded in the foreign
                                   company’s register of members (if the address of the beneficial owner is
                                   not included in publicly available reports or otherwise known to the
                                   foreign company).

                                   Note: See the definition of ‘Australian resident’ in ASIC Instrument 2025/611.


                             On-sale relief

              RG 72.12       Section 707 of the Corporations Act restricts the on-sale of securities issued
                             without disclosure within 12 months of their issue. ASIC Instrument
                             2025/611 grants relief from this restriction so that securities issued under the
                             rights issue can be freely on-sold.



Case-by-case relief for a different class of securities
              RG 72.13       We may grant case-by-case relief for a foreign company to issue securities in
                             a different class to those already held by Australian investors on similar
                             conditions to those in ASIC Instrument 2025/611. Applications should
                             address the criteria set out in Regulatory Guide 51 Applications for relief
                             (RG 51).



Rationale for granting relief for rights issues
              RG 72.14       The requirement for an Australian prospectus may discourage a foreign
                             company with a small percentage of Australian shareholders from extending
                             a rights issue to those shareholders. This may result in a dilution of those
                             shareholders’ interests.

              RG 72.15       When a person acquires shares in a foreign company, they should accept that
                             foreign law will largely govern the relationship with the company. Provided
                             suitable safeguards are in place, we consider it is appropriate to grant relief
                             from the Australian prospectus provisions to reflect this.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                     Page 7
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




C          Foreign scrip bids and schemes of
           arrangement

                               Key points

                               We have granted conditional prospectus and PDS relief for scrip offered as
                               consideration under a foreign takeover bid where Australian residents hold
                               no more than 10% of the bid class securities: see RG 72.16–RG 72.21.

                               We have also granted relief from:
                               • the PDS requirement for the offer and issue of financial products under
                                 a Pt 5.1 scheme (see RG 72.22); and
                               • the prospectus and PDS requirement where securities are offered under
                                 a scheme of arrangement regulated in Hong Kong, Malaysia, New
                                 Zealand, Singapore, South Africa or the United Kingdom (see
                                 RG 72.23–RG 72.24).

                               We have also granted licensing relief for general advice contained in
                               documents required under a foreign regulated control transaction: see
                               RG 72.28–RG 72.30.




Disclosure relief for foreign scrip bids
              RG 72.16       A foreign scrip bid is a bid regulated in a foreign jurisdiction where scrip
                             forms all or part of the consideration being offered for securities in the bid
                             class. Without relief, an offer of scrip to Australian holders under a foreign
                             scrip bid may require a prospectus or a PDS.

              RG 72.17       ASIC Corporations (Foreign Scrip Bids) Instrument 2025/612 grants relief
                             from the prospectus and PDS provisions in Pts 6D.2 and 6D.3 and s1012A,
                             1012B and 1012C of the Corporations Act for offers of securities, interests in
                             a managed investment scheme or shares in a CCIV under a foreign scrip bid
                             where:
                             (a)   Australian residents hold no more than 10% of the bid class securities
                                   or interests (determined at a time, fixed by the bidder, in the 30-day
                                   period before offers are first made under the takeover);
                             (b)   the bid class securities or interests are quoted on an approved foreign
                                   market and the takeover is regulated by the law or other rules that apply
                                   in that jurisdiction;

                                   Note 1:See ASIC Instrument 2017/669 for the definition of ‘approved foreign market’.

                                   Note 2: The scrip offered as consideration for the acquisition of bid class securities or
                                   interests does not have to be in a class that is quoted on an approved foreign market.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                        Page 8
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




                             (c)   if foreign regulatory requirements require disclosure, Australian offerees
                                   are given an English version of the disclosure (if available) or a version
                                   of the document given to offerees in the eligible foreign country;

                                   Note: ‘Eligible foreign country’ means the jurisdiction where the relevant approved
                                   foreign market is located.

                             (d)   the offer made to Australian offerees is on terms that are at least as
                                   favourable as offers that are made to foreign offerees; and
                             (e)   the person relying on the relief reasonably believes the bid complies
                                   with the relevant foreign regulatory requirements.

                                   Note: Where an Australian financial services (AFS) licensee who is not an associate of
                                   the bidder wishes to rely on relief from s1012A, the licensee must have no reason to
                                   suspect that the foreign scrip bid is not made in accordance with the relevant foreign
                                   regulatory requirements.

              RG 72.18       Whether securities or interests are held by Australian residents for the
                             purposes of the 10% limit will be determined by reference to:
                             (a)   the address of the beneficial owner (as included in publicly available
                                   reports that have been given to a relevant regulator or market operator
                                   of the approved foreign market) or as otherwise known to the bidder; or
                             (b)   the address of the registered holder as recorded in the register of
                                   members (if the address of the beneficial owner is not included in
                                   publicly available reports or otherwise known to the bidder).

                                   Note: See the definition of ‘Australian resident’ in ASIC Instrument 2025/612.


                             On-sale relief

              RG 72.19       Sections 707 and 1012C of the Corporations Act restrict the on-sale of
                             securities and interests issued without disclosure within 12 months of their
                             issue. ASIC Instrument 2025/612 grants relief to investors from this
                             restriction so that securities and interests issued under a foreign scrip bid can
                             be freely on-sold.


                             Rationale for granting disclosure relief

              RG 72.20       The requirement to prepare an Australian prospectus or PDS may deter a
                             bidder from offering securities or interests to Australian members of a target
                             as an alternative to cash consideration. This means that Australian members
                             may be deprived of the ability to receive their consideration in the form of
                             securities or interests.

              RG 72.21       For reasons of international comity, Australian regulatory requirements
                             should not impose excessive costs or obstacles on foreign business
                             transactions unless there is a clear need for Australian investor protection.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                     Page 9
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




                             The requirement to prepare a prospectus or PDS imposes substantial costs on
                             what is primarily a foreign business transaction. These costs are not justified
                             when the transaction is subject to comparable regulation in another
                             jurisdiction, and only a small proportion of the target securities or interests
                             are held by Australian investors. The Australian investors have accepted the
                             jurisdiction of foreign law by investing on a foreign market.



Disclosure relief for schemes of arrangement

                             PDS relief for Pt 5.1 schemes of arrangement

              RG 72.22       ASIC Corporations (Compromises or Arrangements) Instrument 2025/613
                             grants relief from provisions in Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act that would
                             require a PDS where financial products are offered or issued under a
                             compromise or scheme of arrangement under Pt 5.1 (Pt 5.1 scheme). This
                             relief is analogous to the prospectus exemption in s708(17) for Pt 5.1
                             schemes and is granted on the basis that investors do not need a PDS in
                             addition to the disclosure provided under Pt 5.1.


                             Disclosure relief for foreign schemes of arrangement

              RG 72.23       ASIC Instrument 2025/613 grants relief from the requirement to prepare a
                             prospectus or PDS for offers of securities or financial products made under a
                             foreign scheme of arrangement that is regulated in a similar manner to
                             Pt 5.1. For more information about this relief, see Regulatory Guide 188
                             Disclosure in reconstructions (RG 188).

              RG 72.24       The jurisdictions covered by the relief are Hong Kong, Malaysia, New
                             Zealand, Singapore, South Africa and the United Kingdom. RG 188 also
                             discusses circumstances where we may grant case-by-case relief for a
                             scheme of arrangement in other foreign jurisdictions.


                             On-sale relief

              RG 72.25       We have also granted relief from the on-sale restrictions in s707
                             and 1012C so that securities or financial products issued in reliance on
                             ASIC Instrument 2025/613 can be freely on-sold.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                               Page 10
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




Incidental relief for advisers and investors
              RG 72.26       Advisers who make a personal recommendation for an investor to acquire
                             scrip issued in reliance on ASIC Instrument 2025/612 or ASIC Instrument
                             2025/613 can rely on relief in those instruments from the requirement to give
                             a PDS in s1012A.

              RG 72.27       Investors who are issued securities without disclosure in reliance on the
                             instruments in RG 72.26 can rely on the relief in those instruments from the
                             on-sale restrictions in s707(3) and 1012C(6) of the Corporations Act.



Licensing relief
              RG 72.28       ASIC Corporations (Financial Product Advice—Exempt Documents)
                             Instrument 2016/356 grants relief from the requirement to obtain an AFS
                             licence for general advice contained in a document that is required under a
                             foreign regulated control transaction. This relief applies generally to control
                             transactions that are regulated in the jurisdiction of an approved foreign
                             market and is not limited to control transactions that satisfy the requirements
                             for disclosure relief referred to in RG 72.17.

              RG 72.29       ASIC Instrument 2016/356 also grants licensing relief for general advice that
                             is contained in an explanatory statement for a scheme of arrangement that is
                             regulated in Hong Kong, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore, South Africa
                             or the United Kingdom. For more information about this relief, see RG 188.


                             Rationale for granting licensing relief

              RG 72.30       If a person provides a document to Australian residents in connection with
                             a foreign regulated control transaction, this may be providing general advice.
                             Without relief, the person providing the document may need to obtain an
                             AFS licence for the provision of any general advice contained in the
                             document.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                               Page 11
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




D          Foreign entities making small-scale personal
           offers

                               Key points

                               We have granted relief from the prospectus and PDS provisions for offers
                               of securities or interests in a managed investment scheme that are in a
                               class that is quoted on an approved foreign market where:
                               • the offer is a personal offer;
                               • the number of persons in Australia to whom securities or interests are
                                 issued is not more than 20 in any 12-month period; and
                               • Australian offerees are given any disclosure required in the primary
                                 foreign jurisdiction (with an English translation if the disclosure is in a
                                 foreign language) (see RG 72.31–RG 72.35).

                               We will also consider granting case-by-case relief to allow a foreign entity
                               whose securities or interests are about to be quoted to make 20 or fewer
                               offers in Australia in any 12-month period subject to additional conditions:
                               see RG 72.36.




Relief for small-scale personal offers
              RG 72.31       ASIC Corporations (Foreign Small Scale Offers) Instrument 2025/614 grants
                             prospectus and PDS relief to foreign companies that make personal offers of
                             securities or interests in a managed investment scheme in Australia if the
                             foreign company reasonably believes the offer is made in accordance with
                             foreign regulatory requirements.

              RG 72.32       An offer is a personal offer if it is not transferable and is made to a person
                             who is likely to be interested in the offer because of:
                             (a)   previous contact with the entity;
                             (b)   some professional or other connection with the company; or
                             (c)   the person’s statements or actions (which indicate that they are
                                   interested in offers of that kind).

              RG 72.33       This relief applies where:
                             (a)   the number of persons in Australia to whom securities or interests have
                                   been issued in reliance on the relief is no more than 20 in any 12-month
                                   period;
                                   Note: Our relief for foreign small-scale personal offers operates in addition to the
                                   exemption in s708(1) and 1012E of the Corporations Act. Offers made in reliance on
                                   the legislative exemption do not count towards the 20-investor limit in our relief and
                                   vice versa.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                     Page 12
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




                             (b)   the securities or interests are in a class that is quoted on an approved
                                   foreign market and trading in the class is not suspended;
                                   Note: See ASIC Instrument 2017/669 for the definition of ‘approved foreign market’.

                             (c)   at or before the time the offer is made, Australian offerees are given any
                                   document relating to the offer that would have been required to be
                                   given to them under the laws of the primary foreign jurisdiction if they
                                   received the offer in that jurisdiction;
                             (d)   if the disclosure given to Australian offerees is not in English, a
                                   certified English translation is provided; and
                             (e)   the disclosure given to Australian offerees includes or is accompanied
                                   by a statement explaining that:
                                   (i)     the documents were prepared for the purposes of compliance with
                                           foreign regulatory requirements;
                                   (ii)    the documents may not contain all the information required for
                                           Australian disclosure documents; and
                                   (iii)   the entity is not subject to the continuous disclosure requirements
                                           of the Corporations Act.

              RG 72.34       Our relief for small-scale personal offers requires any offer document to be
                             translated into English if the original disclosure is in a foreign language. This
                             is because a person who receives an offer under our relief may not have a
                             pre-existing investment with the entity, and it cannot be presumed they are
                             confident in making an investment decision when the disclosure is in a
                             foreign language.

              RG 72.35       We do not intend this relief to be a precedent for giving general relief from
                             the prospectus or PDS provisions of the Corporations Act when a foreign
                             entity wants to raise funds in Australia.



Case-by-case relief for securities about to be quoted
              RG 72.36       We will also consider granting case-by-case relief to allow a foreign entity
                             whose securities or interests are about to be quoted to make 20 or fewer
                             offers in Australia in any 12-month period. We would grant this relief on the
                             same terms as we do for entities whose securities or interests are already
                             quoted, with the following two additional conditions:
                             (a)   the entity must prepare a disclosure document that fully complies with
                                   the relevant local law in the primary foreign jurisdiction; and
                             (b)   if the securities or interests are not quoted within 14 days of the date
                                   stated in the foreign offer document, any allotment or issue to
                                   Australian offerees is void. The foreign entity must repay any money
                                   received by it under the disclosure document as soon as practicable.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                 Page 13
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




E          Advertising and publicity of offers

                               Key points

                               We have granted relief from s734 and 1018A of the Corporations Act for
                               advertisements relating to foreign securities that are only incidentally
                               published in Australia: see RG 72.37–RG 72.40.

                               We have also granted relief from s734 and 1018A for:
                               • a notice or report relating to an offer of foreign securities that are given
                                 to the market operator of an approved foreign market; or
                               • a notice or report of a general meeting of an entity listed on an approved
                                 foreign market: see RG 72.41–RG 72.42.


              RG 72.37       Sections 734(2) and 1018A of the Corporations Act set out restrictions on
                             the advertising and publicity of offers of securities in Australia. ASIC
                             Corporations (Foreign Securities—Incidental Advertising) Instrument
                             2025/615 and ASIC Corporations (Foreign Securities—Publishing Notices)
                             Instrument 2025/616 give relief from these restrictions for advertisements
                             and other notices relating to foreign securities that are only incidentally
                             circulated or published in Australia.
                                   Note: The advertisement must still comply with the law in the foreign jurisdiction and
                                   the other provisions of the Corporations Act (e.g. the s1041H prohibition on misleading
                                   and deceptive conduct).

              RG 72.38       The relief granted by these instruments is narrow and does not extend to offers
                             of securities, which must still comply with the Corporations Act. For example,
                             a foreign entity may not be able to offer or issue securities to a person in
                             Australia who responds to an advertisement covered by ASIC Instrument
                             2025/615 without first giving that person a disclosure document lodged with
                             ASIC (unless the offer is covered by a disclosure exemption).


Relief for authors and publishers
              RG 72.39       ASIC Instrument 2025/615 grants relief from s734(2) and 1018A to authors
                             and publishers who publish an advertisement or statement relating to foreign
                             securities that is incidentally published in Australia.
              RG 72.40       The relief covers advertisements and statements published in:
                             (a)   newspapers and magazines;
                             (b)   radio and television broadcasts; and
                             (c)   electronic services (including the internet) that are operated on a
                                   commercial basis and are similar to newspapers, magazines or radio or
                                   television broadcasts.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                   Page 14
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




Relief for entities listed on an approved foreign market
              RG 72.41       Section 734(7) of the Corporations Act grants a general exemption from the
                             advertising restrictions in s734(2) for certain notices given by a listed body,
                             including notices given to the market operator.

              RG 72.42       ASIC Instrument 2025/616 grants similar relief for notices given by bodies
                             listed on an approved foreign market. An advertisement or publication will
                             not contravene s734(2) if it:
                             (a)   relates to an offer of securities of a body that is listed on an approved
                                   foreign market and consists of a notice or report by the foreign entity, or
                                   one of its officers, about its affairs to the market operator; or
                             (b)   consists solely of a notice or report of a general meeting of a body that
                                   is listed on an approved foreign market.
                                   Note: See ASIC Instrument 2017/669 for the definition of ‘approved foreign market’.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                 Page 15
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




F          Other relief and guidance

                               Key points

                               Foreign entities may rely on the relief in Div 1A of Pt 7.12 of the
                               Corporations Act for employee share schemes.

                               We will consider procedural relief for offers of foreign securities on a case-
                               by-case basis: see RG 72.44–RG 72.45.

                               Some of our other regulatory guides provide guidance on disclosure relief
                               for foreign entities offering securities in Australia: see RG 72.47–
                               RG 72.52.




Employee share schemes
              RG 72.43       Foreign companies that offer interests under an employee share scheme to
                             Australian employees may rely on the relief in Div 1A of Pt 7.12 of
                             the Corporations Act.



Case-by-case procedural relief
              RG 72.44       We will consider applications for procedural relief from the prospectus
                             and PDS provisions. We will not grant relief from the general disclosure
                             requirement in s710 or the requirement for disclosure of particular fees and
                             benefits in s711(3) of the Corporations Act.

              RG 72.45       We may grant procedural relief from the prospectus and PDS provisions if
                             we are satisfied that:
                             (a)   the foreign entity issuing the disclosure has complied with a
                                   requirement in the jurisdiction of an approved foreign market that is
                                   comparable to the provision in the Corporations Act from which it is
                                   seeking relief;
                             (b)   practical difficulties will arise if the relief is not granted;
                             (c)   investor protection will not be reduced if the relief is granted; and
                             (d)   the securities in the offer or invitation are in a class of securities
                                   quoted, or reasonably expected soon to be quoted, on an approved
                                   foreign market.

              RG 72.46       ASIC’s general policy on granting individual relief is set out in RG 51.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                               Page 16
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




Other relevant regulatory guides
              RG 72.47       The following regulatory guides may also be relevant to disclosure by
                             foreign entities offering securities in Australia.


                             Foreign collective investment schemes

              RG 72.48       Regulatory Guide 178 Foreign collective investment schemes (RG 178)
                             describes the relief we grant for foreign collective investment schemes.
                             This includes relief for rights issues made by foreign collective investment
                             schemes.


                             Electronic prospectuses

              RG 72.49       Foreign companies seeking to use an electronic prospectus in Australia
                             should consult Regulatory Guide 107 Fundraising: Facilitating electronic
                             offers of securities (RG 107).


                             Foreign schemes of arrangement

              RG 72.50       As mentioned in Section C, RG 188 describes the prospectus and PDS relief
                             we have granted for schemes of arrangement in certain foreign jurisdictions.


                             Mutual recognition of trans-Tasman securities offerings

              RG 72.51       The trans-Tasman mutual recognition scheme allows Australian and New
                             Zealand entities to offer financial products or interests in collective or
                             managed investment schemes in both countries using one disclosure
                             document prepared under regulation in their home country.

              RG 72.52       Entities that wish to operate under the scheme are able to comply with
                             minimal entry and ongoing requirements agreed to between the two
                             countries and prescribed in each country’s law: see Regulatory Guide 190
                             Offering financial products in New Zealand and Australia under mutual
                             recognition (RG 190).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                               Page 17
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




G          Approved foreign markets

                               Key points

                               Much of the relief referred to in this guide applies where the relevant
                               foreign securities are quoted on an ‘approved foreign market’.

                               ASIC Instrument 2017/669 defines the approved foreign markets for the
                               purposes of the relief and RG 72.59 identifies our criteria for approving a
                               market as an approved foreign market.




Current approved foreign markets
              RG 72.53       The concept of ‘approved foreign market’ is used in a number of ASIC
                             legislative instruments (each, an ‘applicable ASIC legislative instrument’),
                             including but not limited to:
                             (a)   ASIC Instrument 2025/611;
                             (b)   ASIC Instrument 2025/612;
                             (c)   ASIC Instrument 2025/614; and
                             (d)   ASIC Instrument 2025/616.

              RG 72.54       ASIC Instrument 2017/669 contains the definition of ‘approved foreign
                             market’. It inserts this definition in s 9 of the Corporations Act for persons
                             purporting to rely on an applicable ASIC legislative instrument.

              RG 72.55       We encourage issuers to consider ASIC Instrument 2017/669, as it is
                             updated from time to time.

              RG 72.56       We have approved these foreign markets because we believe they are
                             comparable to the ASX market in terms of being fair, efficient, well-
                             informed and internationally competitive.



Criteria for approving other foreign markets
              RG 72.57       We will accept applications for additional foreign markets to be included in
                             the list of approved foreign markets. Applications should address the criteria
                             in RG 72.59. An application should be accompanied by an English
                             translation of the rules of the foreign market and, if applicable, the market’s
                             policy manual.

              RG 72.58       A person other than the foreign market may make the application. An
                             application may come from a market participant or a foreign entity with
                             securities listed on the market. In this case, the application must include a
                             letter from the foreign market verifying the information given.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                               Page 18
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




              RG 72.59       When considering the approval of other foreign markets and adding them to
                             ASIC Instrument 2017/669, we will take into account whether the market:
                             (a)   is a member of the World Federation of Exchanges;
                             (b)   is internationally recognised (i.e. it has concessional treatment and
                                   recognition from other jurisdictions). In particular, we will consider
                                   whether the body applying for approval is a designated off-shore
                                   securities market under Regulation S of the Securities Act 1933 (US);
                             (c)   has rules that meet ASX’s listing and quotation, market information,
                                   regulatory, and trading and settlement principles;
                             (d)   is a key world trading centre—determined by:
                                   (i)    the market’s size relative to other exchanges in its geographic
                                          region; and
                                   (ii)   the links the market maintains with other foreign exchanges or with
                                          specific Australian industries; and
                             (e)   is overseen by a government regulatory authority.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                               Page 19
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B that
                                                         authorises a person who carries on a financial services
                                                         business to provide financial services
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s9.

                               AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                         Corporations Act
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s9.

                               approved foreign          A term defined in ASIC Corporations (Definition of
                               market                    Approved Foreign Market) Instrument 2017/669: see
                                                         RG 72.53–RG 72.55

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Instrument           An ASIC instrument (in this example numbered
                               2017/669 (for             2017/669)
                               example)

                               ASX                       ASX Limited ACN 008 624 691 or the exchange market
                                                         operated by ASX Limited

                               bid class                 The class or classes of securities the subject of a foreign
                                                         scrip bid

                               Ch 6D (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 6D), unless otherwise specified

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               foreign scrip bid         A bid regulated in a foreign jurisdiction where scrip forms
                                                         all or part of the consideration being offered in the bid
                                                         class

                               primary foreign           The place of the approved foreign market on which the
                               jurisdiction              securities in the offer class are quoted or, if the securities
                                                         in the offer class are quoted on more than one approved
                                                         foreign market, the place of the approved foreign market
                                                         where it is reasonably expected the largest number of
                                                         offers will be received

                               Product Disclosure        A document that must be given to a retail client in relation
                               Statement (PDS)           to the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance
                                                         with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: See s9 for the exact definition.

                               Pt 5.1 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                         5.1), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                  Page 20
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               RG 178 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered
                                                         178)

                               rights issue              An offering of securities by a company to all its
                                                         shareholders in proportion to their existing holdings

                               s708 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 708), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                                  Page 21
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             approved foreign markets, disclosure, foreign companies, foreign schemes of
                             arrangements, foreign scrip bids, fundraising, PDS, Product Disclosure
                             Statement, prospectus, rights issue, small-scale personal offer


                             ASIC instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Compromises or Arrangements) Instrument 2025/613

                             ASIC Corporations (Definition of Approved Foreign Market) Instrument
                             2017/669

                             ASIC Instrument (Financial Product Advice—Exempt Documents) 2016/356

                             ASIC Corporations (Foreign Rights Issues) Instrument 2025/611

                             ASIC Corporations (Foreign Scrip Bids) Instrument 2025/612

                             ASIC Corporations (Foreign Securities—Incidental Advertising) Instrument
                             2025/615

                             ASIC Corporations (Foreign Securities—Publishing Notices) Instrument
                             2025/616

                             ASIC Corporations (Foreign Small Scale Offers) Instrument 2025/614


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 107 Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities

                             RG 178 Foreign collective investment schemes

                             RG 188 Disclosure in reconstructions

                             RG 190 Offering financial products in New Zealand and Australia under
                             mutual recognition


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Chs 6D and 7; Pts 5.1, 6D.2, 6D.3, 7.9 and 7.12 Div 1A;
                             s9, 111AC, 707, 707(3), 708(1), 708(17), 710, 711(3), 734, 734(2), 734(7),
                             1012A, 1012B, 1012C, 1012C(6), 1012E, 1018A and 1041H

                             Securities Act 1933 (US), Regulation S



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                               Page 22
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 72: Foreign securities: Disclosure relief




                             Consultation papers

                             CP 67 Disclosure in reconstructions

                             CP 79 Disclosure relief for foreign scrip takeovers

                             CP 225 Remaking ASIC class orders on offers of foreign securities

                             CS 25 Proposed remake of disclosure relief for offers of foreign securities
                             and interests to Australian investors.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2025                                               Page 23
