REGULATORY GUIDE 76

Related party transactions

March 2011




About this guide
This guide sets out our guidance to promote better disclosure and
governance for related party transactions. It is designed for public
companies, responsible entities of registered managed investment schemes,
experts, public company directors and their professional advisers.
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in March 2011 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. On 27 July 2020, we updated the process
                             for submitting an application for relief in RG 76.52 and lodging meeting
                             materials in RG 76.116. We also updated the references to the regulatory
                             guides in RG 76.150.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 76, issued December 1993, updated
                                     January 1994, January 1995 and March 1997, and rebadged as a
                                     regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                             Page 2
                                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    What this guide is about .................................................................... 4
                                    Purpose of this guide ......................................................................... 5
                                    Overview of legal framework for related party transactions .............. 6
                                    Application of this guide ..................................................................... 7
                             B      Directors’ meetings—voting restrictions ...................................... 8
                                    Restrictions on voting—section 195 .................................................. 8
                                    Quorum of directors ........................................................................... 9
                                    Material personal interest ................................................................ 10
                                    ASIC’s relief powers ........................................................................ 11
                                    Content of applications and relief .................................................... 12
                                    Other obligations .............................................................................. 14
                             C      The ‘arm’s length’ exception ........................................................ 15
                                    The s210 exception and the meaning of ‘arm’s length’ ................... 15
                                    Relevant factors to consider when applying the s210 exception..... 17
                                    Seeking member approval when there is uncertainty ..................... 21
                             D      Member approval process ............................................................ 22
                                    Content of explanatory statements .................................................. 22
                                    Expert reports .................................................................................. 27
                                    ASIC’s review of meeting materials ................................................. 29
                                    Voting exclusions for resolutions at members’ meetings ................ 31
                                    ASIC’s relief powers ........................................................................ 31
                             E      Disclosure documents .................................................................. 33
                                    Disclosure to investors about related party transactions ................. 33
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 37
                             Related information ............................................................................... 39




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                                         Page 3
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               There is a risk that the interests of a related party may influence the
                               decision-making of directors to the detriment of the interests of members of
                               the entity as a whole when an entity is considering whether to enter into a
                               transaction with a related party.

                               Together with the provisions about directors’ duties, the Corporations Act
                               2001 (Corporations Act) imposes a number of protections to help manage
                               this risk, including:
                               • Div 2 of Pt 2D.1, which excludes directors of public companies with
                                 material personal interests in certain matters attending director meetings
                                 about, or voting on, these matters; and
                               • Ch 2E and Pt 5C.7, which require public companies and responsible
                                 entities of registered managed investment schemes to obtain member
                                 approval to provide a financial benefit to a related party, subject to
                                 certain exceptions.

                               This guide provides guidance for public companies and registered
                               managed investment schemes (registered schemes) on the application of
                               the Corporations Act and ASIC’s expectations in relation to various aspects
                               of related party transactions. These include the decision to enter into a
                               related party transaction, whether to seek member approval, and what
                               information to include in meeting materials for the approval of related party
                               transactions and other disclosure documents.




What this guide is about
              RG 76.1        A ‘related party transaction’ is any transaction through which a public
                             company or registered managed investment scheme provides a financial
                             benefit to a related party (such as a director, their spouse and certain other
                             relatives). Almost by definition, related party transactions involve conflicts
                             of interest because related parties are often in a position to influence the
                             decision of whether the benefit is provided to them, and the terms of its
                             provision.

              RG 76.2        This regulatory guide covers the matters set out in Table 1.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                           Page 4
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




Table 1:    Summary of our guidance on related party transactions

 What decision is being made        What our guidance covers                                         Where to find it

 Whether to enter into a related    Voting restrictions for directors at directors’ meetings and     Section B
 party transaction                  when we may give relief from these restrictions
                                      Note: This guidance applies when a director has an interest
                                      in the matter being considered at the meeting, regardless of
                                      whether the matter is a related party transaction.

 Whether to seek member             The ‘arm’s length’ exception in s210, including factors to       Section C
 approval                           consider when applying this exception

 What to include in notices of      The requirements of s218 and 219, the focus of our               Section D
 meeting and explanatory            review of meeting materials and the exercise of our
 statements (meeting materials)     powers to shorten the 14-day review period or issue
 if member approval is sought       comments on the meeting materials

 Which votes to count at a          Voting exclusions for related parties at members’                Section D
 members’ meeting                   meetings and when we may give relief from the relevant
                                    provisions

 What to include about related      The content of other disclosures to investors (including         Section E
 party transactions in other        prospectuses, Product Disclosure Statements (PDSs)
 disclosures                        and takeover documents)




Purpose of this guide
              RG 76.3        This guide aims to encourage transparency and best practice in the market,
                             with a view to facilitating informed member decisions. It sets out our views
                             about the type of information that is material to member decisions.

              RG 76.4        In relation to disclosure about related party transactions, we seek to promote
                             informed decision-making by:
                             (a)   members of public companies and registered schemes, when deciding
                                   how to vote on proposed related party transactions; and
                             (b)   investors considering a new or changed level of investment in entities
                                   that have established and ongoing arrangements with related parties.

              RG 76.5        This guide is also intended to promote consistent market practice for the
                             application of the arm’s length exception from the requirement to seek
                             member approval under Ch 2E.

              RG 76.6        In addition, we clarify in this guide some of our expectations in relation to
                             the procedures under the Corporations Act for directors’ meetings and
                             members’ meetings. This guide is intended to provide useful information to
                             persons who might wish to request that we exercise our relief powers
                             concerning material personal interests of directors and member approval of
                             related party transactions.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                    Page 5
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




Overview of legal framework for related party transactions
              RG 76.7        The objective of the related party provisions in Ch 2E and Pt 5C.7 is to
                             protect the interests of members of public companies and registered schemes
                             by requiring member approval for giving financial benefits that could
                             endanger members’ interests: s207 and 601LB.

                             Member approval

              RG 76.8        Under s208, for a public company or an entity it controls to give a financial
                             benefit to a related party of the public company:
                             (a)   the company’s members must approve the transaction in the way set out
                                   in s217–227; or
                             (b)   giving the financial benefit must fall within an exception set out in
                                   s210–216.

              RG 76.9        Directors of companies also have statutory duties (s180–184) and common
                             law duties. These duties apply regardless of whether a transaction receives
                             member approval in accordance with the Corporations Act (s230).

              RG 76.10       Similar restrictions apply when a registered scheme provides a financial
                             benefit to a related party. Part 5C.7 applies the related party provisions in
                             Ch 2E to registered schemes, subject to some modifications to take into
                             account the different features of registered schemes.

              RG 76.11       Section 601LC modifies s208 so that member approval in accordance with
                             s217–227 is required if an exception in s210–212, 215 or 216 does not apply,
                             where:
                             (a)   the benefit is given by any of the responsible entity, an entity it controls,
                                   its agent or a person it engages;
                             (b)   the benefit is given out of scheme property or could endanger scheme
                                   property; and
                             (c)   the benefit is given to any of the responsible entity, an entity it controls,
                                   its agent or a person it engages, or a related party of any of those persons.

              RG 76.12       This is in addition to the responsible entities’ obligations to act in the best
                             interests of members: s601FC(1)(c).

                             Exceptions
              RG 76.13       Member approval is generally not required for:
                             (a)   transactions that are on arm’s length terms (s210);
                             (b)   benefits that are reasonable remuneration or reimbursement of officers’
                                   and employees’ expenses (s211); and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                              Page 6
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             (c)   certain other transactions (s212–215) or financial benefits given under a
                                   court order (s216).

                                   Note: Sections 213 and 214 do not apply for registered schemes.

              RG 76.14       The arm’s length exception in s210 provides that member approval is not
                             needed to give a financial benefit on terms that would be reasonable in the
                             circumstances if the public company and the related party were dealing at arm’s
                             length, or on terms that are less favourable to the related party than these terms.

              RG 76.15       If giving the financial benefit to the related party does not come within any
                             of the exceptions, member approval must be obtained by using the procedure
                             set out in s217–227.



Application of this guide

                             Public companies and registered schemes
              RG 76.16       In this guide a reference to a ‘public company’ or a ‘company’ is a reference
                             to a public company as defined in s9 of the Corporations Act. The definition
                             of public company, being a company other than a proprietary company, is
                             expanded for the purposes of s195 and Ch 2E to include bodies corporate
                             (other than prescribed bodies corporate) that are:
                             (a)   incorporated in a State or internal Territory, but not under the
                                   Corporations Act; and
                             (b)   included in the official list of a prescribed financial market.
                             However, for the purposes of Ch 2E, the s9 definition does not include a
                             company that does not have ‘Limited’ after its name because of s150 or 151.

              RG 76.17       A reference to a ‘registered scheme’ is to a registered managed investment
                             scheme. A reference to a PDS is to a PDS prepared for a registered scheme other
                             than a scheme to which Div 4 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Regulations applies.

              RG 76.18       We use the words ‘entity’ and ‘member’ where the relevant guidance can
                             apply to either a public company or a registered scheme. Section B only
                             refers to ‘public company’ or ‘company’ because it applies to a public
                             company that is considering matters either in its own capacity or in its
                             capacity as the responsible entity of a registered scheme.

                             Interaction with other ASIC guidance

              RG 76.19       This guide describes our overall approach to the disclosure of related party
                             arrangements in prospectuses and PDSs (and other disclosure documents). In
                             other regulatory guides relating to specific products and/or industry sectors,
                             we have set out specific disclosure principles, benchmarks and other guidance
                             for related party arrangements: see RG 76.150. We expect this specific
                             guidance to be followed, where applicable, in conjunction with this guide.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                Page 7
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




B          Directors’ meetings—voting restrictions

                               Key points

                               Directors of public companies with certain material personal interests in a
                               matter may not vote on the matter or attend directors’ meetings while the
                               matter is being considered, unless approved by non-interested directors.

                               A quorum may not be present for a particular matter if not enough non-
                               interested directors entitled to vote are present, as required under the
                               Corporations Act or the constitution. If there is not a quorum because of the
                               application of the Corporations Act, the Act expressly provides that the
                               directors may call a general meeting to deal with the matter.

                               ASIC may declare that, despite having a material personal interest in a
                               matter, a director of a public company may be present while the relevant
                               matter is being considered at the meeting and/or vote on the matter.

                               Directors making decisions about related party transactions need to
                               consider issues other than voting restrictions.




Restrictions on voting—section 195
              RG 76.20       If a director of a public company has a material personal interest in a matter
                             being considered at a directors’ meeting, they must not:
                             (a)   be present while the matter is being considered at the meeting
                                   (s195(1)(a)); or
                             (b)   vote on the matter (s195(1)(b)).

                                   Note: See RG 76.31–RG 76.38 for a discussion about ‘material personal interest’.

              RG 76.21       In our view, the s195(1) requirement that an interested director not be
                             present and not vote applies to all meetings of the board, however held.

              RG 76.22       We apply s195(1) on the basis that ‘meeting’ includes any procedure by
                             which the board or the directors resolve any matter. For example, we
                             consider that the prohibition on voting extends to resolutions of a board
                             made without a meeting (i.e. circular or circulating resolutions). Attributing
                             a narrow meaning to ‘meeting’ would allow directors with material personal
                             interests to do what the section is designed to prevent them from doing
                             (i.e. vote) and would deny the section its intended operation.

              RG 76.23       Section 195(1) also applies to meetings of directors other than board
                             meetings, such as audit committee (or other committee) meetings.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                     Page 8
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             Participation for certain types of material personal interest

              RG 76.24       The prohibition in s195(1) does not apply where the interest does not need to
                             be disclosed under s191. Section 191(2) sets out various types of interest that
                             do not need to be disclosed.


                             Participation with approval of other directors

              RG 76.25       The prohibition in s195(1) does not apply where the board has passed a
                             resolution:
                             (a)   specifying the director, the nature and extent of the director’s interest in
                                   the matter, and its relation to the affairs of the company (s195(2)(a));
                                   and
                             (b)   stating that the directors voting for the resolution are satisfied that the
                                   interest should not disqualify the director from voting or being present
                                   (s195(2)(b)).

              RG 76.26       Section 195(1) has the effect that no interested director may be present or
                             vote on this resolution.



Quorum of directors

                             The Corporations Act and the constitution apply

              RG 76.27       The quorum requirements for a directors’ meeting are set out in the
                             company’s constitution, or the replaceable rule set out in s248F, as
                             applicable. Directors who are not entitled to vote do not count when
                             determining whether a quorum exists.

                                   Note: See McGellin v Mount King Mining NL (1998) 144 FLR 288 (McGellin) at 306
                                   and Claremont Petroleum NL v Cummings and Fuller (1992) 110 ALR 239 (Claremont
                                   Petroleum) at 260.

              RG 76.28       When determining whether there is a quorum of directors who are entitled to
                             vote, the following should not be counted:
                             (a)   a director ineligible to vote under the constitution; and
                             (b)   a director who has a material personal interest and so is ineligible to
                                   vote under s195.

              RG 76.29       Any restrictions on directors voting contained in a company’s constitution
                             are in addition to the restrictions in s195. It is therefore possible that a
                             meeting will lack a quorum because of the combined effect of a director, or a
                             number of directors, having a material personal interest under s195, and a
                             restriction in the company’s constitution.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                              Page 9
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             General meeting of the company

              RG 76.30       If there is not a quorum of directors who are eligible to vote on a matter
                             because of the operation of s195(1), one or more directors may call a general
                             meeting and the general meeting may deal with the matter: s195(4). The
                             voting prohibition in s195(1) does not apply to a proposal to call a general
                             meeting to consider a matter in which one or more directors have a material
                             personal interest—that is, a director with a material personal interest may
                             consider and vote on such a proposal.



Material personal interest
              RG 76.31       ‘Material personal interest’ is not defined in the Corporations Act. However,
                             the word ‘material’ implies that the interest needs to be of some substance or
                             value, rather than merely a slight interest. An interest of small value does not
                             warrant further notice or inquiry: see Grand Enterprises Pty Ltd v Aurium
                             Resources Ltd (2009) 256 ALR 1 (Grand Enterprises) at 15−16.

              RG 76.32       An interest that has the capacity to influence the vote of a director would be
                             considered material. Where this is the case, the nature of the interest—that
                             is, whether it is direct, indirect, contingent or contractual, is not important.

                                   Note: See McGellin at 304 and The Bell Group Limited (in liq) v Westpac Banking
                                   Corporation (No 9) (2008) 70 ACSR 1 (Bell Group) at 261.

              RG 76.33       The prohibition on voting at and attending meetings applies when a
                             director’s interest is personal, as well as material. To be personal, an interest
                             need not be pecuniary: see Bell Group at 261 and The Queen v District
                             Council of Victor Harbour; Ex parte Costain Australia Ltd [1983] 34 SASR
                             188 at 190. However, it will not be personal if it is an interest of someone
                             else only. For example, where the interest at stake is only that of a
                             beneficiary of a trust of which the director is a trustee: see Grand
                             Enterprises at 16. An interest may not be personal if it affects a director as a
                             member of a wide group or class, such as ordinary customers of a bank or
                             shop, in the same manner and to the same degree that it affects the other
                             members of the group or class.

              RG 76.34       In interpreting the phrase, ‘material personal interest’, and in considering
                             whether the prohibition applies, companies should bear in mind that a
                             purpose of the prohibition is to minimise risks or harm to the company
                             arising from conflicts of interest.

              RG 76.35       For example, under s191(2)(a)(i), the prohibition does not apply if the
                             interest arises merely because the director is a member of a company and the
                             interest is held in common with the other members of the company. This
                             exception is probably only available where the interest is in common with all
                             members of the company as members of the company: see Grand



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                  Page 10
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             Enterprises at 18. This may be important where, for example, there are
                             classes of shares with different rights and the issue in question will affect
                             those classes differently.

              RG 76.36       Under common law, as persons in a fiduciary position, directors have duties
                             not to profit from a position of trust or place themselves in a position where
                             duty and interest might conflict. A director also has general duties under
                             s180–184. A fiduciary must not, without informed consent, promote their
                             personal interest where there is a real and substantial conflict between that
                             personal interest and the interests of those the fiduciary is bound to protect.
                             Further, a fiduciary must account for a profit or benefit if it was obtained
                             when such a conflict existed or by reason of the fiduciary taking advantage
                             of an opportunity or knowledge derived from that position. The objective of
                             these principles is to preclude fiduciaries from being swayed by
                             considerations of personal interest and from actually misusing their position
                             for personal advantage.

                                   Note: See generally Grand Enterprises at 9−10; Bell Group at 258−260; Streeter v
                                   Western Areas Exploration Pty Ltd [No 2] [2011] WASCA 17 at 20−24 and 89−103;
                                   Warman International Ltd v Dwyer (1995) 182 CLR 544 at 557; R v Byrnes & Hopwood
                                   (1995) 183 CLR 501 at 513−524; Chan v Zacharia (1984) 154 CLR 178 at 198−199;
                                   Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corp (1984) 156 CLR 41 at 103;
                                   Boardman v Phipps [1967] 2 AC 46 per Upjohn LJ and Bray v Ford [1896] AC 44 at 51;
                                   Boulting v ACTAT [1963] 2 QB 606 at 638 per Upjohn LJ and Transvaal Lands Co v New
                                   Belgium (Transvaal) Lands & Development Co [1914] 2 Ch 488 per Astbury J.

              RG 76.37       While conflict of interest principles are relevant to the concept of material
                             personal interest, s195(1) does not refer to conflict of interest as the basis of
                             having a material personal interest. Therefore, it is possible for a matter that
                             does not give rise to a conflict of interest to nonetheless be a material
                             personal interest, in which event, the board must decide if the relevant
                             director can be present and vote at the directors’ meeting. A court could find
                             that the prohibition on voting at and attending board meetings applies even if
                             the interests of the company and the director coincide.

              RG 76.38       Ultimately, whether a director has a material personal interest will depend on
                             the particular circumstances. If in doubt, directors should seek specific legal
                             advice.



ASIC’s relief powers
              RG 76.39       We have discretion under s196 to declare that, despite having a material
                             personal interest, a director of a public company may be present while a
                             relevant matter is being considered at a meeting, or vote on the matter, or
                             both, but only if we are satisfied that:
                             (a)   a quorum of directors who are present and entitled to vote cannot be
                                   obtained (s196(1)(a)); and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                Page 11
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             (b)   the matter is urgent or there is some other compelling reason for the
                                   matter to be dealt with at the directors’ meeting, rather than by a general
                                   meeting called under s195(4) (s196(1)(b)).

                             We must be satisfied that both conditions are met.

              RG 76.40       We may make a declaration subject to conditions: s196(2).

              RG 76.41       Relief under s196 is not an assurance by us that an interested director voting
                             at a meeting has not otherwise breached their common law or statutory
                             duties to the company. Also, relief from s195 does not exempt the director or
                             the company from restrictions on voting or quorum requirements in a
                             company’s constitution.



Content of applications and relief

                             First condition—No quorum (s196(1)(a))

              RG 76.42       Applications for relief under s196 must satisfy us that the quorum
                             requirement prevents a matter being dealt with at meetings. An application
                             for a declaration under s196 must set out:
                             (a)   details of the material personal interest of the director and each other
                                   director to which s195(1) applies; and
                             (b)   the reasons why the quorum requirement cannot be met, which may
                                   include the operation of the company’s constitution.

              RG 76.43       We will not reject an application as unnecessary if there is a significant risk
                             that the Corporations Act will be contravened.


                             Second condition—Urgent or compelling reasons
                             (s196(1)(b))

              RG 76.44       We must be satisfied that a general meeting is clearly inappropriate.
                             Section 196(1)(b) gives a general example of inappropriateness because the
                             matter is urgent. In the context of the paragraph, ‘urgent’ can be taken to
                             mean that a decision needs to be made (and action taken) before a general
                             meeting can be held or a quorum of directors who are eligible to vote is
                             available. If urgency is the reason for seeking relief, an applicant must
                             demonstrate that this is the case.

              RG 76.45       The paragraph allows that there may be other compelling reasons for
                             concluding that a general meeting is inappropriate. If urgency is not the
                             principal reason, the application must identify the reasons for seeking relief
                             and demonstrate why they are compelling.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                           Page 12
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




              RG 76.46       We will not prescribe other reasons that might be sufficiently compelling.
                             This is partly because the paragraph requires us to consider the reasons in the
                             context of the material personal interests in question. Depending on the
                             circumstances, other reasons may include:
                             (a)   the company has given approval in a general meeting to the basic
                                   principles or parameters of a transaction and left actual implementation
                                   to the directors;
                             (b)   the matter will ultimately be put to a general meeting of the company
                                   for approval (or forms part of, or relates to, a larger matter which will
                                   be put to a general meeting);
                             (c)   there is a need or obligation to maintain confidentiality; and
                             (d)   possessing the material personal interest is a prerequisite to appointment
                                   as a director either under the company’s constitution or as a practical
                                   matter.

              RG 76.47       Depending on the nature of the material personal interests in question, the
                             high cost of calling a general meeting may be a compelling reason.

              RG 76.48       It is implicit in s196(1)(b) that whether it is inappropriate to call a general
                             meeting must be judged according to the best interests of the company and
                             its members as a whole. Compliance with Ch 2E, if applicable, will also be a
                             relevant consideration for us.

              RG 76.49       Applications for relief should include an assessment of the benefit to the
                             company if relief is given and/or the disadvantage to the company if it is not.
                             Where relevant, applications should also include cost estimates relating to
                             the commercial benefit if relief is granted: see Regulatory Guide 51
                             Applications for relief (RG 51) at RG 51.58–RG 51.59.

              RG 76.50       An example of when we are likely to grant relief is where directors propose
                             to enter into a contract that is subject to member approval, provided that, if
                             members do not approve the contract, the company will have no liability and
                             will not forfeit any deposit.

              RG 76.51       In granting relief, we will consider the effect of such relief on the interests of
                             members, other investors and creditors.

              RG 76.52       Applications for relief should be submitted through the ASIC Regulatory
                             Portal. Fees will apply to an application. We have provided details about
                             payment options in the portal. For more information, see how you apply for
                             relief.


                             Pro forma for relief

              RG 76.53       Pro Forma 90 Voting by interested directors (PF 90) sets out the form of
                             relief we will grant under s196.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                           Page 13
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             Publication of relief

              RG 76.54       Our relief under s196 may require the company to publish a copy or notice
                             of the instrument to ensure that members know that a director prevented
                             from voting or attending meetings under the Corporations Act has been
                             granted relief by ASIC.



Other obligations
              RG 76.55       Section 195 does not negate the operation of the Corporations Act and
                             Australian accounting standards on general disclosure obligations by
                             directors of a company, or the general duties of a director under the common
                             law and s191.

                             Interested directors

              RG 76.56       We consider that a director who has a conflict of interest in relation to a
                             proposed transaction should generally not be in a position to influence
                             decision-making in relation to the transaction.

              RG 76.57       In certain circumstances, conflicted directors may have a duty to take
                             reasonable steps to protect a company from suffering serious harm by
                             entering into a transaction in which they are interested. Notifying the board
                             of an interest, abstaining from voting and not attending meetings may not
                             always be sufficient.
                                   Note: See Permanent Building Society (in liq) v Wheeler (1994) 14 ACSR 109 at 160;
                                   Fitzsimmons v The Queen (1997) 23 ACSR 355 at 358; Duke Group Ltd (in liq) v
                                   Pilmer [1999] SASC 97 at [667]−[670]; and Centofanti v Eekimitor Pty Ltd (1995) 65
                                   SASR 31 at 33.


                             The role of non-interested directors

              RG 76.58       ‘Non-interested directors’ are those directors who do not have a material
                             personal interest, or another form of conflict of interest, in respect of a
                             matter being considered by the board.

              RG 76.59       When making decisions to provide financial benefits to a related party, non-
                             interested directors should:
                             (a)   make appropriate inquiries of management and seek appropriate advice,
                                   to the extent necessary, about the proposal;
                             (b)   independently assess the information provided to them; and
                             (c)   exercise ‘special vigilance’ with ‘scrupulous concern’ to ensure the
                                   necessary corporate approvals are obtained (see Re HIH Insurance Ltd
                                   (in prov liq) and HIH Casualty and General Insurance Ltd (in prov liq);
                                   ASIC v Adler and Others (2002) 41 ACSR 72 (ASIC v Adler) at 168,
                                   183 and 250).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                  Page 14
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




C          The ‘arm’s length’ exception

                               Key points

                               One of the exceptions in Ch 2E to the requirement to obtain member
                               approval for giving a financial benefit to a related party is where the benefit
                               is given on arm’s length terms (s210).

                               When considering whether this exception applies, public companies and
                               responsible entities should consider all of the following factors:
                               • how the terms of the overall transaction compare with those of any
                                 comparable transactions on an arm’s length basis;
                               • the nature and content of the bargaining process;
                               • the impact of the transaction on the company or registered scheme;
                               • any other options available to the entity; and
                               • any expert advice received by the entity.

                               Companies and responsible entities may determine the appropriate weight
                               to give each factor in the relevant circumstances. There may be other
                               factors that are also relevant.




The s210 exception and the meaning of ‘arm’s length’
              RG 76.60       If public companies and responsible entities decide that it is in the best
                             interests of the entity to enter into a related party transaction, they will then
                             need to consider whether to obtain member approval for the purposes of
                             Ch 2E and Pt 5C.7. In doing so, they may consider whether the exception in
                             s210 applies. Many of the factors considered when deciding whether to enter
                             into the transaction will also be relevant in determining whether this
                             exception applies.

              RG 76.61       Section 210 provides that member approval is not needed to give a financial
                             benefit on terms that would be reasonable in the circumstances if the entity
                             and the related party were dealing at arm’s length, or on terms that are less
                             favourable to the related party than these terms.

                                   Note: The terms used in s210 are modified for registered schemes in accordance with
                                   s601LA.

              RG 76.62       It is important that the arm’s length exception in s210 is applied correctly so
                             that members are given an appropriate opportunity to vote on a proposed
                             related party transaction where the terms of that transaction are not truly
                             arm’s length terms.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                    Page 15
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             Meaning of ‘arm’s length’

              RG 76.63       The Corporations Act does not define ‘arm’s length’. Case law on the
                             meaning of ‘arm’s length’ suggests that this phrase refers to a relationship
                             between parties where neither bears the other any special duty or obligation,
                             they are unrelated, uninfluenced and each acts in its own interests.

                                   Note: See Orrong Strategies Pty Ltd v Village Roadshow Ltd [2007] VSC 1 (Orrong)
                                   at [723]; Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) v Australian
                                   Investors Forum Pty Ltd & Others (No 2) [2005] NSWSC 267 (ASIC v Australian
                                   Investors Forum) at [456]; and ACI Operations Pty Ltd v Berri Limited [2005] VSC 201
                                   (Berri) at [201]−[243].

              RG 76.64       This meaning of ‘arm’s length’ is supported in recent case law that applies
                             the phrase as it appears in taxation and other legislation.

                                   Note: See Granby Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1995) 129 ALR 503
                                   (Granby) at 505−508; Trustee for the Estate of the Late AW Furse No 5 Will Trust v
                                   FCT (1990) 21 ATR 1123 (Furse) at 1132; and Australian Trade Commission v WA
                                   Meat Exports Pty Ltd (1987) 75 ALR 287 at 289−292.

              RG 76.65       Specifically, ASIC v Australian Investors Forum at [456] indicates that, in
                             determining the objective standards that would characterise arm’s length
                             terms, courts should consider the transaction terms that would result if:
                             (a)   the parties to the transaction were unrelated in any way (e.g. financially,
                                   or through ties of family, affection or dependence);
                             (b)   the parties were free from any undue influence, control or pressure;
                             (c)   through its relevant decision-makers, each party was sufficiently
                                   knowledgeable about the circumstances of the transaction, sufficiently
                                   experienced in business and sufficiently well advised to be able to form
                                   a sound judgement as to what was in its interests; and
                             (d)   each party was concerned only to achieve the best available commercial
                                   result for itself in all the circumstances.

              RG 76.66       In deciding whether the exception applies, the terms on which the financial
                             benefit is given should be compared to the objective range of possible terms
                             that these unrelated, uninfluenced and self-interested parties would
                             reasonably arrive at in the circumstances: see ASIC v Australian Investors
                             Forum at [455] and Orrong at [716] and [721].

              RG 76.67       In determining the outcomes that hypothetical unrelated parties would
                             reasonably achieve, the following points should also be considered:
                             (a)   commercial prudence should be applied and expert guidance may be
                                   required in considering the terms of the related party transaction (see
                                   ASIC v Australian Investors Forum at [458]) and ascertaining common
                                   market practice; and
                             (b)   if the terms of the financial benefit are extraordinary or excessively
                                   generous, or do not include safeguards to manage conflicts of interest, it



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                   Page 16
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                                   is less likely that the terms can be considered ‘reasonable’ and so may
                                   not be arm’s length terms for the purposes of s210 (see Orrong
                                   at [730]−[734], Furse at 1134 and ASIC v Adler at 183, 244, 250).


                             Meaning of ‘in the circumstances’

              RG 76.68       For a transaction to be on ‘arm’s length’ terms within the s210(1)(a)
                             exception, its terms must be reasonable ‘in the circumstances’ if the entities
                             were ‘dealing at arm’s length’.

              RG 76.69       The ‘circumstances’ could include, but are not limited to:
                             (a)   whether there are alternative transactions open to the entity that are not
                                   with related parties (e.g. whether a related party is the only supplier of a
                                   certain component or suitable premises);
                             (b)   prevailing economic conditions and their impact on the parties and their
                                   relevant industries; and
                             (c)   any special value to the transaction (e.g. synergies available to the
                                   related party, other than those arising because it is a related party, that
                                   may not be available to other purchasers).

                                   Note: This is separate to the assessment of fair value of consideration by experts that
                                   does not take special value into account if it is only available to a particular purchaser:
                                   see Regulatory Guide 111 Content of expert reports (RG 111) at RG 111.11.

              RG 76.70       When considering the circumstances in which the hypothetical unrelated
                             parties would be transacting, we consider that, generally, all circumstances
                             of the related party transaction that have a bearing on determining the terms
                             are relevant, except for the fact of their relationship.



Relevant factors to consider when applying the s210 exception
              RG 76.71       At a minimum, public companies and responsible entities should take into
                             account all of the following factors when deciding whether to seek member
                             approval or whether the arm’s length exception in s210 applies:
                             (a)   how the terms of the overall transaction compare with those of any
                                   comparable transactions between parties dealing on an arm’s length
                                   basis in similar circumstances (see RG 76.76–RG 76.80);
                             (b)   the nature and content of the bargaining process, including whether the
                                   entity followed robust protocols to ensure that conflicts of interest were
                                   appropriately managed in negotiating and structuring the transaction
                                   (see RG 76.81–RG 76.86);
                             (c)   the impact of the transaction on the company or registered scheme
                                   (e.g. the impact of dealing on those terms on the financial position and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                          Page 17
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                                   performance of the company) and non-associated members (see
                                   RG 76.87–RG 76.89);
                             (d)   any other options that may be available to the entity (see RG 76.90);
                                   and
                             (e)   expert advice received by the entity on the transaction (if any) (see
                                   RG 76.91–RG 76.92).

              RG 76.72       The following subsections explain each of these factors. This list of factors is
                             not exhaustive. Companies and responsible entities should also consider any
                             other relevant factors.

              RG 76.73       We expect entities to consider all the factors in RG 76.71, but some may not
                             be as relevant as others after consideration. Companies and responsible
                             entities may determine the appropriate weight to give each factor in the
                             relevant circumstances. However, entities should not make an assessment of
                             whether the transaction is on arm’s length terms based on a single factor in
                             isolation from each of the other factors.

              RG 76.74       For example, it would be insufficient for a company or responsible entity to
                             make this assessment based only on the nature of the bargaining process
                             without considering other relevant factors, such as comparable transactions
                             and other available options.

              RG 76.75       We expect that the factors in RG 76.71 can be considered using information
                             already obtained in connection with the transaction (which may include
                             expert advice: see RG 76.91), the knowledge and experience of directors,
                             officers, employees and advisers, and publicly available information.
                             However, separate advice could be sought or inquiries made on the
                             particular factors in RG 76.71 if the directors believe this is necessary.


                             Comparable transactions

              RG 76.76       A good indicator of arm’s length terms is whether the terms of the proposed
                             related party transaction are comparable to those of similar transactions
                             completed in similar circumstances between unrelated parties in a contract
                             for legitimate commercial bargain. Entities should seek to establish the
                             contractual terms that prevail in the open market for similar transactions
                             between unrelated parties. Common experience and usual terms of trade can
                             be taken as a guide: see ASIC v Australian Investors Forum at [457].

              RG 76.77       Common sense and commercial prudence should be applied and expert
                             guidance may be required when considering the terms of the related party
                             transaction (see ASIC v Australian Investors Forum at [457]−[458]) and
                             determining the terms on which unrelated parties would transact in the same
                             circumstances.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 18
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




              RG 76.78       We expect that, in many cases, entities will have already contemplated this
                             when considering whether to enter into the proposed related party
                             transaction and whether it is in the best interests of the company or
                             registered scheme.

              RG 76.79       In assessing the terms of the related party transaction, consideration should
                             also be given to whether any key provisions (such as consideration,
                             warranties, indemnities, term and termination) are excessively onerous or
                             excessively generous. If so, the terms are less likely to be considered
                             ‘reasonable’ or comparable with terms achieved by other parties on the open
                             market in similar circumstances, and therefore not arm’s length terms for the
                             purposes of s210: see Orrong at [730]−[734], ASIC v Australian Investors
                             Forum at [458] and Furse at 1134. Terms that are extreme or unlikely should
                             therefore not be used in the comparison because they may generally be
                             unreasonable.

              RG 76.80       If there is no reliable data about comparable transactions between parties
                             dealing at arm’s length, it will be more difficult to determine with certainty
                             the hypothetical reasonable arm’s length terms that could be reached by
                             unrelated parties. In this event, other factors may be more important in
                             determining whether to obtain member approval.


                             Bargaining process

              RG 76.81       Consideration of the nature and content of the bargaining process, including
                             how the transaction was initiated, structured, negotiated and disclosed to
                             directors, is also relevant in determining whether the terms of a proposed
                             related party transaction are arm’s length.

              RG 76.82       If the parties have dealt with each other as unrelated parties would normally
                             do, and engaged in a process of real bargaining, it is more likely that the
                             outcome of their dealings can be considered to be arm’s length terms: see
                             Furse at 1132 and Granby at 507.

              RG 76.83       It is not necessary to show that the parties negotiated on an arm’s length
                             basis to decide whether the terms of a proposed transaction are arm’s length
                             terms for the purposes of s210 (in fact, due to their relationship, they may
                             not have done so). However, factors relating to how the parties conducted
                             themselves in forming the terms of the transaction will be relevant in
                             assessing whether the outcome of their negotiations could reasonably have
                             been achieved by uninfluenced, self-interested parties in the circumstances.

              RG 76.84       These factors include:
                             (a)   whether the proposed transaction is contractual in nature, including
                                   whether it is adequately documented in binding form (see Orrong
                                   at [729], ASIC v Australian Investors Forum at [463] and ASIC v
                                   Adler);



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 19
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             (b)   the involvement in the negotiations of professional advisers
                                   representing or advising each party (see Orrong at [795]); and
                             (c)   the nature of the negotiation process, including the length and sincerity,
                                   whether there was ‘hard’ or ‘real’ bargaining (e.g. a disinterested
                                   bargaining process that is characteristic of strangers, who are each
                                   applying their independent separate wills), and whether any of the terms
                                   were negotiated at all (see Orrong at [721]−[726], Furse at 1132, Berri
                                   at [205]−[214] and Granby at 506−507).

              RG 76.85       If a director has a material personal interest in the related party transaction
                             and has participated in, or been privy to, negotiations with the related party,
                             this aspect of the bargaining process and its potential impact on the terms of
                             the transaction should be taken into account when assessing whether the
                             terms are arm’s length.

              RG 76.86       It may also be relevant to consider the entity’s bargaining position. This is
                             not only determined by reference to the knowledge and experience the entity
                             has, including through its advisers, but also by the relevant circumstances in
                             which the transaction is contemplated. Circumstances include the entity’s desire
                             and need to complete the transaction (e.g. if an entity is in financial distress).


                             Impact on company or registered scheme

              RG 76.87       In assessing whether the terms of a transaction would be reasonable if the
                             entity were dealing at arm’s length, entities should also consider the
                             implications of dealing on those terms on the financial position and
                             performance of the company or registered scheme. The implications for non-
                             associated members should also be considered. Both short-term and long-
                             term implications will be relevant. This includes considering whether:
                             (a)   there is a negative effect on the company’s or registered scheme’s
                                   financial position or performance that is not sufficiently balanced by the
                                   positive effects;
                             (b)   the transaction fits within the entity’s business plan or affects whether
                                   the entity is able to pursue its business plan; and
                             (c)   the terms are fair, given the expected return on the relevant asset, the
                                   risks to which the asset is exposed and the relative liquidity of the asset.

              RG 76.88       Companies and responsible entities should also consider whether the
                             contract or agreement adequately protects the interests of the entity giving
                             the financial benefit: see ASIC v Adler at 182−183, 232, 250.

              RG 76.89       Generally, when dealing at arm’s length, entities acting in their own interests
                             have the option not to proceed, or to conduct business in a different way, if
                             the terms do not satisfy their performance expectations or present a
                             significant risk to the entity’s performance, financial position or prospects.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                           Page 20
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             Alternative options available to the entity

              RG 76.90       If the proposed related party transaction is one of a number of options open
                             to the entity:
                             (a)   the terms of these options can provide a good comparison of the terms
                                   that can reasonably be obtained between unrelated parties in the
                                   circumstances; and
                             (b)   if the terms of the proposed transaction are less favourable to the related
                                   party than the terms of these options, the arm’s length exception is more
                                   likely to apply.

                             Expert advice for directors

              RG 76.91       Directors should ensure they have, or have access to, enough knowledge or
                             expertise to assess all aspects of proposed related party transactions—where
                             necessary, they should obtain appropriate professional and expert advice
                             from any appropriately qualified person. This may include the advice
                             referred to in RG 76.75.

              RG 76.92       The directors will need to be satisfied that it is appropriate to rely on the
                             expert advice, including that the opinion given by the expert is directly
                             relevant to the decision at hand. However, directors relying on information,
                             professional advice or expert advice provided by others must make their own
                             independent assessment of the information or advice: see s189. Advice does
                             not replace careful judgement by the directors.



Seeking member approval when there is uncertainty
              RG 76.93       Under Ch 2E, entities must obtain member approval to give a related party
                             benefit unless an exception applies.

              RG 76.94       When there are potential conflicts of interest, directors have a heightened
                             obligation to ensure that the necessary corporate approvals are obtained: see
                             ASIC v Adler at 250.
                                   Note: For public companies that are Australian financial services (AFS) licensees,
                                   compliance with the obligation in s912A(1)(aa) to manage conflicts adequately will
                                   generally involve documenting the reasons for relying (or not relying) on the arm’s
                                   length exception: see Regulatory Guide 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest
                                   at RG 181.33 and RG 181.45.

              RG 76.95       Directors should only rely on the exception when they are persuaded that the
                             exception does apply, rather than it being merely arguable that it applies.

              RG 76.96       Accordingly, if after taking into account all the factors in RG 76.71 and any
                             other relevant factors, it is not clear that the transaction falls within the arm’s
                             length exception (or any other exception in Ch 2E), member approval should
                             be sought.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                    Page 21
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




D          Member approval process

                               Key points

                               If it is determined that member approval is required under Ch 2E, entities
                               must lodge with ASIC the material that will be put to members.

                               We expect explanatory statements for the approval of financial benefits
                               lodged with us under Ch 2E to include certain information: see Table 2.

                               In some circumstances, it may be necessary for entities to include a
                               valuation from an independent expert with a notice of meeting and
                               explanatory statement.

                               Meeting materials must be lodged with us at least 14 days before the notice
                               convening the meeting is given to members, unless we approve a shorter
                               period on application.

                               In rare circumstances, we may grant relief from the voting exclusion
                               requirements that prohibit related parties receiving financial benefits (or
                               their associates) voting on the resolution to approve that transaction.

                               We may also grant relief to stapled entities from the requirement to obtain
                               member approval where there is no value leakage from the group.




Content of explanatory statements
              RG 76.97       If public companies and responsible entities decide that member approval is
                             required to enter into a related party transaction, they will then need to
                             consider what information to include in the meeting materials.

              RG 76.98       Meeting materials seeking member approval for related party transactions
                             must provide sufficient information to members to enable them to decide
                             whether or not the financial benefit to be given to a related party is in the
                             interests of the entity: s219.

              RG 76.99       Information about the valuation and details of the financial benefit are important
                             to members’ voting decisions: see RG 76.107–RG 76.112. Where possible,
                             members should be able to understand the value of the financial benefit and its
                             impact on the entity in dollar terms. The matters set out in s219(2) indicate the
                             importance of providing members with information about value.

              RG 76.100      Members also need to understand the circumstances in which the financial
                             benefit is proposed to be given. Information about the existing arrangements
                             between the entity (and its related entities) and the related party (and its
                             related entities) receiving the financial benefit may be important. For
                             example, the related party may be a shareholder, lender, contractor or




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                           Page 22
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             manager of the entity giving the financial benefit. Without this information,
                             members may not have sufficient context for making their decision.

              RG 76.101      The discussion in RG 76.143–RG 76.150 about information to include in
                             disclosure documents sets out information that may also need to be included
                             in the meeting materials to ensure that investors have all the information
                             reasonably required to decide whether it is in the entity’s interests to approve
                             the proposed financial benefit.

              RG 76.102      We also expect explanatory statements for the approval of financial benefits
                             lodged with us under Ch 2E to include information about:
                             (a)   the directors’ recommendations and the reasons for them;
                             (b)   alternative options to the related party transaction and the reasons for
                                   choosing the related party transaction (as well as the implications of not
                                   proceeding with the transaction); and
                             (c)   the impact of the transaction on the company or registered scheme.
                             More detailed guidance on the information to include in meeting materials is
                             set out in Table 2.

              RG 76.103      Directors have a duty to give full and proper disclosure. Under common law,
                             a notice of meeting must contain all the information needed to fully and
                             fairly inform members of the nature of the proposed resolutions, and to
                             enable members to judge for themselves whether to attend the meeting and
                             vote for or against the proposed resolutions.

                                   Note: See generally Devereaux Holdings Pty Ltd v Parry Corporation (1985) 9 ACLR
                                   956 (Devereaux) at 958−959; Bulfin’s Limited v Bebarfald (1938) 38 SR (NSW) 423;
                                   Fraser v NRMA Holdings Limited (1995) 55 FCR 452 at 466; ENT Pty Ltd v Sunraysia
                                   Television Ltd (2007) 61 ACSR 626 (Sunraysia); and Lion Nathan Australia Pty Ltd v
                                   Coopers Brewery Ltd and Others (2005) 55 ACSR 583 at 594−598.

              RG 76.104      We consider that the information set out in RG 76.99–RG 76.102, and in
                             Table 2 below, to be material to members’ decisions about how to vote on a
                             proposed related party transaction and that members expect to see this
                             information in meeting materials.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                 Page 23
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




Table 2:     Content of related party meeting materials

 Topic                         Guidance

 Identity of the related       The party receiving the financial benefit must be clearly identified, including an
 party: s219(1)(a)             explanation of the nature of the related party relationship.

                               For group structures, the nature of these relationships should be disclosed for all
                               group entities and related parties involved in each transaction that is disclosed.

                               For example, if an entity is acquiring a substantial interest in an asset from a related
                               party, it will be relevant and should be disclosed that:
                                other entities within the same corporate group as the related party may also have
                                 an interest (either directly or indirectly) in that asset, and the nature of those
                                 interests; and
                                ongoing management services on arm’s length terms in relation to the asset may be
                                 provided by another entity within the same corporate group as the related party.

 Nature of the financial       Complete details of the financial benefit to be given must be provided to members.
 benefit: s219(1)(b)           This includes not only details of what the benefit is (both in nature and quantity), but
                               also the reason for giving the benefit and the basis on which it is given.

                               For example, if options are to be granted to a director, we expect the following
                               information, at a minimum, to be disclosed:
                                the number of options to be granted to the director;
                                the terms of the options;
                                an explanation as to why the options are to be granted, particularly where
                                 alternative forms of remuneration or incentive may be required to be expensed by
                                 the entity in future years; and
                                an explanation as to why the specified number of options is to be granted and why
                                 the specified value of the options was chosen.

                               Entities should be careful to disclose the substantive effect of a transaction if
                               necessary in order to explain the financial benefit. For example, if a company,
                               instead of granting options, proposes to lend a director money to acquire shares in
                               the company but the repayment terms of the loan effectively create an option-like
                               situation, this should be disclosed.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                   Page 24
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




 Topic                         Guidance

 Directors’                    For each proposed related party resolution, each director of the company or
 recommendations:              responsible entity must either:
 s219(1)(c)                     make a recommendation about the resolution and state their reasons for it; or
                                if they do not make a recommendation, state why they do not.

                               If, for some reason, a director is not able to make either of these statements, they
                               must also state why this is the case. We consider that detailed reasons for director
                               recommendations should be provided, including a discussion of any alternative
                               options considered. This may also include a discussion of the opportunity costs
                               involved (s219(2)) and the implications of not proceeding with the transaction. It is
                               not enough simply for a director to state that they approve of the resolution. This is
                               because we consider this information is material to members when deciding how to
                               vote, and, in some cases, the omission of this information could be misleading.

                               We also consider it is good practice for directors to avoid making a recommendation
                               for resolutions about each other’s remuneration as there may be a conflict of interest:
                               see Claremont Petroleum at 261−263. The reason for not making a recommendation
                               must be disclosed: s219(1)(c)(ii).

                               For example:
                                if a proposal to issue options to a non-executive director will mean that a listed
                                 company will no longer comply with the ASX Corporate Governance Council’s
                                 Corporate governance principles and recommendations (2nd edn)—the reasons
                                 supporting the director’s recommendation should include an explanation of why
                                 the director considers this is appropriate, and a discussion of other relevant
                                 options;
                                if a company’s reason for granting options to a director is as an incentive for future
                                 performance but the options are in the money—the reasons should address how
                                 the director has reconciled these facts; and
                                if a proposed related party transaction is chosen over other alternative
                                 transactions with non-related entities—the reasons for choosing the related party
                                 transaction over the alternatives (including not proceeding with the transaction)
                                 should be explained.

 Directors’ interest in the    Each director must state whether or not they have an interest in the outcome of the
 outcome: s219(1)(d)           proposed resolution. If a director does have an interest in the outcome, they must
                               state what that interest is.

                               If the director’s interest in the outcome is considered a material personal interest,
                               this should be disclosed, along with whether the director voted on the transaction at
                               the relevant board meeting. Further, if a director has a material personal interest in
                               the outcome, there should also be an explanation as to whether the director has
                               been excluded as a related party for the purposes of voting at the general meeting
                               and the reasons for this.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                 Page 25
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




 Topic                         Guidance

 Other: s219(1)(e)             The explanatory statement must contain all other information that is reasonably
                               required by members to decide whether or not it is in the entity’s interests to pass
                               the related party resolution: s219(1)(e).

                               To the extent that it may reasonably be required by members, information leading to
                               the conclusion that the arm’s length exception does not apply should be included in
                               the explanatory statementfor example, where the amount of the financial benefit
                               paid to a related party under a service agreement is far in excess of market rates.

                               For transactions with multiple steps and approvals, entities should assess what
                               information is to be disclosed for each step, and the information provided should
                               enable a member to understand the transaction as a whole. Even where only one or
                               a few steps comprise related party transactions requiring approval, the overall
                               transaction and the cumulative impact of each step on the entity are important
                               contextual information that should be disclosed.

                               In preparing this information, the directors should keep in mind:
                                in the case of companies, the general requirement that information included in a notice
                                 of meeting is presented in a clear, concise and effective manner (s249L(3)); and
                                the obligations stated in a note at the end of s219—that is:
                                 ‘Sections 180 and 181 require an officer of a corporation to act honestly and to exercise care
                                 and diligence. These duties extend to preparing an explanatory statement under this section.
                                 Section 1309 creates offences where false and misleading material relating to a
                                 corporation’s affairs is made available or furnished to members.’

 Valuation of the              Meeting materials must adequately value the financial benefit, preferably in dollar
 financial benefit             terms. This is especially the case where:
                                the financial benefit is the issue of shares, options or convertible notes or interests
                                 in a registered scheme; or
                                the financial benefit involves the sale or purchase of an asset, such as a mining
                                 tenement or an existing business.

                               An adequate valuation requires the basis of the valuation, and the principal
                               assumptions behind the valuation, to be disclosed. In some circumstances, it may
                               also be necessary to provide a valuation by an independent expert. This may be
                               particularly important where the directors have a conflict of interest in relation to the
                               transaction.
                               Options must be valued in accordance with Australian Accounting Standards Board
                               (AASB) accounting standard AASB 2 Share-based payment and all material
                               assumptions used in valuing the options must be disclosed.

                               For example, if a company is purchasing an asset from a related party in exchange
                               for shares, it may be necessary to include both a valuation of the asset and a valuation
                               of the shares. Where relevant, the valuation methodology should be consistent with that
                               required to be adopted in the entity’s financial reports.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                         Page 26
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




 Topic                         Guidance

 Disclosure of a relevant      Where the financial benefit is to be conferred by way of remuneration or incentive,
 director’s total              the amount of the total remuneration package must be disclosed to the members.
 remuneration package          For example, if options are to be granted to a director, the company or responsible
                               entity must provide a proper valuation of those options as well as give members
                               details of other remuneration the director will receive.

                               Members must be able to assess the value of the overall remuneration package the
                               director will receive when taking into account the financial benefit to be conferred. It
                               is not usually sufficient to include only the past remuneration of directors. However,
                               if the remuneration a director will receive is not known but is anticipated to be similar
                               to that received in the previous year, it may be sufficient to include the previous
                               year’s remuneration and a statement to that effect.

 Related party’s existing      Details of the related party’s existing interest in the entity should be disclosed. For
 interest                      example, where securities in the entity are to be granted to a related party, that
                               party’s existing interest will be relevant because it allows the members to determine
                               the likely extent of the related party’s influence or control if the financial benefit were
                               to be granted.

 Dilution effect of the        Where an entity intends to provide equity-related financial benefits to a related party,
 transaction on existing       the meeting materials should state the possible dilution effects of that issue on the
 members’ interests            interests held by other members.




Expert reports
              RG 76.105      To ensure that members are provided with sufficient information to assess a
                             proposed related party transaction and decide how to vote, it may be
                             necessary for entities to include a valuation from an independent expert with
                             a notice of meeting for member approval under Ch 2E or Pt 5C.7 where:
                             (a)   the financial benefit is difficult to value;
                             (b)   the transaction is significant from the point of view of the entity (see
                                   RG 76.113); or
                             (c)   the non-interested directors do not have the expertise or resources to
                                   provide independent advice to members about the value of the financial
                                   benefit.

              RG 76.106      A valuation from an independent expert may also be required to be included:
                             (a)   under Chapter 10 of the ASX Listing Rules; or
                             (b)   if the related party transaction is also a control transaction for which the
                                   entity is commissioning an expert report (e.g. for member approval
                                   under item 7 of s611).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                     Page 27
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             Importance of valuation information

              RG 76.107      Independent valuation advice on a proposed related party transaction can
                             help members better understand and assess the proposal and make an
                             informed decision about how to vote. Independent valuation advice can also
                             play an important part in maintaining investor confidence in the management
                             of the entity.

              RG 76.108      Members receive independent expert reports relating to acquisitions or
                             disposals of a substantial asset from or to a related party (or an associate of the
                             related party) that require member approval under Chapter 10 of the ASX
                             Listing Rules. The ASX Listing Rules do not include an arm’s length
                             exception and so all transactions of this nature must be approved by members.

              RG 76.109      There is no express requirement in Ch 2E for an independent expert report to
                             be obtained for provision to members with a notice of meeting. However,
                             we encourage independent expert reports to be obtained and sent to members
                             with the accompanying explanatory material in the circumstances set out in
                             RG 76.105.

              RG 76.110      In our view, under Ch 2E and directors’ duties, directors have a general
                             obligation to include information about the value of a financial benefit in a
                             notice of meeting for member approval of a related party benefit. The
                             directors’ fiduciary duty of disclosure generally requires notices of meeting
                             for approval of asset sales or acquisitions to include the material information
                             necessary for members to assess whether a transaction is for a fair price, and
                             whether the terms and conditions are onerous or disadvantageous: see
                             Sunraysia at 635.

              RG 76.111      The economic and commercial considerations addressed in the examples in
                             s219(2) would often require directors to provide information about the value
                             of the benefit.

              RG 76.112      In some cases, a notice of meeting for approval of a related party benefit
                             could include information about the value of the financial benefit in the form
                             of advice from the non-interested directors. However, given the complexities
                             and inherent conflicts of interest involved in many related party transactions,
                             it is sometimes more appropriate for an entity to commission an independent
                             expert to give an opinion on the proposed transaction.


                             Significant transactions

              RG 76.113      A transaction can be significant from the point of view of an entityso that
                             an independent expert report may be necessary (see RG 76.105(b))for
                             reasons other than the dollar value involved. For example, a transaction may
                             be considered to be significant if it involves a change of business activities
                             or strategic direction, the replacement of the full board, substantial dilution
                             of existing members, or if it is very complex.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                            Page 28
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             How experts should assess related party transactions

              RG 76.114      Regulatory Guide 111 Content of expert reports (RG 111) provides guidance
                             on the content of expert reports for related party and other transactions and
                             how experts should assess related party transactions.

              RG 76.115      If an independent expert has prepared a report, it must also comply with
                             Regulatory Guide 112 Independence of experts (RG 112).



ASIC’s review of meeting materials
              RG 76.116      At least 14 days before the entity sends a notice convening a members’
                             meeting, it must lodge copies of documents to be given to members with us.
                             These documents include the proposed notice, resolution, explanatory
                             statement and any other documents to be put to the meeting that could
                             reasonably be expected to be material to the members in deciding how to
                             vote (see s218 and 219). Documents should be lodged through the ASIC
                             Regulatory Portal using the ‘Submit shareholder meeting materials – related
                             party transactions or acquisition approvals’ transaction. For more
                             information, see how you lodge fundraising and corporate finance
                             documents.

              RG 76.117      If we consider that the meeting materials do not contain adequate disclosure
                             to members, we can issue a comment letter that the entity is required to
                             distribute to members along with the meeting materials: see s220(1) and
                             RG 76.121–RG 76.126. The comment letter will also be available on ASIC’s
                             Australian Company Register.


                             Shortening period for document lodgement (s218(3))

              RG 76.118      Entities may apply to us in writing to shorten the 14-day period in which we
                             may review and comment on the documents: s218(3). Where we have
                             reviewed the documents in a shorter period, we will notify the applicant and
                             grant approval for a shorter period.

              RG 76.119      Approval of the shorter review period does not suggest that the meeting
                             materials comply with the requirements of the Corporations Act.
                             Applications for shorter approval periods must be in writing, clearly
                             outlining the reasons why the meeting materials should be dealt with in less
                             than 14 days, and must be accompanied by the prescribed fee.

              RG 76.120      Where an entity has applied for a shorter review period but re-lodges
                             meeting materials with us under s221 (see RG 76.127), a new application
                             must also be lodged in respect of the re-lodged documents.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 29
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             ASIC comments on lodged documents (s220)
              RG 76.121      We may make comments on the lodged documents, other than about whether
                             the proposed resolution is in the entity’s best interests: s220(1).

              RG 76.122      We will usually issue a comment letter if, in our view, the meeting materials
                             do not comply with the requirements of s218 and 219 (e.g. if the information
                             set out in Table 2 is not included, or if the meeting materials include an
                             independent expert report that does not analyse the transaction in accordance
                             with our guidance: see RG 111.55).

              RG 76.123      In determining whether to comment on the documents, we will consider case
                             law and general principles governing notices of meetings. In particular, we
                             will consider whether the documents fully disclose material facts and
                             whether they are clear and unambiguous. In considering these matters, we
                             will apply the guidance contained in this regulatory guide.

                             Full disclosure of material facts

              RG 76.124      We will consider:
                             (a)   whether the documents fully inform a member about the matter on
                                   which they will have to vote, and, in particular, whether the documents
                                   sufficiently explain the practical consequences of accepting the
                                   proposed resolution; or
                             (b)   whether the documents omit a material matter.

              RG 76.125      We will also consider the guidance outlined in this section about what
                             should be included in meeting materials.

                             Clear, concise and effective

              RG 76.126      We will consider:
                             (a)   whether the information is presented in a manner that is not misleading;
                             (b)   whether the documents are clear, concise and effective (as required by
                                   s249L(3) for notices of meeting issued by companies); and
                             (c)   the effect the information will have on the member as an ordinary
                                   person in commerce or as an ordinary investor.
                                   Note: See generally Residues Treatment and Trading Co Ltd v Southern Resources Ltd
                                   (1988) 14 ACLR 375 at 377−378; and Devereaux at 958.


                             Variation in lodged documents
              RG 76.127      The notice and accompanying documents may vary from those lodged with
                             us in ways that are not material (s221), but the resolution about the related
                             party transaction must be the same as that lodged with us: s223. If there is a
                             material change to the meeting materials that have been lodged with us
                             under s218, regardless of whether the change relates to the related party
                             resolution, the meeting materials should be re-lodged with us: s221(a)–(c).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                 Page 30
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




Voting exclusions for resolutions at members’ meetings
              RG 76.128      Section 224 provides that a related party of a public company, or an
                             associate of a related party, may not vote on a proposed resolution to
                             approve a financial benefit to be given to the related party except where:
                             (a)   the vote is cast as a directed proxy for a non-related party or associate
                                   (s224(2)); or
                             (b)   we have declared that s224(1) does not apply (s224(4)) (see RG 76.131).

              RG 76.129      Section 601LD provides that s224 does not apply to voting by members of a
                             registered scheme on a resolution to approve a related party transaction.
                             Instead, the voting exclusion set out in s253E, which excludes a responsible
                             entity and its associates from voting on a resolution in which they have an
                             interest, will apply. The courts have interpreted s253E strictly: see Everest
                             Capital Ltd as Trustee of the EBI Income Fund v Trust Co Ltd and Others
                             [2010] NSWSC 231.

              RG 76.130      A resolution to approve the giving of a related party benefit will not be
                             effective if it would not have been passed but for votes cast by excluded
                             persons: s225(1). Entities should ensure that proper procedures are in place
                             to implement the voting exclusions, and that the steps taken to implement the
                             exclusions can be verified.



ASIC’s relief powers

                             Shareholder resolutions

              RG 76.131      We may only make a declaration for the purposes of s224(4), allowing a
                             related party or an associate of a related party to vote, if we are satisfied that
                             it will not cause unfair prejudice to the interests of any member of the company.

              RG 76.132      It is unlikely that we will often make such a declaration. However, since the
                             definition of related party in the Corporations Act is so broad, a declaration
                             may be made, for example, if the applicant can show:
                             (a)   that the association between the parties is strictly technical; and
                             (b)   no real conflict of interest exists (e.g. an associate has no interest in the
                                   outcome of the transaction, the interests of the related party are the
                                   same as that of the company, or where all the parties are related parties).

              RG 76.133      In granting this relief, we will consider the effect of relief on the interests of
                             members, other investors and creditors.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                            Page 31
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             Registered schemes
              RG 76.134      We may use our powers under Ch 5C to grant relief from the voting
                             exclusion in s253E.

                             Stapled entities
              RG 76.135      Related party transactions are common in the context of stapling transactions
                             involving registered schemes, where an interest in a registered scheme may
                             only be traded with an interest in another registered scheme or a company, or
                             other combinations of interests. In this situation, the entities that comprise
                             the stapled group may be one economic entity. If a related party transaction
                             within the stapled group does not transfer value outside the group, the
                             transaction may not have a material effect on the value of a member’s
                             stapled securities and may not require a new investment decision.

              RG 76.136      In these circumstances, we may exercise our powers under s601QA to grant
                             relief from the member approval requirements under Pt 5C.7. If multiple
                             registered schemes are involved, we may grant incidental relief under Div 1
                             of Pt 5C.2 in relation to the duties of:
                             (a)   the responsible entity, set out in s601FC(1)(c) and s601FC(1)(e);
                             (b)   officers of the responsible entity, set out in s601FD(1)(c), s601FD(1)(d)
                                   and s601FD(1)(e); and
                             (c)   employees of the responsible entity, set out in s601FE(1)(a) and
                                   s601FE(1)(b).

                             Pro forma for relief
              RG 76.137      Pro Forma 113 Related parties or associatesvoting (PF 113) sets out the
                             form of relief we will grant under s224(4). There is no pro forma for the
                             relief we may grant under Ch 5C: see RG 76.134 and RG 76.136.

                             Publication of instruments
              RG 76.138      Our relief under s224(4) will require the entity to publish a copy or a notice
                             of the relief instrument, unless the application relates to confidential matters
                             and it is impossible to publish it without defeating the purpose of the relief.

              RG 76.139      We must publish a notice of the relief granted under s601QA in the ASIC
                             Gazette: s601QA(4).

              RG 76.140      We consider that members should know who can vote at the meeting and
                             when a person, normally prevented from voting under the Corporations Act
                             because they are receiving a financial benefit, may vote due to relief granted
                             by ASIC. We generally expect entities to include in meeting materials an
                             explanation of the types of relief granted to facilitate the lawful
                             implementation of the proposed related party transaction, including relief
                             from the voting exclusion provisions of the Act.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 32
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




E          Disclosure documents

                               Key points

                               Information about related party arrangements is information that investors
                               reasonably require to make informed decisions about whether to acquire
                               securities or managed investment products, and therefore should be
                               included in disclosure documents.

                               Disclosure about related party arrangements should be made in a manner
                               that ensures that investors understand how related party arrangements
                               affect the entity overall and, if these arrangements are significant, the
                               benefits and risks associated with them.




Disclosure to investors about related party transactions
              RG 76.141      If entities that have entered into related party arrangements wish to offer
                             securities or managed investment products, they will need to decide what
                             information should be disclosed about those arrangements in the relevant
                             disclosure documents.

              RG 76.142      Table 3 identifies some relevant types of disclosure documents and
                             summarises the legislative tests for the content of these documents. In
                             applying these tests, entities must have regard to related party arrangements.
                             Disclosure of information about related party transactions may also be
                             required in other documents, such as continuous disclosure announcements
                             and financial reports.


                             Context of the related party transaction

              RG 76.143      The nature, extent and complexity of related party arrangements that exist
                             for an entity, or within a corporate structure, is information that we consider
                             investors reasonably require to make informed decisions about whether to
                             acquire a security or managed investment product. For instance, details of a
                             related party transaction involving payment of large financial benefits over a
                             long period could be information investors reasonably require about the
                             financial position of a company, as required by the s710 prospectus test.

              RG 76.144      In deciding what disclosure about related party transactions should be
                             included in a disclosure document, entities should consider the context in
                             which the related party transaction occurs. A related party transaction may
                             not be relevant to an investor’s decision when considered on its own, but
                             when grouped together with other transactions (for instance, transactions of a
                             similar nature or with the same related party) and their cumulative impact on
                             the entity is considered, they may become relevant and should be disclosed.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 33
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




              RG 76.145      Related party arrangements can be indicative of certain aspects of an entity’s
                             business model and the risks relating to that business model. This
                             information can also show that some members may have different economic
                             interests in an entity to others (i.e. some members may lend to, or provide
                             other services to, the entity), which will affect the future prospects of the
                             entity. Entities may need to disclose ongoing related party transactions
                             because the conflicts of interest in connection with those transactions may
                             continue to exist and pose particular risks to investors.

              RG 76.146      Where possible, investors should be given information about the value of the
                             financial benefits paid under related party arrangements in dollar terms. This
                             information, as well as details about the proportion of the company’s or
                             registered scheme’s revenue, expenses, assets or liabilities that is attributable
                             to related party arrangements, is important to investors’ decisions. (See
                             Table 2 above for how information about the valuation of the financial
                             benefit should be disclosed.)

              RG 76.147      We expect entities to disclose information about existing related party
                             transactions in disclosure documents except to the extent that:
                             (a)   such disclosure may confuse investors by dealing with inconsequential
                                   matters; or
                             (b)   investors already have adequate information about the related party
                                   transactions as a result of past disclosures so it is not reasonable for the
                                   information to be repeated in full.

              RG 76.148      In meeting the legislative tests for disclosure documents in relation to related
                             party arrangements, an entity should focus on presenting investors with the
                             key information they need to know rather than making detailed yet confusing
                             disclosures.

              RG 76.149      Prospectuses and PDSs (and other disclosure documents, such as those
                             identified in Table 3) should describe related party arrangements relevant to
                             the investment decision. The description should address:
                             (a)   the value of the financial benefit;
                             (b)   the nature of the relationship (i.e. the identity of the related party and
                                   the nature of the arrangements between the parties, in addition to how
                                   the parties are related for the purposes of the Corporations Act or ASX
                                   Listing Rules—for group structures, the nature of these relationships
                                   should be disclosed for all group entities);
                             (c)   whether the arrangement is on arm’s length terms, is reasonable
                                   remuneration, some other Ch 2E exception applies or we have granted
                                   relief;
                             (d)   whether member approval for the transaction has been sought and, if so,
                                   when (e.g. where member approval was obtained prior to the initial
                                   public offering (IPO) of securities in the entity);



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                            Page 34
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             (e)    the risks associated with the related party arrangement; and
                             (f)    the policies and procedures that the entity has in place for entering into
                                    related party transactions, including how compliance with these policies
                                    and procedures is monitored.


                             Other guidance

              RG 76.150      We have given guidance in other regulatory guides about what we consider
                             investors need to know about related party transactions in relation to certain
                             industries and products. Our general view about related party disclosure
                             outlined above should be interpreted with the benefit of this more specific
                             guidance.

                                    Note: For other guidance and proposals on the disclosure of information about related
                                    party arrangements in prospectuses and PDSs, see Regulatory Guide 45 Mortgage
                                    schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors (RG 45), Regulatory Guide 46
                                    Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors (RG 46),
                                    Regulatory Guide 69 Debentures: Improving disclosure for retail investors (RG 69),
                                    Regulatory Guide 132 Funds management: Compliance and oversight (RG 32),
                                    Consultation Paper 133 Agribusiness managed investment schemes: Improving
                                    disclosure for retail investors (CP 133), Consultation Paper 134 Infrastructure entities:
                                    Improving disclosure for retail investors (CP 134) and Consultation Paper 141
                                    Mortgage schemes: Strengthening the disclosure benchmarks (CP 141).


Table 3:    Summary of content requirements for disclosure documents

 Disclosure document           Content requirements relevant to related party arrangements

 Prospectus                    All the information that investors and their professional advisers would reasonably
                               require to make an informed decision about the financial position, performance
                               and prospects of the company: s710.

                               Information about the nature and extent of interests, or amounts paid, given or
                               agreed to be paid or given, to directors, proposed directors or promoters of the
                               company: s711.

                               All the information that investors and their professional advisers would reasonably
                               require to make an assessment of the effect of the offer on the body (s713),
                               including information excluded from a continuous disclosure notice reasonably
                               required to make an informed decision about the financial position, performance
                               and prospects of the company: s713(5).

 Product Disclosure            Any information that might reasonably be expected to have a material influence
 Statement (PDS)               on the decision of a reasonable person, as a retail client, whether to acquire the
                               product: s1013E.
                                   Note: For registered schemes to which Div 4 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Regulations
                                   applies, the specific disclosures required by that division apply instead of s1013E. (For
                                   example, in the case of a simple managed investment scheme to which the division
                                   applies, all information required by Sch 10B of the Corporations Regulations must be
                                   disclosed, which includes the risks of the scheme.)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                           Page 35
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




 Disclosure document           Content requirements relevant to related party arrangements

 Offer information             A copy of an annual financial report with a balance date that occurs within the
 statement                     past six months before the offer of securities. The annual financial report must be
                               audited and prepared in accordance with the Australian accounting standards:
                               s715(2). Related party disclosure in accordance with AASB 124 Related party
                               disclosures must be included in the annual financial report.

 Bidder’s statement            If any securities (other than managed investment products) are offered as
                               consideration under the bid—all material that would be required for a prospectus
                               for an offer of those securities by the bidder under s710–713 (see above):
                               s636(1)(g).

                               If any managed investment products are offered as consideration under the bid—
                               all material that would be required by s1013C (which refers to s1013E) to be
                               included in a PDS given to a person in an issue situation for those managed
                               investment products (see above): s636(1)(ga).

                               In any case—information that is material to the decision-making by a holder of bid
                               class securities whether to accept the offer under the bid: s636(1)(m).

 Target statement              All the information that holders of bid class securities and their professional
                               advisers would reasonably require to make an informed assessment about
                               whether to accept the offer under the bid: s638(1).

 Scheme booklet                All the information that is material to the decision-making by a creditor or member
                               of the body that is known by the directors of the body and has not previously been
                               disclosed to the creditors or members of the body: s412(1)(a).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                    Page 36
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AASB 124 (for             An Australian accounting standard made for the purposes
                               example)                  of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered 124)

                               AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                         the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                         out a financial services business to provide financial
                                                         services
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                           Corporations Act.

                               AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                         Corporations Act
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                           Corporations Act.

                               arm’s length              The exception, set out in s210, to the requirement for
                               exception                 public companies and registered schemes to obtain
                                                         member approval to give a financial benefit to a related
                                                         party

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               Australian accounting     Standards made for the purposes of the Corporations Act
                               standards

                               Australian Company        The register of companies maintained by ASIC
                               Register

                               Ch 2E (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                         numbered 2E), unless otherwise specified

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               director                  A director of a public company

                               disclosure document       Includes a prospectus, PDS, profile statement, offer
                                                         information statement, scheme booklet or takeover
                                                         document for the offer of securities or managed
                                                         investment products, as the case may be

                               entity                    A public company or a registered scheme

                               general meeting           A meeting of the members of a public company or
                                                         registered scheme, as the case may be

                               meeting materials         The notice of meeting and explanatory statement

                               members’ meeting          A meeting of the members of a public company or
                                                         registered scheme, as the case may be

                               PDS                       Product Disclosure Statement




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                     Page 37
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               prescribed financial      Has the meaning given to that term in s9 of the
                               market                    Corporations Act

                               Product Disclosure        A document that must be given to a retail client in relation
                               Statement                 to the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance
                                                         with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                               Pt 5C.7 (for example)     A part of the Corporations Act (in this example, numbered
                                                         5C.7)

                               registered managed        A managed investment scheme registered under s601EB
                               investment scheme         of the Corporations Act

                               registered scheme         Registered managed investment scheme

                               related party             Has the meaning given to that term in s228, or as
                                                         modified by Pt 5C.7 for registered schemes, as the case
                                                         may be

                               responsible entity        The public company named in ASIC’s record of the
                                                         scheme’s registration as the responsible entity or
                                                         temporary responsible entity of a registered scheme

                               RG 76 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example, numbered 76)

                               s208 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                         numbered 208)

                               takeover document         A bidder’s statement, target statement or explanatory
                                                         statement for a scheme of arrangement




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                  Page 38
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




Related information

                             Headnotes
                             allowing directors with a material personal interest to attend and vote at board
                             meetings and quorum requirements (s195, 196), allowing related party or its
                             associates to vote on a resolution at shareholders’ meeting (s224(4)), ASIC
                             comments on documents (s220), content of notices of meeting and explanatory
                             statements (s219), disclosure about related party transactions in other disclosure
                             documents (s412, 636(1), 638(1), 710, 711, 713(5), 715(2), 1013E), factors to
                             consider when deciding if a related party transaction is on arm’s length terms
                             (s210), shortening period for ASIC comments on lodged documents (s218(2))

                             Pro formas
                             PF 90 Voting by interested directors

                             PF 113 Related parties or associates—voting

                             Regulatory guides
                             RG 45 Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors

                             RG 46 Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 69 Debentures: Improving disclosure for retail investors

                             RG 74 Acquisitions agreed to by shareholders

                             RG 111 Content of expert reports

                             RG 112 Independence of experts

                             RG 132 Funds management: Compliance and oversight

                             RG 136 Funds management: Discretionary powers

                             RG 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, s9, 189, 191, 195, 196, 208, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215,
                             216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 230, 249L(3),
                             253E, 412(1)(a), 601LA, 601LB, 601LC, 601LD, 601LE, 601FC(1), 611,
                             636, 638, 710, 711, 713, 715, 1013C, 1013E and 1317D




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                           Page 39
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             Cases

                             ACI Operations Pty Ltd v Berri Limited [2005] VSC 201 (Berri)

                             ASIC v Australian Investors Forum Pty Ltd & Others (No 2) [2005] NSWSC
                             267 (ASIC v Australian Investors Forum)

                             Australian Trade Commission v WA Meat Exports Pty Ltd (1987) 75
                             ALR 287

                             The Bell Group Limited (in liq) v Westpac Banking Corporation (No 9)
                             (2008) 70 ACSR 1 (Bell Group)

                             Boardman v Phipps [1967] 2 AC 46

                             Boulting v ACTAT [1963] 2 QB 606

                             Bray v Ford [1896] AC 44

                             Bulfin’s Limited v Bebarfald (1938) 38 SR (NSW) 423

                             Centofanti v Eekimitor Pty Ltd (1995) 65 SASR 31

                             Chan v Zacharia (1984) 154 CLR 178

                             Claremont Petroleum NL v Cummings and Fuller (1992) 110 ALR 239
                             (Claremont Petroleum)

                             Devereaux Holdings Pty Ltd v Parry Corporation (1985) 9 ACLR 956
                             (Devereaux)

                             Duke Group Ltd (in liq) v Pilmer [1999] SASC 97

                             ENT Pty Ltd v Sunraysia Televisions Ltd (2007) 61 ACSR 626 (Sunraysia)

                             Everest Capital Ltd as Trustee of the EBI Income Fund v Trust Co Ltd and
                             Others [2010] NSWSC 231

                             Fitzsimmons v The Queen (1997) 23 ACSR 355

                             Fraser v NRMA Holdings Limited (1995) 55 FCR 452

                             Granby Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1995) 129 ALR 503
                             (Granby)

                             Grand Enterprises Pty Ltd v Aurium Resources Ltd (2009) 256 ALR 1
                             (Grand Enterprises)

                             Re HIH Insurance Ltd (in prov liq) and HIH Casualty and General
                             Insurance Ltd (in prov liq); ASIC v Adler and Others (2002) 41 ACSR 72
                             (ASIC v Adler)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 40
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 76: Related party transactions




                             Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corp (1984) 156 CLR 41

                             Lion Nathan Australia Pty Ltd v Coopers Brewery Ltd and Others (2005) 55
                             ACSR 583

                             McGellin v Mount King Mining NL (1998) 144 FLR 288 (McGellin)

                             Orrong Strategies Pty Ltd v Village Roadshow Ltd [2007] VSC 1 (Orrong)

                             Permanent Building Society (in liq) v Wheeler (1994) 14 ACSR 109

                             The Queen v District Council of Victor Harbour; Ex parte Costain Australia
                             Ltd [1983] 34 SASR 188

                             R v Byrnes & Hopwood (1995) 183 CLR 501

                             Residues Treatment and Trading Co Ltd v Southern Resources Ltd (1998) 14
                             ACLR 375

                             Streeter v Western Areas Exploration Pty Ltd [No 2] [2011] WASCA 17

                             Transvaal Lands Co v New Belgium (Transvaal) Lands & Development Co
                             [1914] 2 Ch 488

                             Trustee for the Estate of the Late AW Furse No 5 Will Trust v FCT (1990) 21
                             ATR 1123 (Furse)

                             Warman International Ltd v Dwyer (1995) 182 CLR 544


                             Consultation papers and reports

                             CP 133 Agribusiness managed investment schemes: Improving disclosure
                             for retail investors

                             CP 134 Infrastructure entities: Improving disclosure for retail investors

                             CP 141 Mortgage schemes: Strengthening the disclosure benchmarks

                             CP 142 Related party transactions

                             REP 233 Response to submissions on CP 142 Related party transactions


                             Media releases

                             04-206MR Valuing options for directors and executives (28 June 2004)

                             04-257MR ASIC cracks down on related party disclosure (10 August 2004)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 41
