REGULATORY GUIDE 94

Unit pricing: Guide to good
practice

August 2008




   Note 1: In September 2015, ASIC repealed [CO 04/1575] Managed investment
   schemes: unit pricing as part of our bulk repeal process to repeal redundant instruments
   identified in our sunsetting work. All references to [CO 04/1575] in this guide are
   historical because this class order no longer exists.

   Note 2: On 1 July 2021, s52(2)(c) of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
   was amended. As a result of the amendment, the reference to ‘the best interests of the
   beneficiaries’ at 7.1 should be read as ‘the best financial interests of the beneficiaries’.
Unit pricing
Guide to good practice
Joint ASIC and APRA guide
Updated August 2008
Unit pricing – guide to good practice




                                        Copyright
                                           © Australian Prudential Regulation Authority and Australian Securities &
                                           Investments Commission (2008).

                                           The material in this publication is copyright. You may download, display,
                                           print or reproduce material in this publication in unaltered form, for sale
                                           or otherwise, conditional upon acknowledging ownership of content
                                           by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) and the
                                           Australian Securities & Investments Commission (ASIC), for example:
                                           ‘© Australian Prudential Regulation Authority and Australian Securities
                                           & Investments Commission. Reproduced with permission.’ Apart from
                                           any use as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968, all other rights
                                           are reserved.

                                           Requests for other uses of the information in this publication should be
                                           directed to APRA Public Affairs Unit, GPO Box 9836, Sydney NSW 2001
                                           or Public.Affairs@apra.gov.au and feedback@asic.gov.au



                                        Disclaimer
                                           While APRA and ASIC have published this publication in good faith
                                           based on the facts we are aware of at the time of publication, neither
                                           APRA nor ASIC accept any responsibility for the accuracy, completeness
                                           or currency of the material included in this publication, and will not be
                                           liable for any loss or damage arising out of any use of, or reliance on the
                                           material in this publication.

                                           This publication is meant to be a general guide and you should form
                                           your own views as to its application.




                                           Australian Securities & Investments Commission, GPO BOX 9827, Sydney NSW 2001
                                           Australian Prudential Regulation Authority, GPO Box 9836, Sydney NSW 2001
                                           First published: 2005
                                           ISBN: 0-646-45372-6




                                           © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 2
Unit pricing — guide to good practice




                                        What this guide is about
                                           APRA/ASIC review of unit pricing practice
                                           Both APRA and ASIC have regulatory jurisdiction for aspects of the
                                           practice of life companies, superannuation providers and fund managers.
                                           After noting concerns about unit pricing practice in these entities in
                                           recent years, we undertook a joint review of unit pricing practice from
                                           July to December 2004.

                                           The review built on the prior work of both regulators, examining
                                           instances at more than 40 entities where unit pricing issues have
                                           been addressed since 2000. We also visited product issuers and service
                                           providers and consulted with industry bodies to obtain current views on
                                           unit pricing and outsourcing practice.

                                           The review included a survey of aspects of unit pricing, outsourcing
                                           and tax practice that was sent to 95 entities. The response rate overall
                                           was high at 85%. We received replies from 29 operators of managed
                                           investment schemes (93% response rate), 16 life companies (100%) and
                                           36 superannuation funds (80%).

                                           The regulators’ fndings in the joint review were by no means all bad
                                           news. Substantial evidence was found of entities that had clearly
                                           recognised and were managing the risks associated with unit pricing,
                                           and where the complexities of operating a unit pricing methodology
                                           were approached with care and diligence. For the thousands of unit
                                           prices calculated by industry each day, most will be correct, or if found
                                           to be in error will be quickly corrected. However, a small number of
                                           undetected errors can give rise to problems.

                                           In December 2004 we published a joint consultation paper on good
                                           practice in unit pricing, based on the fndings of our review. We
                                           received 16 detailed submissions in response and have considered those
                                           comments in the development of this guide.

                                           Our survey process, the development of the consultation paper and the
                                           further refnement of parts of this guide were subject to independent
                                           review by an external consultant.

                                           We would like to acknowledge the contribution of industry participants
                                           and industry bodies to the development of both the consultation paper
                                           and this guide.




                                           © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 3
Unit pricing — guide to good practice




                                        Status of this guide
                                        We are not of a view that there is only one preferred way to address
                                        unit pricing issues, and we have noted a range of industry conduct that
                                        has the characteristics of good practice.

                                        This is therefore a guide to ‘good practice’ – not a guide to ‘best
                                        practice’ nor a mandatory set of instructions.

                                        Some of the material in this guide is a reminder of current legal
                                        obligations, while some is a reminder of policy and other guidance
                                        we have published. Other material describes good practice as observed
                                        among industry participants. Much of the material outlines a common
                                        sense approach, building on the obligation to treat unit holders
                                        equitably.

                                        Many of the matters raised in this guide have come to our attention
                                        following recent unit pricing issues. However, the range of matters
                                        that product providers need to consider in managing unit pricing is not
                                        necessarily limited to, or fully covered by, this guide.

                                        We will continue to review aspects of unit pricing practice as part of our
                                        ongoing regulatory monitoring. In doing so, we will expect to fnd:
                                          sound understanding of good practice in unit pricing demonstrated at
                                          all levels of regulated organisations, and
                                          a strong commitment to the implementation of effective unit pricing
                                          practice.

                                        We will also expect that product providers’ unit pricing practices will
                                        measure up with the practices described in this guide. There may be
                                        unusual circumstances in which alternative practices are appropriate.
                                        In such cases, we expect that product providers will have a reasonable
                                        and documented justifcation for adopting alternative practices.

                                        Scope of this guide
                                        APRA and ASIC have developed this guide to help product providers
                                        understand and comply with their unit pricing obligations. The guide
                                        may also help entities considering whether to unitise their products.

                                        The guide does not specifcally address crediting rate practices, which are
                                        another way of attributing investment returns from a pool of assets to
                                        members of the pool. However, some of the issues raised and practices
                                        outlined in this guide are also relevant to crediting rate practices.

                                        Chapter 1 outlines strategic unit pricing issues to be considered by
                                        the board and senior management. Chapter 2 identifes good practice
                                        principles that should underpin the unit pricing practice of all product
                                        providers.



                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 4
Unit pricing — guide to good practice




                                        The body of the guide (Chapters 4 to 6) describes the application
                                        of the good practice principles in relation to a range of important
                                        management, technical and consumer matters. Each section of these
                                        chapters outlines a particular unit pricing issue and concludes with
                                        guidance on good practice.

                                        Key terms used in the guide are defned in Chapter 8 at the end of
                                        the guide.

                                        Updates to this guide
                                        We will consider updating this guide from time to time. If you would
                                        like to comment on matters discussed in the guide, please send your
                                        comments to both:

                                        Review of Unit Pricing Guide

                                        APRA                                ASIC
                                        GPO Box 9836, Sydney NSW 2001       GPO BOX 9827, Sydney NSW 2001

                                        or email:
                                        unitpricingguide@apra.gov.au        unitpricingguide@asic.gov.au




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 5
Unit pricing — guide to good practice




                                        In this guide, references to laws, including regulations and sections
                                        of acts, are references to those laws as at the date of this guide.




                                        This page has otherwise been intentionally left blank




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                           page 6
Unit pricing – guide to good practice




                                        Contents
                                                                                                      page


                                          1 Strategic unit pricing issues for the board and
                                            senior management                                            8

                                          2 Good practice principles for unit pricing                   14

                                          3 Pooled investments – unit pricing and crediting rates       18

                                          4 Management issues                                           21

                                              4.1 Effective risk management culture                     21

                                              4.2 Unit pricing issues common to many products           30

                                              4.3 Additional unit pricing issues for products with
                                                  complex structures                                    38

                                              4.4 Managing diversity in systems and products            41

                                              4.5 Managing change                                       44

                                              4.6 Outsourcing unit pricing functions                    48

                                          5 Technical issues                                            56

                                              5.1 Determining asset values                              56

                                              5.2 Determining tax treatments                            63

                                              5.3 Determining the use of reserves                       72

                                              5.4 Applying accounting standards                         76

                                          6 Consumer issues                                             80

                                              6.1 Providing information about unit pricing              80

                                              6.2 Managing complaints                                   87

                                              6.3 Managing errors and compensation                      90

                                          7 Obligations relevant to unit pricing                        99

                                          8 Key terms                                                 102




                                           © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                             page 7
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Strategic unit pricing issues for the board and senior management                                                       1




                                      Strategic unit pricing issues for the
                  1                   board and senior management
                                              Focus on unit pricing issues
                                              Unit prices are often calculated in a high-speed, high-pressure
                                              environment. Your organisation may calculate and publish many
                                              hundreds of unit prices every day. Even if you only calculate a smaller
                                              number of unit prices weekly or monthly, you still face considerable
                                              pressure to obtain timely, if less frequent, information and to ensure
                                              consistency and accuracy in your operations.

                                                 You need to consider the following strategic unit pricing issues to
                                              ensure that your organisation measures up to industry good practice.

                                              We discuss these issues in more detail in the remainder of this guide and
                                              outline good practice in relation to them.

                                              Errors in unit pricing can be costly
                                                  When large errors arise they tend to be very large indeed.

                                              There have been instances of errors costing more than $10 million
                                              in compensation. The associated costs of rectifcation can also be
                                              substantial, as can the consequences of reputational damage or
                                              publicity. As a senior manager or member of the board, it is therefore
                                              important to get unit pricing right.

                                              Give unit pricing a high profle and resources
                                                 To avoid costly errors ensure that unit pricing in your organisation
                                              has a high profle and adequate resources.

                                              In each budget cycle you need to consider the resources required for
                                              unit pricing and ensure they are at the appropriate level.

                                              You also need to determine the appropriate level of board and senior
                                              management involvement in unit pricing issues, including endorsement
                                              of policies and the implementation of a unit pricing policy framework.

                                              Comply with your legal obligations
                                              At all times you are subject to a wide range of duties.

                                                In particular, in all cases you need to act honestly, diligently and
                                              impartially and in the best interests of all unit holders.




                                              © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 8
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Strategic unit pricing issues for the board and senior management                                                        1




                                              Build an effective risk management culture
                                                 You need to build an effective risk management culture in your
                                              organisation from the top down.

                                              The board and senior management set the tone and approach. Your
                                              attitude to risk management is the major determinant of the likelihood
                                              and impact of unit pricing errors. Signifcant errors have arisen, and have
                                              continued undetected, where the approach to risk management has
                                              been inadequate.

                                                  You also need to demonstrate your commitment to risk management.

                                              This may be done by setting policy, monitoring performance and leading
                                              risk management committees. In such ways your staff and professional
                                              advisers are more likely to see risk management as a high priority for
                                              your organisation.

                                                 Your risk management systems should include controls, monitoring
                                              and reporting, so that unit pricing errors are avoided or quickly
                                              identifed.

                                              The more effective your risk management systems, the more likely it is
                                              that errors will be avoided or quickly identifed. The sooner an error is
                                              detected and resolved, the lower the potential cost and reputational
                                              damage to your organisation.

                                                 You need to support and encourage staff and professional advisers
                                              to report issues, incidents and exceptions.

                                              Establish a policy framework
                                                 You need to take responsibility for developing and implementing a
                                              unit pricing policy framework for your organisation.

                                              Your policy framework needs to cover all of the management, technical
                                              and consumer issues identifed in this guide. It should also include policy
                                              and procedures for managing any unit pricing errors that arise and for
                                              addressing rectifcation and compensation issues.

                                                 Implement the policy framework in such a way that your unit
                                              pricing policies are discussed, understood and applied consistently
                                              throughout your organisation.

                                              Implementation should include regular monitoring to ensure that your
                                              policies are updated as required.




                                              © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 9
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Strategic unit pricing issues for the board and senior management                                                         1




                                              Maintain robust systems and processes
                                                 You need to have reliable unit pricing systems, procedures
                                              and controls in place, as well as business continuity and disaster
                                              recovery plans.

                                              Where possible, avoid manual systems and upgrade your old
                                              information technology systems. Old systems require signifcantly
                                              greater controls and maintenance, as well as viable interfaces with up-
                                              to-date systems. You also risk loss of critical knowledge and skills as old
                                              systems become obsolete.

                                                Your unit pricing systems and procedures need to be well designed
                                              and well understood, and should be reviewed periodically.

                                              End-to-end process maps and end-to-end maps of unit pricing controls
                                              may be useful, particularly when developed by the people involved in
                                              unit pricing functions.

                                                 Your systems and procedures should include measures to minimise
                                              the likelihood of unit pricing errors.

                                              This includes applying reliable cross-checks to data before it is used in
                                              calculations and reviewing valuation methodologies.

                                              Design effective reports for monitoring
                                                 You need to ensure you receive appropriate and timely information
                                              on unit pricing issues.

                                              The reports you receive should focus on key unit pricing measures and
                                              show the cumulative impact of unit pricing issues arising in different
                                              parts of your organisation.

                                                 If you are not kept adequately informed then you cannot manage
                                              the risks.

                                              Establish clear delegations and
                                              accountabilities
                                                 You need to ensure responsibility for each function in your
                                              organisation is allocated to a designated person.

                                              Depending on the nature and scale of your operations, the range of
                                              functions impacting on unit pricing will probably include:
                                                 Product development
                                                 Marketing
                                                 Unit pricing operations




                                              © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 10
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Strategic unit pricing issues for the board and senior management                                                   1




                                                 Information technology
                                                 Tax
                                                 Accounting
                                                 Legal
                                                 Compliance
                                                 Risk management
                                                 Outsourcing management
                                                 Internal audit.

                                                Your end-to-end process map should completely describe all
                                              business activities that can impact on unit pricing.

                                              Manage complexity and diversity
                                                 If you choose to offer complex products or a diverse range of
                                              products, or if you operate with diverse systems, then you must
                                              ensure that you appropriately manage all aspects of your operations.

                                              Some unit pricing issues are common to most products. However,
                                              unitised products are numerous and diverse. A single provider may
                                              administer many different unitised products offering a variety of
                                              investment choices. Many products and investment choices may no
                                              longer be actively marketed to new investors, yet they still need to be
                                              administered. Some unitised products invest in other unitised products.

                                              Multilayered products and the use of performance fees add complexity
                                              to unit pricing decisions and management.

                                              Diversity in information technology systems and in product range
                                              constrains simplifcation and standardisation.

                                                 Extra layers of complexity require greater commitment to
                                              implementing effective systems and procedures and greater attention
                                              to risk management.

                                              Manage change effectively
                                                  Many unit pricing errors arise as a consequence of change.

                                              Some change occurs in the external environment, while other change
                                              is driven by the board and senior management implementing strategic
                                              direction, such as takeovers, downsizing or relocation. Other change,
                                              such as changes in policy, investment strategy, fees or product
                                              documentation, comes about during normal business operations.




                                              © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 11
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Strategic unit pricing issues for the board and senior management                                                         1




                                              Change that might appear initially to be unrelated to unit pricing may
                                              signifcantly affect the unit pricing function.

                                                 You need to attend to risk management during periods of change,
                                              particularly where there is more than one change or where change
                                              arises frequently.

                                              Where possible, schedule the implementation of change to avoid
                                              reporting and other peak periods, when business workloads may affect
                                              the success of the change program.

                                                You should also implement project management policies, planning
                                              and reporting systems to approve, monitor and control change.

                                              You need to assess the effect of proposed change on unit pricing and
                                              need to involve unit pricing staff as early as possible.

                                              You are responsible for outsourced functions
                                                While you can outsource some of your functions, remember that
                                              you cannot outsource your responsibility for those functions.

                                              You need to decide which functions will be outsourced and be satisfed
                                              that all aspects of the end-to-end unit pricing process are addressed in
                                              outsourcing arrangements.

                                              The outsourcing agreement must include arrangements for service
                                              levels, reporting, determining the extent of liability, dispute resolution,
                                              error and complaint management, business continuity and disaster
                                              recovery and termination of the agreement.

                                                 You need to build and maintain effective working relationships
                                              with service providers, maintain appropriate knowledge and build and
                                              maintain appropriate monitoring systems.

                                              Meet periodically with service providers to understand the effect any
                                              proposed strategic change will have on unit pricing functions.

                                              Be prepared to manage errors and
                                              compensation
                                                 Regardless of the quality of your systems and controls, unit pricing
                                              errors may occur – you need to be ready to deal with them.

                                              When an error has been identifed, all your attention needs to
                                              be directed to limiting damage and addressing the loss to investors.
                                              At that stage it is too late to be establishing general processes to deal
                                              with errors.




                                              © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 12
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Strategic unit pricing issues for the board and senior management                                                   1




                                                 You need rectifcation and compensation procedures in place so
                                              that they can be applied promptly.

                                              These should be applied consistently and in good faith so that current or
                                              former unit holders are not disadvantaged. You should also give priority
                                              to preventing recurrence of the error.

                                                 Communicate with the regulators as soon as possible after you
                                              detect a unit pricing error.

                                              Independent review by external experts is likely to be important in
                                              helping you quantify errors and rectify your systems and may help you
                                              to avoid errors in the future.




                                              © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                     page 13
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Good practice principles for unit pricing                                                                           2




                                        Good practice principles for unit pricing
                   2                        The following good practice principles should underpin the unit pricing
                                            practice of all product providers. In Chapters 4 to 6 of this guide we
                                            consider the application of these principles in relation to a range of
                                            management, technical and consumer issues.

                                            We will consider ‘substance over form’ when examining particular
                                            instances of conduct.

                                        2.1 Unit pricing policies and practice must be
                                            consistent with the governing documents for
                                            each product
                                            Your policies and practices need to be consistent with the governing
                                            documents for each product and your PDS or offer documents.

                                            Some unit pricing errors have arisen because the calculation
                                            methodology did not match statements in the product’s governing
                                            documents, rather than because the unit pricing methodology was
                                            intrinsically faulty. Examples of these include errors in asset valuation
                                            and transaction cost methodologies and errors in fee and tax treatments.

                                            To the extent that implementation of good practice is currently
                                            constrained by the governing documents, you need to update the
                                            governing documents where possible and, as the opportunity arises,
                                            align them with good practice.

                                            Governing documents for new products need to be written to take
                                            account of guidance for good practice in unit pricing.

                                        2.2 Sound unit pricing policies should be
                                            implemented consistently and kept up-to-date

                                            Policies
                                            Your unit pricing policies need to seek to achieve equity between
                                            unit holders.

                                            You need to develop soundly based policies that cover the range of
                                            reasonably foreseeable circumstances, including sudden changes in
                                            the environment.

                                            You must explain any relevant methodologies and assumptions, and
                                            why the assumptions are appropriate and reasonable. This includes
                                            explanation of the use of judgement and estimates.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 14
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Good practice principles for unit pricing                                                                              2




                                            You need to specify delegation levels for decisions and approvals.

                                            Where unit pricing functions are outsourced, you remain responsible for
                                            the policies adopted. Maintain a register of key service provider policies
                                            and review those policies periodically.

                                            Procedures
                                            You need to develop procedures to ensure that your unit pricing policies
                                            are implemented consistently, including in circumstances where the
                                            policies require the exercise of judgement.

                                            Your procedures should be developed by operational unit pricing staff in
                                            consultation with staff from other relevant functional areas.

                                            You need to monitor and report internally on the use of these
                                            procedures.

                                            Review
                                            You need to review your policies and procedures periodically, and
                                            update them in line with changed circumstances – for example, changes
                                            in market conditions, legislation or strategic direction.

                                            Documentation
                                            Documenting policy and procedures promotes effciency and consistency
                                            and assists in managing risk.

                                            Documenting your policies and procedures will also help you
                                            demonstrate, both internally and to the regulators, that your approach
                                            and your systems are soundly based and appropriate.

                                            Remember that documentation does not replace individual vigilance.

                                        2.3 Adjustments to unit price, if based on sound
                                            policy, are not errors
                                            In considering whether compensation is required when you make an
                                            adjustment to a unit price, it is essential to consider whether the unit
                                            price being adjusted was developed in accordance with soundly based
                                            and appropriate policies that were applied consistently.

                                            For example, where estimates included in a unit price need adjustment
                                            as the actual amounts become known, or where a reasonable policy is
                                            nonetheless reviewed from time to time and updated, neither the unit
                                            price before the change, nor the unit price after the change, is incorrect
                                            for the purpose of deciding whether compensation is required.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 15
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Good practice principles for unit pricing                                                                             2




                                            Where such a change is to be made to a unit price, the change should
                                            be made as soon as possible. Such change should not be implemented
                                            gradually over a period of time.

                                            It is important to note that compensation does need to be considered
                                            where policy has been or is inappropriate or where the application of
                                            policy has been or is defcient.

                                       2.4 Judgement may be applied to develop
                                           estimates in some circumstances
                                            You should not use estimates where actual values are available. However,
                                            we recognise that in some cases there is no alternative but to use
                                            estimates – for example, in relation to some aspects of tax provisioning.

                                            Your estimation policies, like your other policies, should seek to provide
                                            equity to unit holders and potential unit holders.

                                            Your development and use of estimates needs to be consistent with the
                                            legal obligations that apply to you, the rules that govern the operation
                                            of the product and relevant policies.

                                            If you are using estimates, you should develop these on the most sound
                                            and reasonable basis available at the time. You need to be able to justify
                                            why the use of an estimate is appropriate in the circumstances and that
                                            the estimated value is reasonable.

                                            You need to adjust amounts initially estimated as soon as information
                                            on the actual position becomes available. You should also test estimates
                                            periodically for robustness using actual data.

                                       2.5 Information for unit holders should be
                                           accessible, timely and useful
                                            You are subject to a range of obligations to provide information. For
                                            example, there are specifc obligations to provide PDSs and periodic
                                            statements to unit holders.

                                            You may also provide information to unit holders to meet other
                                            obligations, or voluntarily.

                                            Where there is no specifc obligation on you to provide information,
                                            but you decide it is consistent with your broader obligations to do so,
                                            we expect that you will make this information available in an
                                            appropriate form. Depending on the circumstances, you may use
                                            channels such as websites, call centres or correspondence, or include
                                            information in documents provided under statutory obligations.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 16
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Good practice principles for unit pricing                                                                          2




                                            Information must be expressed in terms that unit holders will
                                            understand.

                                            The Good Disclosure Principles in ASIC Regulatory Guide 168 Disclosure:
                                            Product Disclosure Statements (and other disclosure obligations) [RG 168]
                                            provide a useful checklist:
                                            1. Disclosure should be timely
                                            2. Disclosure should be relevant and complete
                                            3. Disclosure should promote product understanding
                                            4. Disclosure should promote comparison
                                            5. Disclosure should highlight important information
                                            6. Disclosure should have regard to consumer needs.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 17
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Pooled investments — unit pricing and crediting rates                                                                         3




                                      Pooled investments – unit pricing and
                   3                  crediting rates
                                               People may choose to invest directly in assets such as shares or bonds.
                                               Alternatively, they may choose to invest in products where their money is
                                               pooled with the money of other people. The investment assets acquired with
                                               this pooled money are managed on behalf of all the investors.

                                               Unitisation is a way to equitably attribute a share of the value of pooled
                                               products to investors. Products that may be unitised include superannuation,
                                               life insurance and managed funds.

                                               To enable people to enter or exit a unitised fund, the price per unit is
                                               determined based on the number of units issued and the value of fund
                                               investments at the time the price is calculated. Unit prices are generally
                                               calculated daily, weekly or monthly. The elements of a unit price calculation are
                                               shown in Figure 1 below.

                                               Figure 1: Basic unit price calculation

                                                                        Unit price calculation
                                                                               system
                                                                     • Calculate assets
                                                                     • Calculate liabilities
                                                                     • Calculate net assets
                                                                     • Divide by number of
                                                                       units and take account
                                                                       of transaction costs to
                                                                       determine unit price


                                               Another method to attribute a share of the value of pooled products
                                               is the use of a crediting rate. An amount is credited to each person’s
                                               account based on the overall rate of return on investments and the
                                               amount invested by each person in the fund. A crediting rate is generally
                                               calculated monthly, quarterly or annually.

                                               Unitisation provides a more direct link to movements in asset values,
                                               investment income and transaction costs, as unit prices are calculated
                                               at, or closer to, the time unit holders acquire or dispose of products.
                                               Unit pricing avoids transferring investment returns between entering,
                                               leaving and ongoing unit holders (generations of unit holders). That
                                               is, unitisation may be perceived as providing more transparency and
                                               resulting in more equitable treatment of benefciaries and fund
                                               members.




                                               © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                              page 18
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Pooled investments — unit pricing and crediting rates                                                                        3




                                               However, calculation of unit prices can involve signifcant administrative
                                               effort, and the costs of establishing and operating an effcient unit
                                               pricing system may be prohibitive for certain types of fund.

                                               Unit prices also fuctuate with changes in asset values and investment
                                               returns. Where unit prices are calculated frequently there is often
                                               greater volatility in the unit price. Returns appear more volatile than for
                                               funds using crediting rates.

                                               A number of the issues covered in this guide are relevant to both the
                                               unit pricing and crediting rate environments. While this guide focuses on
                                               unit pricing issues and practices, the following sections in particular are
                                               also relevant for entities using crediting rates:
                                                  4.1 Effective risk management culture
                                                  4.5 Managing change
                                                  4.6 Outsourcing unit pricing functions
                                                  5.1 Determining asset values
                                                  5.2 Determining tax treatments
                                                  5.3 Determining the use of reserves
                                                  5.4 Applying accounting standards.
                                                  6.3 Managing errors and compensation.

                                               Whichever method is chosen – unit pricing or crediting rates – providers
                                               of superannuation and life products and managed investment schemes
                                               must ensure that their practices provide fair and reasonable outcomes
                                               for all benefciaries and members.

                                               Figure 2 below outlines key elements and relationships in the unit
                                               pricing calculation cycle. While Figure 1 focuses on the unit pricing
                                               calculation itself, Figure 2 illustrates the complexity of the overall unit
                                               pricing function, and shows, in the bottom left-hand corner of the
                                               diagram, the unit pricing calculation in this context.




                                               © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 19
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Pooled investments — unit pricing and crediting rates                                                                                                                 3




                                               Figure 2: Key elements of the unit pricing cycle

                                                                        Unit holder/             Send payment and application form or
                                                                        contributor             redemption request to product provider


                                                                                                              Risk management arrangements
                                                               Check application and
                                                              payment, or redemption                 Transfer and       Transfer and         Buy and sell fund
                                                              request and redemption                reconcile assets   reconcile assets        assets within
                                                                                                                                           investment mandate

                                                                                                                 Bank and              Investment
                                                   Units issued to unit                                           custody               managers
                                                   holders, or payment
                                                   made for units
                                                   redeemed, based on:                                                                Fund assets
                                                   • unit price at date                                                  Data feeds – domestic
                                                                                    Unit registry                        Listed equity, fund, yield security prices
                                                     of application or               (member
                                                     redemption request                                                  Market traded derivatives prices
                                                                                      records)
                                                   • entry/exit fees                                                     Data feeds – foreign
                                                                                    Records of                           Listed equity, fund, yield security prices
                                                   • purchase/sale of              unit holders                          Market traded derivatives prices
                                                     fund assets                  and number of
                                                                                                                         Corporate action records
                                                                                  units they each           Check        Dividends and dividend reinvestment
                                                                                    hold in the             asset        Share splits, rights issues, buybacks
                                                                                        fund               values
                                                                                                           before
                                                                                                                         Valuations
                                                        Publish price                                     transfer
                                                                                                                         Property
                                                                                                           to unit       Infrastructure
                                                      Website of                                           pricing       Unlisted equity
                                                   product provider                                        system        OTC derivatives

                                                                                                                         Unit prices
                                                                                                                         Fund managers
                                                    Check unit price against             Check
                                                                                        number                                 Fund of funds/sub-fund
                                                   market/other performance
                                                                                       of units in                                 arrangements
                                                         benchmarks
                                                                                          fund                            No. and price         No. and price
                                                                                                                          of units              of units
                                                                                                                          Fund manager          Fund manager
                                                                    Unit price calculation
                                                                           system                                      Investment tax information
                                                                                                            Check      FITB, CGT, imputation credits,
                                                                •       Calculate assets                  tax and      foreign tax credits
                                                                                                          account
                                                                •       Calculate liabilities                data      Investment accounting information
                                                                •       Calculate net assets               before
                                                                                                          transfer     Assets – investments, income and
                                                                •       Divide by number of                to unit     distributions
                                                                        units and take account             pricing     Liabilities – management and
                                                                        of transaction costs to            system      performance fees, tax, expenses,
                                                                        determine unit price                           interest


                                               Some product providers may confgure the elements differently.
                                               Some may use additional elements. All providers should undertake
                                               reconciliations – for example, reconciling bank records and investment
                                               accounting records.

                                               A product provider may choose to outsource some of the above functions.
                                               Nevertheless, the product provider remains responsible for proper
                                               performance of outsourced functions and should retain the capacity to
                                               monitor and supervise service providers.

                                               There are many interdependent elements in a unit pricing system. Where
                                               change is made to some elements, care should be taken to ensure that
                                               the system as a whole continues to operate effectively.


                                               © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                                                                 page 20
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                        4




                                        Management issues
                     4                      Chapter 4 outlines a range of important management issues in unit
                                            pricing and includes guidance on good practice. The good practice
                                            guidance is presented as boxed text at the end of each section.

                                        4.1 Effective risk management culture

                                            Risk in unit priced products
                                            Unit pricing, like other business activities, involves risk. The number of
                                            steps in the unit pricing process and the complexity of the associated
                                            functions make the risk of pricing errors one of the most signifcant
                                            non-market risks faced by investors in unitised products.

                                            Unit pricing errors do not appear to follow a normal distribution. There
                                            are many trivial errors. However, when larger errors do arise, they tend to
                                            be very large indeed – there have been instances of errors greater than
                                            $10 million. The associated costs of rectifcation can also be substantial.

                                            Unit pricing may receive little ongoing review or attention until a major
                                            problem is identifed.

                                            Responses to our unit pricing survey indicated that risks arise from:
                                              the timeframes in which unit prices need to be calculated
                                              tax issues, including reconciliations of deferred and current tax, and
                                              determination of values for current tax, deferred tax liabilities, and
                                              deferred tax assets
                                              lack of integration of information technology systems, and the need for
                                              manual workarounds
                                              the need to manage the relationship with the service provider where
                                              functions are outsourced
                                              legacy products and services – for life companies and some managed
                                              investment schemes, and
                                              the need for timely provision of information by external product
                                              providers.

                                            Role of the board and senior management in
                                            establishing risk management culture
                                            The board and senior management set the tone and approach.
                                            If they demonstrate commitment – for example, by setting policy
                                            and monitoring performance and by leadership of risk management
                                            committees – high priority is more likely to be given to risk management
                                            throughout the organisation.



                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 21
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                4




                                        However, if the board and senior management indicate that risk
                                        management is of subsidiary importance, this attitude will also be
                                        refected throughout the organisation.

                                        We have seen signifcant errors arise, and continue undetected, where
                                        an organisation’s approach to risk management was inadequate. In the
                                        worst cases, there was even failure to identify the risk that errors might
                                        occur, or staff were disadvantaged or penalised for reporting problems.

                                        Unit pricing errors occur most frequently in an environment of
                                        management indifference to the unit pricing function or to risk
                                        management generally.

                                        Attitude to risk management
                                        Managers and operational staff directly involved in day-to-day unit
                                        pricing play a vital role in drawing key unit pricing issues to the
                                        attention of senior management and the board.

                                        The effectiveness of an organisation’s risk management culture
                                        can infuence the probability and impact of unit pricing errors more
                                        strongly than:
                                          the nature of the product – for example, life insurance,
                                          superannuation or a managed investment scheme
                                          the type of product provider – for example, life company, bank
                                          subsidiary, superannuation trustee, conglomerate, or
                                          the ownership structure or the size of the product provider.

                                        The effectiveness of risk management in the unit pricing function can
                                        indicate the effectiveness of risk management in the organisation as a
                                        whole. Organisations with unit pricing problems often fail to address
                                        other operational risks.

                                        Identifying the source of unit pricing errors
                                        Seeking the immediate cause of a unit pricing error may not identify
                                        the actual source. Symptoms may be addressed without identifying
                                        underlying sources. If piecemeal solutions are implemented, an
                                        organisation may continually incur costs of rework, investigation
                                        and compensation.

                                        Frequently the problem is a failure to appropriately consider and
                                        manage risks such as:
                                          diffculties in asset valuation
                                          ineffective product management
                                          lack of an effective control environment




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 22
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                    4




                                          lack of an appropriate policy framework for fees, tax, asset valuation
                                          and other elements of unit pricing
                                          failure in information technology systems
                                          failure to manage outsourced services
                                          low priority given to unit pricing resourcing, including the number
                                          and seniority of unit pricing staff
                                          staff morale and productivity issues, including inadequate training
                                          ineffective project or transition management, and
                                          pressure to increase competitive advantage by reducing the time to
                                          market for new products.

                                        Key considerations for managing risks in unit pricing
                                        In building an effective risk management culture in your organisation
                                        you need to consider:
                                          How can systems and procedures be built and maintained to eliminate
                                          or reduce errors?
                                          When designing your systems and procedures, you should particularly
                                          focus on minimising large errors. You also need to consider other
                                          issues, including the matters covered in this guide, as relevant to your
                                          organisation.
                                          How can errors be detected as soon as possible?
                                          Effective detection controls are fundamental. A major determinant
                                          of the impact of a unit pricing incident is the time taken to identify
                                          the error.
                                          How can the time taken to address errors be minimised?
                                          A key element of proactive risk management is effective planning,
                                          which includes the establishment and periodic review of procedures
                                          to quarantine, quantify and rectify errors as soon as they have been
                                          identifed. There is a risk that skilled unit pricing staff will be taken
                                          from business as usual to fx unit pricing problems. This may create
                                          even more exposure to unit pricing problems. The risk to ongoing
                                          business operations needs to be managed.
                                          How can independent review be achieved?
                                          Internal and external reviews need to be taken seriously, and
                                          recommendations considered and implemented. An organisation’s
                                          failure or refusal to implement recommendations is a clear indication
                                          of a poor attitude to risk management.

                                        Early identifcation of errors followed by thorough investigation and
                                        rectifcation action can signifcantly limit the impact of problems in unit
                                        pricing systems or procedures. Systematic analysis of customer complaints



                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 23
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                 4




                                        and feedback may help to identify problems quickly.
                                        For more information see section 6.2, ‘Managing complaints’.

                                        In the risk management plans provided to APRA as a part of the
                                        superannuation licensing process, superannuation trustees need to
                                        identify, monitor and manage risks such as those inherent in unit pricing.
                                        Similarly, entities applying to ASIC for an Australian fnancial services
                                        (AFS) licence need to address such issues in their risk management plans.

                                        Accountability to unit holders
                                        Unit holders expect exposure to the risk that investments may perform
                                        poorly. However, unit holders should not be exposed to the risk of
                                        administrative error.

                                        You are responsible for managing the risk of administrative error
                                        whether you invest directly in the market or through other product
                                        providers (for example, by investing in managed investment schemes).
                                        You should select product providers who themselves manage
                                        administrative risks effectively. In particular, you need to be wary of
                                        accepting limitations on service provider liability.

                                        Unit holders reasonably expect that, regardless of where an error
                                        occurs in an investment chain, the initial product provider will take
                                        responsibility for managing risk, and for explaining and correcting the
                                        results of any errors.


                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  effective risk management

                                            Build and maintain an effective risk management
                                            culture
                                            The need for an effective risk management culture is a constant
                                            theme of this guide.

                                            The board and senior management cannot be expected to
                                            understand every process at a detailed level. Nevertheless, they
                                            should have suffcient understanding of business processes,
                                            including unit pricing, to plan for and manage risks appropriately.

                                            Depending on the nature, scale and complexity of the business,
                                            your risk management systems and procedures are likely to
                                            include:

                                               clear delegations and accountabilities




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 24
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  effective risk management (cont.)
                                               formal identifcation, assessment and rating of risks

                                               formal identifcation of mitigating factors, with assessment
                                               and rating of their effectiveness

                                               monitoring controls embedded in unit pricing processes –
                                               for example, measurement of movements outside acceptable
                                               ranges, tracking of prices against benchmarks, and the use
                                               of key risk indicators to measure and monitor operational
                                               performance and to control quality

                                               assessment and rating of the residual risk after mitigation

                                               assessment of proposed changes in business activity that affect
                                               unit pricing

                                               formal procedures to report on the above matters. Reports
                                               need to provide integrated information to the board
                                               and senior management about the effectiveness of risk
                                               management and about emerging issues. Effective reporting
                                               allows the organisation to learn about risk management. The
                                               systems themselves cannot solve problems, however they do
                                               tell management what is important. Reports need to address:

                                                  exceptions (what is not working as expected)

                                                  movements outside agreed tolerance levels (a number,
                                                  a dollar amount, and measure of impact)

                                                  reassessment of measures – changes to ratings need to be
                                                  reported and explained, and

                                                  regular identifcation and reporting of new risks

                                               consideration of the number of service providers. Information
                                               may be received by the product provider at different times
                                               and in many different formats. The greater the number
                                               of systems, the greater the number of controls required
                                               to ensure that all relevant information is obtained and
                                               integrated into the reports. Ideally the number of service
                                               providers would be kept to a minimum

                                               senior management involvement in compliance and risk
                                               management. For example, this may include leadership of
                                               risk management and compliance committees and regular
                                               reporting to the board on risk issues




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 25
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                   4




                                                   Guide to good practice in
                                                   effective risk management (cont.)
                                               the presence of a risk management unit and/or a compliance
                                               unit that monitors and advises on risk mitigation across the
                                               organisation

                                               the use of independent review, which may include internal
                                               and external audit, and the use of external consultants.

                                            In particular, your risk management for unit pricing should
                                            include:

                                               board and senior management attention – the lower the
                                               profle of unit pricing, the higher the risk that errors will arise
                                               or continue undetected

                                               attention to resourcing in each budget cycle for unit pricing
                                               staff, information technology systems and policy and
                                               procedures. The strength of the risk management culture is
                                               refected in the priority the board and senior management
                                               give to resources for unit pricing

                                               support and encouragement for staff to report incidents and
                                               exceptions. According to Australian Standard AS 3806–1998
                                               Compliance programs (paragraph 3.3.8): ‘Staff should be
                                               encouraged to respond and report breaches of the law and
                                               other incidents of non-compliance, and to see reporting as
                                               a positive and non-threatening action.’ We expect entities
                                               to establish a similar environment for reporting on risk
                                               management

                                               implementation of operational procedures such as
                                               reconciliations in each pricing cycle. Inconsistencies may
                                               indicate errors and should be investigated and resolved as
                                               soon as possible

                                               reporting of operational losses due to poor risk management

                                               procedures to track errors and their resolution

                                               periodic centralised review of incident and exception logs to
                                               identify systemic problems for further attention

                                               involvement of unit pricing staff in the design of information
                                               technology testing for changes to unit pricing systems.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 26
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                 4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  effective risk management (cont.)

                                            These lists are not intended to be exhaustive. As product
                                            providers, you are responsible for ensuring that you identify,
                                            measure, mitigate and manage your business risks.

                                            For further guidance see:

                                               Australian and New Zealand Standard AS/NZS 4360:2004
                                               Risk management

                                               ASIC Regulatory Guide 164 Licensing: Organisational
                                               capacities [RG 164], if you are an AFS licensee

                                               ASIC Regulatory Guide 132 Managed investments: Compliance
                                               plans [RG 132], if you are a responsible entity or other
                                               provider of managed investments, including IDPS, MDA and
                                               custodial services

                                               APRA Superannuation Guidance Note SGN 120.1 Risk
                                               Management, if you are the trustee of a superannuation fund.

                                            Training
                                            Everyone participating in unit pricing needs to understand
                                            the end-to-end unit pricing process and how their own
                                            responsibilities ft into that process. Errors should not arise
                                            because ‘things fall between the cracks’. Training is essential to
                                            build understanding of all the elements of unit pricing and to
                                            implement procedures effectively.

                                            Some industry participants have commented that the
                                            development of process maps by unit pricing staff is an effective
                                            training tool.

                                            While policy may be developed separately from operational
                                            areas, procedures refecting that policy should be developed in
                                            consultation with unit pricing staff. This may also be an effective
                                            training tool.

                                            Document policies and procedures
                                            Documenting your policies and procedures promotes effciency
                                            and consistency, and also assists in risk management by:

                                               reducing reliance on key individuals




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 27
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                  4




                                                   Guide to good practice in
                                                   effective risk management (cont.)
                                               describing checks and tests, clear paths for investigation of
                                               errors and reporting/escalation procedures

                                               providing clear instructions for complaints management,
                                               disaster recovery and business continuity. This reduces the risk
                                               of ‘spur of the moment’ decisions

                                               providing clarity about the authority to exercise discretion

                                               providing clarity about requirements for review and
                                               high-level decisions

                                               providing clarity about the meanings of terms. For example,
                                               tolerance thresholds may be specifed rather than referring to
                                               ‘material amounts’

                                               outlining each step/process, its purpose and the recipients
                                               of each output in the process. You should develop and use
                                               checklists for this

                                               describing the evidence of review, such as signed printouts,
                                               required for each step/process, and

                                               assisting product or systems migration, where required.

                                            However, documentation does not replace individual vigilance.

                                            To be effective, your documentation should be succinct and
                                            relevant.

                                            Documentation will be simpler to manage where you achieve
                                            alignment between your governing documents and your policies
                                            and procedures – for example, regarding cut-off times for
                                            transactions.

                                            Your documentation should be periodically reviewed and
                                            updated. While this can be time-consuming, resources need
                                            to be allocated to it. You should review and update your
                                            documents when there are changes in:

                                               your organisation

                                               the external environment, or

                                               your systems or products.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 28
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  effective risk management (cont.)

                                            Independent review and investigation
                                            Regular independent review of the inputs and outputs of
                                            unit pricing, as well as the related systems, procedures,
                                            methodologies and controls, can signifcantly reduce the
                                            risk of error. These reviews should both check accuracy and
                                            consider whether the related processes continue to
                                            be relevant.

                                            Reviews can be undertaken by parties who are not directly
                                            involved in the unit pricing function – for example, internal
                                            audit, the compliance unit, the risk management unit,
                                            external auditors, actuaries or other external advisers.

                                            The use of such independent review is generally regarded as
                                            good practice. For example, IFSA Standard 5.00 Operational
                                            capabilities specifes that scheme operators should have
                                            appropriate compliance or independent audit functions to
                                            ensure that control systems operate effectively.

                                            Our unit pricing survey found that where product providers
                                            have audits conducted for unit pricing functions, the focus
                                            is on member registry, fund accounting, asset valuation,
                                            and fee, tax and unit price calculations. However, member
                                            registry and tax calculation functions are audited less
                                            frequently. While external audits are generally conducted
                                            half-yearly or annually, internal audits tend to be based on
                                            the organisation’s assessment of risk.

                                            Remember that the compliance plans of registered managed
                                            investment schemes must be externally audited every
                                            fnancial year (under s601HG of the Corporations Act 2001),
                                            and the risk management plans and risk management
                                            strategies of superannuation funds must be audited annually
                                            (under s113(3)(c) of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision)
                                            Act 1993).




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 29
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                        4




                                        4.2 Unit pricing issues common to many products

                                            Forward pricing or historic pricing
                                            Many product providers use forward pricing to calculate unit prices.
                                            With forward pricing, applications to buy or sell units are processed
                                            using a price calculated and published after the applications have been
                                            received. For example, the end of day price is used for applications
                                            received during that day.

                                            The use of forward pricing may be limited by governing documents.
                                            Old information technology systems or the design of registry systems
                                            may also pose a challenge to the use of forward pricing.

                                            An alternative is to use backward or historic pricing. This enables
                                            purchases and sales of units using a price calculated before applications
                                            have been received – for example, yesterday’s price is used for
                                            applications received today. In this case the most recent market
                                            movements are not refected in the price.

                                            Where historic pricing is used there is potential for arbitrage – that is,
                                            unit holders can buy or sell units to take advantage of the difference
                                            between yesterday’s price and the subsequent shift in market value.
                                            When this happens, a few transacting unit holders beneft to the
                                            detriment of all ongoing unit holders.

                                            Fund documents may state that forward prices will be used, whereas we
                                            have seen cases where both forward and historic prices were used
                                            in practice.

                                            In 2004 ASIC reviewed the investment practices of 70 managed
                                            investment scheme operators in Australia following regulatory action
                                            regarding market timing and late trading behaviour in the United
                                            States. The review found that 84% used forward pricing exclusively
                                            while 9% used some backward pricing.

                                            Many pieces of information are used to calculate one
                                            unit price
                                            As shown in Figure 2, ‘Key elements of the unit pricing cycle’, data
                                            is drawn from many sources to calculate a unit price. For example,
                                            information about security and derivative values, foreign exchange
                                            rates, or tax benefts and fees might be included in a price.

                                            There is a risk of error where data is not checked. For example,
                                            commercial data feeds for listed equity and derivative prices may include
                                            stale prices, zero amounts, or daily movements outside the usually
                                            accepted tolerances. We have also seen incorrect foreign exchange and
                                            fee rates applied.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 30
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                 4




                                        There is also a risk of error when the information used to calculate a unit
                                        price is not timely. External product providers may be slow to provide
                                        the prices of units in unlisted managed investment schemes. Providers
                                        vary in their ability to provide prices, depending on their technology and
                                        systems. The wrong data fles may be sent, or data fles with the wrong
                                        date may be used in unit pricing calculations.

                                        Manual operations increase the possibility of error. Prices may be
                                        provided by facsimile, rather than electronically, requiring manual entry.

                                        Transaction costs
                                        When unit holders enter or exit an open-ended fund, investment assets
                                        are bought or sold to support the change in number of units on issue.
                                        The acquisition or disposal of these assets incurs transaction costs such as
                                        brokerage fees.

                                        These transaction costs will vary depending on the type and volume of
                                        assets transacted. A fund investing in international equities will incur
                                        different transaction costs from a fund investing in domestic fxed
                                        interest securities. Funds with high volumes of transactions may be able
                                        to negotiate lower brokerage fee rates. In some cases – for example,
                                        when a person invests in a fund by transferring equities into the fund
                                        (‘in specie’ transfer) – transaction costs are not charged by the product
                                        provider because brokerage costs have not been incurred.

                                        There are a number of ways that transaction costs have been allocated
                                        – for example, using:
                                          the mid-price as a single price for both sales and purchases.
                                          Transaction costs for unit holders entering and leaving the fund
                                          are paid by the fund and so subsidised by all existing unit holders.
                                          The impact on the fund becomes greater as more units are bought
                                          and sold
                                          a buy-sell spread, where two prices are applied, calculated from the
                                          mid-price plus or minus an allowance for transaction costs. The higher
                                          price is paid by people entering the fund. The lower price is received
                                          by people exiting the fund
                                          the net buyer/seller method, where a single price is used for both
                                          applications and redemptions. Whether the price is above or below
                                          the mid-price depends on whether there are more buyers or sellers:
                                             when the overall size of the fund is increasing – a net buyer
                                             position – transaction costs are added to the unit price. In effect the
                                             underlying assets associated with the units of exiting unit holders
                                             are sold to the new unit holders
                                             when the overall size of the fund is decreasing – a net seller
                                             position – transaction costs are subtracted from the unit price.



                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 31
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                               4




                                        We have seen unit pricing errors arise where uncertainty about the
                                        methodology has resulted in inconsistent calculation of transaction costs
                                        or inappropriate application of transaction costs.

                                        Backdating – processing applications other than on the
                                        date of receipt
                                        The practice of backdating – that is, processing applications to acquire
                                        or sell units after the date of receipt – may increase the risk of error.
                                        For example, the wrong date of receipt may be recorded or the price
                                        for the wrong date may be applied. Errors may occur particularly when
                                        there are long delays before processing or where many applications
                                        accumulate.

                                        Fund documents, including the PDS, may specify rules about the price
                                        to be applied when units are issued or redeemed and the timeframe in
                                        which applications will be processed.

                                        Unprocessed money (money paid to a product provider to acquire a
                                        fnancial product, where the product has not yet been issued) must be
                                        held in trust for the person who paid the money in a designated account
                                        until the units are issued: see s1017E of the Corporations Act 2001.

                                        Manual systems and workarounds
                                        Some entities use computer spreadsheets to calculate and record
                                        pricing data or unit prices. Some entities, particularly after takeovers
                                        or mergers, join disparate unit pricing computer systems by using
                                        temporary manual systems that are not well documented or maintained,
                                        but which become entrenched over time.

                                        Short-term computer fxes and manual workarounds have been a
                                        signifcant cause of unit pricing errors. We have seen double counting of
                                        fees and the use of incorrect rates or incorrect formulae for fees.


                                                  Guide to good practice in relation
                                                  to common issues

                                            Forward pricing or historic pricing
                                            Forward pricing is preferred to historic pricing. You should take
                                            steps to move to forward pricing, where possible. When moving
                                            to forward pricing, it is important to consider the matters
                                            discussed in section 4.5, ‘Managing change’.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 32
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                   4




                                                  Guide to good practice in relation
                                                  to common issues (cont.)

                                            Where historic pricing is used, controls should be in place to avoid
                                            arbitrage. Some controls that may assist are:

                                               introducing fees for frequent switching, or a disclosed period
                                               of delay to make arbitrage uneconomic

                                               monitoring and investigating switching activity by investors,
                                               and

                                               conducting market volatility tests so that unit transactions are
                                               suspended if markets move by more than a pre-determined
                                               amount. This needs to be supported by clauses in the
                                               documents setting out fund operating rules that permit
                                               suspension and recalculation of unit prices during periods of
                                               extreme market volatility.

                                            Where unit prices are calculated less frequently than daily, the use
                                            of forward pricing will mean that applications are accumulated
                                            in the period leading up to the calculation of the price, and
                                            processed as soon as possible after calculating the price.

                                            Batching
                                            If you use batching, you should process applications and
                                            redemptions at the same time you strike the unit price.
                                            In our view this is good practice. We encourage you to:

                                               batch and process on the day, or the day after, the price is
                                               calculated, and

                                               make reasonable efforts to ensure that any return earned on
                                               unprocessed funds is attributed to the investor.

                                            If batching is not possible, a less preferred option is to accumulate
                                            applications in the period before the price is struck, and process
                                            those applications in the period after the price is struck. In this
                                            case, you would need to include in the amount invested for each
                                            applicant any investment earnings accrued in the intervening
                                            period.

                                            Another less preferred option is to process applications as they
                                            are received, using the historic price. In this case, you would
                                            need to undertake additional checks and controls to remove the
                                            possibility of arbitrage, and to enable prices to be suspended or
                                            reworked when necessary.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 33
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                               4




                                                  Guide to good practice in relation
                                                  to common issues (cont.)

                                            Many pieces of information are used to calculate
                                            one unit price
                                            You need systems and procedures to check that data has not
                                            become unreliable, inaccurate or late. For example, you need
                                            procedures to ensure that you obtain timely information,
                                            particularly from unlisted trusts, about assets deriving from
                                            corporate actions such as share splits and rights issues.

                                            Each data item used in a unit pricing cycle needs to be
                                            appropriately checked before it is fed into the unit pricing
                                            calculation. The unit pricing team needs training to understand
                                            the check for each data item and the importance of undertaking
                                            each check.

                                            You need policy and procedures to deal with situations where
                                            information is unexpectedly not available – for example, due to
                                            computer failure or loss of data feeds.

                                            You should also monitor and report internally on:

                                               the processes you have in place for obtaining information,
                                               and

                                               the timeliness of the information you receive.

                                            This information will help you to develop more effective systems.

                                            Where you outsource your unit pricing, you must be satisfed
                                            that the external service provider is undertaking appropriate
                                            checks. For example, you may be able to do this by reviewing
                                            reports from the service provider.

                                            Transaction costs
                                            To the extent that transaction costs are incurred as a result
                                            of application and redemption cashfows, people buying and
                                            selling units in the fund need to pay an allowance for those
                                            costs. The use of a single mid-price with no allowance for
                                            transaction costs is not consistent with good practice.

                                            You need to ensure that the transaction cost methodology you
                                            use is appropriate for the nature of the fund.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 34
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                               4




                                                  Guide to good practice in relation
                                                  to common issues (cont.)

                                            You need to develop comprehensive policy so that:

                                               transaction costs are calculated and applied consistently and
                                               equitably. Any proft from the application of the transaction
                                               cost policy must be returned to the fund

                                               the amount of costs and the method of inclusion are reviewed
                                               at appropriate periods. Where transaction costs are estimated,
                                               you need to apply a sound and reasonable process. This
                                               process should be documented so that you can explain why
                                               the estimation process is appropriate

                                               for the net buyer/seller method, the policy outlines the basis
                                               and timeframes to assess the direction of cash fows, to
                                               determine whether the buyer or seller price is applied

                                               transaction costs are not mixed with other costs, such as
                                               expenses to acquire research. Other costs need to be disclosed
                                               separately as the expenses of operating the fund.

                                            You must periodically review and update your transaction cost
                                            methodology and make it available as required.

                                            The transaction cost methodology should not result in money
                                            accruing to the product provider. Where there are investment
                                            options within a fund, to the extent possible any benefts arising
                                            from transaction costs should be retained within each option.

                                            Backdating – processing applications other than
                                            on the date of receipt
                                            For each application, redemption or switching request, you
                                            should record the date of receipt, the date of processing and the
                                            price used to issue units on that date.

                                            You must ensure that units are issued and redeemed at the price
                                            and in the timeframes stated in the governing documents and in
                                            the PDS. You must determine timeframes on a reasonable basis,
                                            taking account of your obligations. Where, due to unavoidable
                                            administrative delays, the actual issue or redemption of units
                                            occurs outside such service standards, you need to ensure
                                            that the affected unit holders and ongoing unit holders have
                                            not suffered loss as a result of your delay. You must consider
                                            compliance with your obligations under the law.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 35
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                     4




                                                  Guide to good practice in relation
                                                  to common issues (cont.)

                                            We expect that you will make reasonable efforts to ensure that
                                            any return derived from unprocessed funds held in an account
                                            designated for the purposes of s1017E of the Corporations Act
                                            2001 is attributed to the investor, subject to any disclosures to the
                                            investor: see Corporations Regulation 7.9.08A.

                                            To the extent possible, you should design your procedures and
                                            allocate your resources so that delays are avoided and the use of
                                            backdating is minimised.

                                            You need to ensure that you have an appropriate number of
                                            administrative staff.

                                            Your procedures should cover reprocessing where units have been
                                            issued at the wrong price and an adjustment is required.

                                            Despite your best efforts, delays may arise in issuing or redeeming
                                            units or processing switches – for example, because:

                                               a high volume of applications is received on one day

                                               all the required information is not received at one time and
                                               you are not able to process the transactions. This may be the
                                               case, for example, for superannuation funds where employers
                                               make contributions well before the employee records are
                                               received by the fund. This may include a high volume of small
                                               contributions

                                               there are delayed distributions to the fund and the asset value
                                               is not known. Where there is a reasonable basis for estimating
                                               the distributions, you should undertake an estimation and
                                               avoid the need to backdate. However, where there is no
                                               reasonable basis for estimating the distributions, it is likely that
                                               you will need to take the less preferred option of backdating.

                                            With any delay in processing transactions, there may be
                                            substantial market movements between the date of receipt of the
                                            application and the date when the units are issued or redeemed.
                                            We would normally expect you, as the product provider, to
                                            fund this difference. Where you are a product provider that
                                            has no external source of funds – for example, a not-for-proft
                                            superannuation fund without reserves – you need to consider
                                            whether ongoing unit holders should fund the difference.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 36
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                               4




                                                  Guide to good practice in relation
                                                  to common issues (cont.)

                                            You need to monitor and report internally on the costs
                                            of backdating.

                                            Market disruption
                                            You need policies and procedures to deal with market
                                            disruption. In particular you need to plan for:

                                               suspension and resumption of asset valuations and unit
                                               pricing

                                               suspension and resumption of transactions, and

                                               notifcation to unit holders of suspension of unit pricing.

                                            Manual systems and workarounds
                                            Short-term computer fxes and manual workarounds should
                                            be avoided.

                                            In the short term, you need to implement controls and
                                            independent reviews to manage these systems. In the longer
                                            term, you should replace manual systems and workarounds
                                            with automated processes.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 37
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                    4




                                        4.3 Additional unit pricing issues for products
                                            with complex structures
                                            You need to take particular care in determining unit prices if the
                                            products you provide have additional features that affect the timing or
                                            complexity of the unit pricing calculation.

                                            Fund of fund structures
                                            You may invest in other funds, rather than investing directly in products
                                            such as equities, fxed interest securities or derivatives. These other funds
                                            may be managed by the same corporate group or by independent asset
                                            managers.

                                            In a fund of funds structure, there are layers of unit pricing calculations.
                                            You need to know that the units of the sub-funds are appropriately
                                            priced before using those prices as asset values to calculate the unit price
                                            of the higher level fund.

                                            There have been cases where fees have been inappropriately ‘double
                                            charged’ – for the fund as well as the sub-fund. There have also been
                                            cases where the amounts of fees charged have not matched the amounts
                                            of fees described in fund documents.

                                            Investments between retail and wholesale funds
                                            Managing assets in retail funds often involves investing in larger unitised
                                            wholesale funds, to access the expertise of particular professional
                                            investment managers and to obtain the beneft of lower fees.

                                            You need to know that the units of the wholesale fund are appropriately
                                            priced before using those prices as asset values to calculate the unit price
                                            of the retail fund. We have seen instances where fees, distributions,
                                            taxes and allowances have been applied without regard for the different
                                            rates that apply to retail and wholesale products.

                                            Options within a fund
                                            There may be several investment options within one fund. Each option
                                            may treat taxes, fees and distributions differently. You need to consider
                                            these different treatments when calculating the unit price.

                                            Performance fees
                                            Traditionally fees have been paid as management fees, based on the
                                            amount of funds under management (FUM). Where FUM increases,
                                            managers earn more fees.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 38
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                4




                                        More recently, performance fees have been applied in some funds
                                        in addition to management fees. For example, some managers have
                                        decided that an investment strategy cannot continue to perform at the
                                        same rate where FUM increases beyond a certain level. Where FUM
                                        ceases to grow, the potential to earn traditional management fees is
                                        also capped. In this case, performance fees provide ongoing potential to
                                        earn higher fees.

                                        Performance fees are structured in many different ways. They often
                                        require complex calculations including thresholds, rates and accruals.
                                        Models for performance fee calculations are usually individually
                                        designed and often complex. There may be complexity in mechanisms
                                        addressing negative performance, in describing benchmarks and in
                                        accruing fees between performance measurement points.


                                                  Guide to good practice in relation to
                                                  products with complex structures
                                            Where you choose to provide more complex products, you must
                                            ensure you have the skills, knowledge and other resources to
                                            manage those products.

                                            Extra layers of complexity require greater commitment to
                                            developing effective systems and procedures. The development
                                            and operation of complex systems often beneft from
                                            independent review.

                                            Fund of fund structures
                                            You should build into your unit pricing cycle an allowance for
                                            the time needed to obtain unit prices from external product
                                            providers. Unit pricing can only move at the pace of the slowest
                                            determination of this information.

                                            In limited cases estimates may be required. However, you
                                            can adopt this approach only where there is no alternative
                                            and only where there is a sound and justifable basis for
                                            making estimates.

                                            When relying on the unit pricing systems of other product
                                            providers, you need to take steps, as you would when
                                            engaging any other service provider, to ensure that the
                                            service meets your requirements – for example, regarding
                                            the timeliness of information and the reliability of the
                                            approach to unit pricing calculations.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 39
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                4




                                                  Guide to good practice in relation to
                                                  products with complex structures (cont.)

                                            Fund of fund structures
                                            Investments between retail and wholesale funds
                                            Options within a fund
                                            You need to design your unit pricing calculations so they
                                            can deal with adjustments to taxation, fee, and distribution
                                            amounts for sub-funds, wholesale funds or options within a
                                            fund. Depending on the nature of your fund, you will need to
                                            review at appropriate intervals the documentation of sub-funds,
                                            wholesale funds and funds with options to ensure that the
                                            correct adjustments are made.

                                            Performance fees
                                            You need to carefully design and test your performance fee
                                            model. You also need to review its operation and how it relates
                                            to the unit price calculation. Periodically you need to check that
                                            the basis of the model continues to be relevant.

                                            Where an accrual can be estimated on a sound basis, this is
                                            likely to provide a more equitable outcome. This will depend on
                                            factors including the fee model, whether there is a fund of fund
                                            structure and the particular circumstances of the fund. Whatever
                                            approach you take, you need to develop it on a reasonable basis.

                                            You will need to disclose your approach, including the effect
                                            on investors, the frequency of calculating the fee and any
                                            limitations on entering and exiting the fund relating to the
                                            timing of performance fee calculation. If you issue PDSs or
                                            periodic statements, you must disclose fees in accordance with
                                            the prescribed fee disclosure template: see Part 7.9, Division 4C
                                            and Schedule 10 of the Corporations Regulations 2001.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 40
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                  4




                                        4.4 Managing diversity in systems and products
                                            Some product providers, particularly large product providers with a
                                            history of acquisition or extensive product development, are more likely
                                            to operate a diverse range of systems and products.

                                            The greater the diversity, the more care you need to take in calculating
                                            unit prices.

                                            We have found that the incidence of error is higher where a provider has
                                            many products operating under different rules or several administration
                                            platforms operating at once.

                                            Diversity may be an issue for you because of:
                                              the age of your products and their associated documents and systems
                                              the information technology that you use for unit pricing
                                              the range of products you provide
                                              the frequency of your unit pricing.

                                            Old products and systems
                                            Our unit pricing survey found that life companies and some managed
                                            investment scheme operators have a signifcant proportion of products
                                            and systems that are more than 10 years old.

                                            Legacy products may not be intrinsically prone to error. However, the
                                            systems on which they depend may not process data quickly and may
                                            not interface well with modern data sources or other systems. For some
                                            legacy products there are manual workarounds, such as spreadsheets,
                                            that may be undocumented or rely on key staff.

                                            Products that are closed to new clients do not provide substantial sources
                                            of new revenue. Funds may not be allocated to upgrade the systems and
                                            procedures associated with these products.

                                            If you have old products or systems:
                                              it may be diffcult to integrate these systems with newer technology
                                              your documentation may be out-of-date and system support may
                                              be limited
                                              system operations may rely on the knowledge of a few key staff
                                              your systems may lack the fexibility to handle evolving product or
                                              control structures
                                              your systems may be expensive to maintain and upgrade –
                                              for example, if programs are written in superseded languages.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 41
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                4




                                        Range of information technology systems
                                        You may use databases with different operating systems, which may
                                        make electronic exchange of data diffcult. Having diversity in your
                                        information technology systems may also hinder the application of
                                        standard solutions for development, testing and rectifcation.

                                        The greater the number of systems you have, the greater the cost of
                                        maintaining and modifying those systems.

                                        Range of product types
                                        Life insurance, superannuation and managed investment scheme
                                        products differ in their operating rules, record-keeping requirements and
                                        compliance obligations. Products are also affected differently by market
                                        and regulatory change, and may require individually tailored system and
                                        procedure modifcations.

                                        Where you provide different products, maintaining your systems and
                                        procedures becomes particularly challenging.

                                        Frequency of unit pricing
                                        You may provide products that have different unit pricing cycles –
                                        for example, daily, weekly and monthly. We have seen misunderstandings
                                        about the appropriate values for assets and liabilities (including fees and
                                        tax) for each pricing cycle.


                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  managing diversity
                                           Complexity is expensive. Simplifcation, where it can be achieved,
                                           will assist good practice.

                                           If you cannot remove complexity, you need to apply additional
                                           controls and greater vigilance and undertake regular reviews.

                                           If you have diverse products or systems, you must manage the
                                           associated risks. You need to assess the risks of diversity and
                                           implement appropriate risk management strategies. For more
                                           guidance see section 4.1, ‘Effective risk management culture’.

                                           Age of products and systems
                                           It may not be feasible for you to replace old products or systems.
                                           In this case, additional care and attention are required to manage
                                           them effectively as, for example, documentation must be kept
                                           up-to-date and the knowledge of key staff must be retained.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 42
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                   4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  managing diversity (cont.)

                                            Reconciliations can assist, in addition to vigilance and a strong
                                            control framework.

                                            Information technology
                                            You should plan to simplify and integrate your systems where
                                            possible.

                                            Products and systems that are new today may be legacy products
                                            or systems in a few years. You need to develop and maintain
                                            your systems to keep pace with market and regulatory change,
                                            and undertake ongoing review and improvements as required.

                                            You should also ensure that you have appropriate resources
                                            available for investment in information technology.

                                            When selecting and contracting with information technology
                                            vendors, you should take into account their ongoing ability to
                                            upgrade and provide support for your systems.

                                            For more guidance see section 4.5, ‘Managing change’.

                                            Range of product types
                                            You should clearly distinguish price calculation procedures
                                            for different product types. You should also conduct reviews
                                            periodically to ensure that procedures are updated for
                                            regulatory and market change.

                                            Frequency of unit pricing
                                            You should establish clear procedures for each element of the
                                            unit pricing calculation for each separate pricing cycle.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                           page 43
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                   4




                                        4.5 Managing change
                                           Many unit pricing errors arise as a result of change.

                                           Some change occurs in the external environment, while other change is
                                           driven by the board and senior management implementing strategic
                                           direction. Yet other change comes about during normal business operations.

                                           Regardless of the source, you need to pay particular attention when change
                                           occurs – for example, changes in:
                                             law and regulation
                                             tax and accounting requirements
                                             organisational strategy or structure, including takeovers, downsizing
                                             or relocation
                                             staff
                                             outsourcing arrangements
                                             product offerings, including investment strategy
                                             fees or documents, or
                                             information technology systems.

                                           Change that might appear initially to be unrelated to unit pricing can
                                           signifcantly affect the unit pricing function.

                                           We have found that there is an additional risk of error where there
                                           are many changes occurring at one time. In this situation, the internal
                                           environment often becomes unstable and management and staff can
                                           become distracted. Where many changes occur in combination, the usual
                                           checks and reconciliations may not take place or remain adequate. In these
                                           circumstances, the risks may not be apparent and unit pricing problems may
                                           arise and continue undetected.

                                           Change in strategy and structure
                                           A takeover or merger, or the appointment of a new board or senior
                                           management, is likely to lead to signifcant change that may affect unit
                                           pricing. In these situations:
                                             altered reporting lines or systems may affect the information available to
                                             senior and middle management
                                             people in teams may be dispersed to other work groups, made redundant
                                             or geographically relocated, which may affect morale or operational
                                             effectiveness
                                             staff with key knowledge may leave the organisation




                                           © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 44
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                4




                                          based on new strategy, or the need to obtain planned economies of
                                          scale, products, services or procedures may be changed without frst
                                          building a frm understanding of the effects of such change
                                          when companies and their products are acquired, unit pricing
                                          problems may be acquired
                                          there may be cultural differences. People in one unit pricing area may
                                          not communicate effectively with people in another unit pricing area
                                          or with people in the investment accounting, tax, registry, custody or
                                          investment management areas.

                                        Reliance on short-term staff
                                        Some operational unit pricing areas may have long-term reliance
                                        on short-term staff. There may be limited opportunities for career
                                        progression.

                                        Change in product offerings
                                        If your product offerings change, you may need to make changes to
                                        documents such as scheme constitutions or compliance plans, PDSs,
                                        or superannuation trust deeds.

                                        Your unit pricing systems or procedures might not support changes
                                        such as:
                                          investment in pooled funds rather than direct investment in securities,
                                          with the associated increased complexity in tax and fee arrangements
                                          investment in new assets that are diffcult to value
                                          change to fee arrangements, such as the introduction of management
                                          or performance fees or fee rebates
                                          change in benchmarks.

                                        Change to information technology systems
                                        If your information technology systems change, your system documents
                                        may be incomplete and may not provide a reliable basis for system
                                        development. System upgrades may not be fully tested or reviewed.


                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  managing change
                                            You should implement simple change management processes to
                                            approve, monitor and control change. These processes need to
                                            assess the effect of proposed change on unit pricing and need to
                                            involve unit pricing staff as early as possible.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 45
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                  4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  managing change (cont.)
                                           The effects of change vary depending on the type of change.
                                           Escalation points and measures need to be decided during initial
                                           planning. Careful monitoring and detailed reporting are required
                                           throughout the change process.

                                           You should provide training to staff and implement a
                                           communication strategy so that they understand the extent and
                                           effect of the changes. In doing this you should:

                                             advise staff of implementation timeframes and any reasons for
                                             changed timeframes

                                             consider constructive staff suggestions for managing change, and

                                             engage staff in the change management process to ensure
                                             continuity after it has been completed.

                                           Where possible, schedule the implementation of change to avoid
                                           reporting and other peak periods, when business workloads may
                                           affect the success of the change program.

                                           Your risk management strategies need to identify and address unit
                                           pricing risks and errors arising during change. For more guidance see
                                           section 4.1, ‘Effective risk management culture’.

                                           Change in strategy and structure
                                           You need to understand and manage the likely adverse
                                           consequences of change in organisational strategy or structure,
                                           including lower staff morale and key person risk.

                                           You should also balance the pressure to downsize with the need to
                                           provide effective service and comply with your obligations.

                                           Maintaining a strong focus on customer service can help you to
                                           direct attention and give priority to the effective operation of your
                                           systems, including unit pricing.

                                           When you assess potential acquisitions, you should assess the control
                                           environment, including the controls for unit pricing operations.

                                           Reliance on short-term staff
                                           Where you have high staff turnover, you need effective supervision and
                                           training procedures and reliable documentation in place. It may also be
                                           appropriate for you to consider ways of reducing your staff turnover.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 46
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                  4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  managing change (cont.)

                                            Change in outsourcing arrangements
                                            See the guidance in section 4.6, ‘Outsourcing unit pricing
                                            functions’.

                                            Change in product offerings
                                            Your product development, change management, risk
                                            management, legal, compliance, sales, marketing, tax,
                                            accounting, information technology and unit pricing teams
                                            need to understand each other’s language, timing and processes.
                                            If your product offerings change, you need to develop strong
                                            communication channels between these areas to ensure that
                                            everyone understands the issues and applies a consistent
                                            approach.

                                            Change to information technology systems
                                            You should use appropriate project management methodologies
                                            to implement changes to information technology systems.
                                            Guidance provided by information technology professional
                                            bodies may help.

                                            Operational staff who understand unit pricing procedures need
                                            to sign off on the test plans. The test scripts should deal with
                                            infrequent events, such as end of fnancial year, and unusual
                                            circumstances, such as price suspension. The test data should
                                            cover the valid range as well as the invalid range, to force errors.

                                            When you test the systems undergoing change, this should not
                                            be in isolation from the systems with which they interface. You
                                            must also test the downstream effects.

                                            You need to check the old and new systems for consistency –
                                            for example, by running them in parallel for an appropriate
                                            period, or by independent review.

                                            Integration risk
                                            Where more than one change is occurring in your organisation,
                                            or where you are experiencing frequent change, you need highly
                                            effective reporting and coordination to understand and manage
                                            the effects of one change on other change, and the effects of
                                            change on ongoing operations.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 47
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                     4




                                        4.6 Outsourcing unit pricing functions
                                            In fnancial services globally, the use of outsourcing to both related
                                            and unrelated entities appears to be increasing and in some cases may
                                            be the most practical option. Performance of business activities by
                                            service providers has attracted the attention of international standard
                                            setters who are developing principles and guidance for good practice
                                            in outsourcing.

                                            Outsourcing for unit pricing
                                            In Australia a number of product providers outsource unit pricing
                                            functions to service providers. Our unit pricing survey found that
                                            product providers appear to make a decision either to outsource very
                                            few, or to outsource the majority of, unit pricing functions.

                                            According to the survey, where outsourcing is used for unit pricing,
                                            business activities are more likely to be outsourced to an unrelated
                                            entity than to an entity within the corporate group.

                                            The survey also found that the functions most commonly outsourced are
                                            asset valuation and fund accounting. Superannuation providers
                                            generally outsource more than life companies and operators of
                                            managed investment schemes and, in particular, tend to outsource the
                                            calculation of unit prices and tax amounts.

                                            The majority of respondents to our unit pricing survey stated that
                                            they had service level agreements (SLAs) in place for most outsourced
                                            functions. Some superannuation funds, however, did not have SLAs in
                                            place. One-ffth of respondents did not report breaches of SLAs.

                                            In addition, more than a third of outsourcing agreements did not
                                            include arrangements for dispute resolution. The survey also found
                                            that a quarter of entities did not have arrangements in place to exit
                                            outsourcing agreements.

                                            Effective communication is essential in all phases of
                                            outsourcing
                                            The decision to outsource is clearly a determination for the board and
                                            senior management. However, we have seen instances where work
                                            units have not been consulted about the consequences of outsourcing
                                            and the key issues and risks to be managed during the transition to
                                            outsourcing. Effective communication channels may not have been set
                                            up between work areas, or between work areas and the board.

                                            When assessing possible service providers and later, when setting up a
                                            relationship with a particular service provider, product providers may not
                                            take the time to clarify the nature and levels of the services required.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 48
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                 4




                                        Commonly used expressions such as ‘soft pricing’, ‘leverage’ and
                                        ‘performance’ can have particular meanings in different organisations.
                                        Product providers may not have specifed in suffcient detail the nature
                                        and frequency of reports to be provided. Subsequently, during the
                                        transition to outsourcing, they may not have ensured that reports were
                                        considered regularly at senior and operational levels to ensure that any
                                        problems were escalated and addressed.


                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  outsourcing unit pricing

                                            Responsibility for outsourced functions
                                            When you outsource a business activity to a service provider, you
                                            are still accountable for the performance of the business activity.
                                            The risk of non-performance does not transfer to the service
                                            provider: see s601FB and 769B of the Corporations Act 2001 and
                                            s52(2) of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993.

                                            You must retain suffcient knowledge of the outsourced
                                            functions to effectively:

                                               monitor both the performance of the service provider and the
                                               end-to-end performance of the unit pricing function

                                               address any defciencies in performance, and

                                               ensure continued compliance with all regulatory requirements.

                                            You are also responsible for maintaining up-to-date knowledge
                                            of regulatory obligations.

                                            Outsourcing should be seen as a long-term
                                            commitment
                                            You need to carefully choose a service provider. Selecting
                                            an inappropriate service provider may lead to business
                                            disruption and damage your relationship with your clients or
                                            your reputation.

                                            It may take you six to twelve months to effectively transition to
                                            outsourced unit pricing functions. You need to work with the
                                            service provider to implement the transition using a project
                                            management methodology.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 49
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  outsourcing unit pricing (cont.)

                                            Considerable costs are involved in the transition process.
                                            Some industry participants have indicated that, to recover
                                            the costs of transition and gain the benefts of using a
                                            service provider, you need to think in terms of a three- to
                                            fve-year commitment to outsourcing.

                                            Develop and implement outsourcing policy
                                            and procedures
                                            You need to determine which functions constitute your
                                            core business and which functions can be outsourced, and
                                            develop a detailed business case.

                                            You should consult the people who are able to assess the
                                            risks, costs and benefts of outsourcing. In addition to the
                                            board and senior management, and depending on the size
                                            and nature of your business, these people may include:

                                               middle management

                                               the operational unit pricing team

                                               risk management, compliance and internal auditors

                                               the product development team

                                               the information technology team

                                               the legal team

                                               external asset advisers, and

                                               other external advisers.

                                            You need to develop criteria to assess the capacity of
                                            service providers to meet your requirements and you need
                                            to understand the key elements of a service provider’s
                                            unit pricing methodology, policies, processes and controls.
                                            Obtaining up-to-date, accurate and detailed documentation
                                            from a service provider – particularly their policies, systems
                                            and procedures, including diagrams and process maps – can
                                            greatly help in your discussions with them and your review
                                            of their compliance standards. You should also undertake
                                            reference checks to help you make your decision.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 50
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                 4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  outsourcing unit pricing (cont.)

                                            Assessment criteria may include:

                                               the fnancial strength and technical abilities of the service
                                               provider

                                               their ability to understand the objectives of your organisation

                                               their ability to manage unusual or internationally held assets

                                               the nature of the relationship management arrangements,
                                               including project management during the transition, ongoing
                                               relationship management and exit processes

                                               the systems and staff resources they have available for
                                               unit pricing and their capacity to expand. If the number
                                               of your investors increases, you may want to increase
                                               the number of products and the number of prices, or the
                                               frequency of unit pricing

                                               the nature and frequency of their reports

                                               the nature of their risk management and compliance
                                               procedures, including their internal and external audit and
                                               business continuity and disaster recovery procedures

                                               the profle of their risk management and compliance
                                               functions and the resources that are available to them

                                               the extent of access you and your auditors will have to
                                               their records

                                               how they have managed past problems, and

                                               their policies – for example, regarding tax and accounting.

                                            Managing the transition process
                                            The general guidance on managing change in section 4.5 also
                                            applies to managing the transition to outsourcing your unit
                                            pricing functions.

                                            Communication about outsourcing is in addition to, and
                                            should not compromise the effectiveness of, ‘business as usual’
                                            communications about unit pricing. Discussion and planning for
                                            outsourcing usually take place under pressure.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 51
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                   4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  outsourcing unit pricing (cont.)

                                            You must ensure that your staff with the greatest knowledge of
                                            critical business functions, including unit pricing, have appropriate
                                            support and incentives to work towards the effective transfer of
                                            unit pricing functions to the service provider. You need to agree
                                            on the project management approach to be taken and develop
                                            procedures for decision-making and escalation of issues.

                                            You should also clarify with the service provider:

                                               the services to be outsourced and the linkages with functions to
                                               be retained in-house

                                               your expectations regarding service provision based on the
                                               governing documents of your products. You will need to
                                               provide unambiguous, authorised instructions to the service
                                               provider based on these documents

                                               whether functions you retain need to be restructured. For
                                               example, some service providers do not generally backdate
                                               transactions. They accept only complete applications and
                                               clearly identifed payments. You may need to modify your
                                               arrangements with contributors to the fund

                                               the extent to which it is feasible or necessary to customise
                                               standard services. The cost advantage of economies of scale will
                                               be lost to the extent that services are individually tailored to
                                               your requirements. Also, substantial customisation may inhibit
                                               subsequent transfer to another service provider. On the other
                                               hand, there may be times when standard services need to be
                                               brought into step with emerging industry trends, or where
                                               there is no choice but to tailor services

                                               linkages with in-house business continuity and disaster recovery
                                               plans. You should test for a range of unusual physical and
                                               market conditions and determine the extent of periodic testing
                                               and review to be undertaken.

                                            You need to pay attention to the development of strong working
                                            relations, both in allocating resources to ongoing management
                                            of the relationship with the service provider and in agreeing on
                                            the contract for services. One entity or the other may propose
                                            their standard form of contract. If the service provider proposes
                                            a contract, it is likely that you will need to tailor it to meet your
                                            requirements.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 52
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                 4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  outsourcing unit pricing (cont.)

                                            You need to develop SLAs. When drafting SLAs it may be
                                            appropriate for you to refer to other documentation, such as
                                            procedure manuals and policies.

                                            In negotiating the contract and SLAs with the service provider,
                                            you need to consider:

                                               the nature, frequency and quality of the services to be
                                               provided

                                               standards required for sub-contractors

                                               whether you write SLAs into the contract, so requiring legal
                                               involvement to effect change. As an alternative, SLAs might
                                               be set out in a separate document to which the contract
                                               makes reference

                                               procedures for giving authorised instructions to the service
                                               provider, and

                                               timely and effective reporting. Some reports may be provided
                                               at pre-determined intervals. Others may be prepared as the
                                               need arises, based on pre-determined criteria. Generally,
                                               reports from the service provider should include comparisons
                                               with performance benchmarks, notifcation of breaches of
                                               SLAs and action taken when breaches arise. To effectively
                                               monitor service provider performance, your contract should
                                               require timely reporting of SLA breaches.

                                            Your contract needs to:

                                               provide for resolving disputes with the service provider

                                               establish mechanisms and assign responsibility for managing
                                               unit holder complaints and unit pricing errors

                                               provide for termination of the outsourcing arrangement and
                                               procedures for orderly transition. For example, you need to
                                               consider transfer of data and records of fund history

                                               address the use of confdential information about your clients.

                                            You may need to audit the quality of your data before and after
                                            transferring unit pricing functions to the service provider.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 53
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                                4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  outsourcing unit pricing (cont.)

                                            Outsourcing affects staff morale and productivity
                                            When you decide to outsource business activity, some staff
                                            know they will cease in their current roles in your organisation,
                                            although some may fnd a role with the service provider. This
                                            affects morale and may affect productivity.

                                            The impact on productivity may be greater when outsourcing
                                            occurs in the context of a takeover or business relocation.

                                            Monitoring the provision of outsourced services
                                            The transition team and procedures may continue to operate for
                                            some time after the end of the transition to outsourcing. This
                                            enables the known escalation and problem-solving procedures to
                                            continue during the early stages of the new relationship.

                                            You need to ensure that the service provider provides the agreed
                                            reports and that these are reviewed promptly at operational
                                            and senior levels of your organisation. You should check that
                                            breaches of SLAs are reported to you as soon as possible. The
                                            service provider should also refer such breaches to its risk
                                            management area as soon as possible.

                                            You need to implement training in your organisation to
                                            maintain knowledge of both your regulatory obligations and the
                                            outsourced functions. As noted earlier, you remain accountable
                                            for compliance with your regulatory obligations.

                                            You should periodically hold discussions with the service provider
                                            about issues, including changes to products and compliance with
                                            SLAs. Depending on the nature and complexity of your business,
                                            it may be appropriate to conduct these reviews monthly,
                                            quarterly or half-yearly.

                                            You need to review your strategic direction periodically and
                                            discuss with the service provider your levels of satisfaction with
                                            the outsourcing arrangements. You may need to update SLAs to
                                            match shifts in your strategy or the business environment.

                                            If you are a prudentially regulated entity, you need to ensure
                                            that APRA can conduct on-site reviews and inspect documents
                                            and information held by the service provider.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 54
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Management issues                                                                                              4




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  outsourcing unit pricing (cont.)

                                            Changing your service provider
                                            When changing your service provider, three parties –
                                            the outsourcing entity, the current service provider and
                                            the proposed service provider – need to set up effective
                                            communication channels. More time is required to
                                            communicate effectively. When the number of entities involved
                                            increases, the complexity and the risks increase and details may
                                            be overlooked. The level of risk increases further where an
                                            outsourcing change occurs due to dissatisfaction with current
                                            levels of service provision. In addition, if service provision
                                            moves from a related to an unrelated entity, you will need to
                                            manage any loss of organisational knowledge.

                                            For more information on outsourcing see:

                                               APRA Superannuation Guidance Note SGN 130.1 Outsourcing

                                               ASIC Regulatory Guide 164 Licensing: Organisational
                                               capacities [RG 164]

                                               ASIC Regulatory Guide 130 Managed investments: Licensing
                                               [RG 130]

                                               APRA Prudential Standard on Outsourcing APS 231 and
                                               attached Guidance Note AGN 231.1 Managing Outsourcing
                                               Arrangements.

                                            Also relevant are the IOSCO report Principles on Outsourcing
                                            of Financial Services for Market Intermediaries and the Joint
                                            Forum report Outsourcing in Financial Services, both published
                                            on 2 August 2004.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 55
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                      5




                                        Technical issues
                     5                      Chapter 5 outlines a range of important technical issues in unit pricing
                                            and includes guidance on good practice. The good practice guidance is
                                            presented as boxed text at the end of each section.

                                        5.1 Determining asset values
                                            Appropriate valuation of assets and any related liabilities is essential to the
                                            calculation of unit price.

                                            Asset valuation issues include:
                                              ensuring that valuations are unbiased
                                              the relationship between the frequency with which assets are valued
                                              and the frequency with which unit prices can be struck to enable
                                              purchase and sale of units
                                              the use of soft prices. We regard these as prices estimated as a part of
                                              normal business operations when actual or hard prices are available, but
                                              never in time to strike the unit price. Soft prices are based, for example,
                                              on index or other market movements
                                              determining values where assets are not traded in deep, liquid and
                                              well-maintained markets but where there are recognised valuation
                                              methodologies. These methodologies are applied with varying
                                              frequency depending on market conditions and the professional
                                              judgement of investment managers and valuers. Such assets include
                                              property and infrastructure
                                              determining values where assets are not traded in deep, liquid and
                                              well-maintained markets and valuation methodologies are less well
                                              recognised or are specifc to a transaction. Such assets include some
                                              types of complex structured products and some types of OTC derivative
                                              determining values where assets are traded in deep, liquid and well-
                                              maintained markets, but are traded only infrequently (‘thinly traded’) –
                                              for example, rarely traded shares
                                              determining values for illiquid assets. For example, some hedge funds
                                              are able to determine the value of unit prices only quarterly. Private
                                              equity may also be illiquid
                                              understanding the age of valuations, including the date of data feeds,
                                              and the date of unit pricing by external product providers
                                              understanding the unit pricing methodology used by external product
                                              providers – whether or not fees, fee rebates, transaction costs, tax, or
                                              distribution entitlements are included in unit prices
                                              developing, documenting and implementing valuation policies for the
                                              range of assets held in the fund.


                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 56
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                 5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining asset values
                                            Develop and apply appropriate valuation policies
                                            You need to develop sound and justifable policies for asset
                                            valuation for unit pricing. These policies must be documented,
                                            explaining the methodologies, the assumptions, and why they
                                            are reasonable and appropriate for the assets.

                                            You need to ensure that valuations are unbiased. As the product
                                            provider, you should exercise no undue infuence on the
                                            determination of asset values.

                                            The nature of your policies will depend on the types of assets in
                                            which your products invest.

                                            When developing asset valuation policies, the methodologies
                                            need to be consistent with the rules governing the operation of
                                            each fund.

                                            Where you outsource some aspects of the unit pricing function,
                                            you remain responsible for the valuation policies you adopt.

                                            Your policies need to document delegation levels for approval
                                            of valuations.

                                            You need to develop and document procedures to ensure
                                            consistent implementation of asset valuation policies. You need
                                            to monitor and report internally on the use of these procedures.

                                            You should review and update your asset valuation policies
                                            and procedures periodically, and as market conditions change.
                                            Obtain expert professional valuation advice where necessary.

                                            You need to provide appropriate resources to support valuation
                                            processes.

                                            Applying estimates
                                            You should not use estimates where actual values are available.
                                            However, in some cases, there may be no alternative but to
                                            use estimates.

                                            The development and use of estimates should be consistent with
                                            your legal obligations, your valuation policies, and the rules
                                            that govern the operation of the product. You need to develop
                                            estimates on a sound and reasonable basis and be able to justify
                                            why an estimate is appropriate in the circumstances.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 57
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                   5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining asset values (cont.)

                                            Your estimation policies and procedures need to be developed
                                            by people with appropriate expertise. They should be
                                            documented, tested periodically using actual data, and updated.
                                            For example, you will need to develop an appropriate policy for
                                            the timing and amounts to be included in the net asset value for
                                            year-end distributions. This may involve the use of estimates in
                                            some circumstances.

                                            Purpose of asset valuation policies
                                            Your valuation policies need to refect the purpose of valuing
                                            the assets, which is determining the entitlements of unit holders,
                                            taking into account intergenerational equity for unit buyers and
                                            sellers and ongoing unit holders.

                                            This purpose is not necessarily the same as the purpose of
                                            valuing assets to prepare fnancial statements, although in many
                                            cases the asset values will be consistent. Accounting standards
                                            can provide a recognised benchmark.

                                            However, different values may arise due to differences in
                                            timing or valuation methodology. For example, to assist in
                                            providing equity, deferred tax may be discounted for unit price
                                            calculations. This treatment is not permitted under accounting
                                            standards. Such differences should be monitored, analysed and
                                            reconciled, at least annually.

                                            You need to make available key information on the valuation
                                            bases adopted for assets and related liabilities, and note key
                                            differences in reconciling asset values for fnancial statements
                                            and asset values for unit pricing. This should be available in a
                                            form accessible to unit holders – for example, in your annual
                                            report, periodic statements or on your website.

                                            Valuation of non-exchange traded assets
                                            There are cases where values are not directly obtained from a
                                            market. Instead, values are determined by applying a model,
                                            or by periodic third party valuation, or by using an estimate
                                            between specifc valuation dates. For example, some OTC
                                            derivatives may be subject to private valuation arrangements.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 58
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                   5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining asset values (cont.)

                                            In all these cases, you are responsible for understanding the
                                            valuation bases and ensuring that the bases, including the
                                            model and assumptions, are appropriate, objectively reasonable,
                                            independently verifable and internally consistent. The bases must
                                            not be subject to your undue infuence. You should also ensure
                                            that they are periodically reviewed.

                                            You may seek third party professional valuation advice, but you
                                            cannot delegate responsibility for determining the asset value.

                                            Frequency of transacting and frequency of
                                            unit pricing
                                            You should price as frequently as you make it possible to buy
                                            or sell units in the fund, and process applications at the price
                                            effective on the date of transaction.

                                            Many funds price at least weekly, and large retail funds price
                                            daily. However, we note that some superannuation funds may
                                            price only monthly or quarterly. If you price weekly or less often,
                                            preferably you should batch the applications to buy or sell units,
                                            and process them on the day the unit price is struck.

                                            For more guidance see ‘Batching’ in section 4.2, ‘Unit pricing
                                            issues common to many products’.

                                            Frequency of unit pricing and frequency of
                                            asset valuation
                                            In principle, unit prices should only be struck with the same
                                            frequency that asset values are determined.

                                            However, the timing of asset valuation depends on the nature
                                            of the assets and the valuation process adopted. In some cases,
                                            you may need to use reasonable estimates of asset values.

                                            Soft pricing
                                            You should determine the appropriate frequency for calculating
                                            hard prices, and for comparing hard and soft prices, based on the
                                            nature of the assets.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 59
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                  5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining asset values (cont.)

                                            You should ensure that:

                                               estimates are checked with suffcient frequency against prices
                                               that have been calculated using up-to-date hard prices

                                               the checking process and explanations of differences are
                                               complete, and

                                               the practice of soft pricing does not encourage the use of
                                               inappropriate asset values. For example, values should not be
                                               stale (well out-of-date).

                                            You should also determine a reasonable basis for adjusting prices
                                            when a signifcant difference is found. Any rectifcation action
                                            should be documented.

                                            Assets valued periodically using recognised
                                            methodologies
                                            Where there are recognised valuation methodologies, as for
                                            property and infrastructure, you should obtain valuations
                                            periodically from reputable, professional, third party valuers.

                                            If more than one such asset is held in the portfolio, the periodic
                                            valuations should, where possible, occur at different times, to
                                            avoid concentrating the effect of any changes in valuation and so
                                            causing a price discontinuity. Staggered valuations also assist in
                                            early identifcation of signifcant market shifts, indicating when it
                                            may be prudent to obtain new valuations for other assets.

                                            Between periodic valuations, the value of the asset needs to
                                            be considered each time a price is struck. For example, where it
                                            is expected, based on experience or the nature of the asset or
                                            market movements, that the value of an asset is likely to increase
                                            at the next valuation, and there is a recognised methodology for
                                            doing so, it may be appropriate to estimate and include in the
                                            unit price calculation a gradually increasing value. Otherwise, if
                                            the price increases suddenly at the end of the period, there will
                                            be a price discontinuity. Those who sell immediately before the
                                            price discontinuity will be disadvantaged, while those who buy
                                            immediately before the price discontinuity will be advantaged.

                                            Price discontinuities cannot be avoided entirely. Once a value
                                            has been determined, you should include it in the unit price.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 60
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                  5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining asset values (cont.)

                                            However, to promote equity between unit holders, you should
                                            take steps to minimise the effect of price discontinuities.

                                            Other illiquid assets
                                            Certain hedge fund assets might only be valued every
                                            three months. Private equity might also be diffcult to
                                            value frequently.

                                            Where an asset is valued infrequently, daily or weekly prices
                                            cannot be struck between valuations unless there is a reasonable
                                            basis for estimating the unit price.

                                            Using estimates may be acceptable where illiquid assets comprise
                                            a small part of a large portfolio. You need to determine what
                                            is an acceptable proportion of assets in the circumstances of
                                            your product. You also need to determine a reasonable basis
                                            for making any estimation of value, having regard to your
                                            obligations, including the obligation to treat members equitably.
                                            Using estimates would not be appropriate where illiquid assets
                                            comprise a signifcant part of a portfolio.

                                            Thinly traded assets
                                            Some assets may be traded on deep, liquid and well-maintained
                                            markets, but may not have traded for long periods. You need to
                                            consider whether the last available sale price would be realised if
                                            the current holding were to be sold now. Special pricing models
                                            may be needed for such assets.

                                            Effect of the hold-sell strategy on the valuation
                                            model
                                            You should not use long-term valuation models where assets are
                                            to be sold in the short-term. For example:

                                               the period of time for which it is assumed an asset will be held
                                               in net present value methodology needs to be determined by
                                               reference to the hold-sell investment strategy of the fund

                                               assets are usually valued on a ‘going concern’ basis. However,
                                               this is clearly unsuitable where a scheme is being wound up
                                               and the assets are to be sold quickly.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 61
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                  5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining asset values (cont.)

                                              Foreign assets
                                              You need to carefully determine and consistently apply
                                              policy that sets the time at which you take the value of
                                              foreign assets or the time at which you strike the associated
                                              exchange rates.

                                              For assets denominated in a foreign currency, the appropriate
                                              exchange rate may be identifed in the fund documentation.
                                              Otherwise, you need to develop a policy to determine
                                              the exchange rate appropriate for the valuation point.
                                              For example, the exchange rate may be the Reuters 4pm
                                              London Exchange Rate or the last exchange rate at which a
                                              transaction in that currency took place, if more appropriate.

                                              Transaction costs should not be included in
                                              asset values
                                              Our general guidance is that a separate allowance for
                                              transaction costs should be included in the calculation of
                                              the unit price. Asset valuations should not normally include
                                              allowances for the costs of buying or selling those assets.
                                              In circumstances where transaction costs are unavoidably
                                              included in the cost of an asset, you need to ensure that
                                              transaction costs are not counted twice.

                                              For more guidance see ‘Transaction costs’ in section 4.2,
                                              ‘Unit pricing issues common to many products’.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 62
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                        5




                                        5.2 Determining tax treatments
                                            This section is relevant if you are an entity that is directly responsible for
                                            paying tax where this tax is included in the unit price of your products.
                                            In this case, you prepare tax calculations and tax returns and related
                                            accounting records for the unit priced fund.

                                            Determining tax treatments for unit pricing is primarily an issue
                                            for superannuation funds, pooled superannuation trusts and the
                                            investment-linked products managed by life insurance companies.

                                            Tax issues relating to other unit trusts, including registered managed
                                            investment schemes, and their distributions are not discussed in
                                            this guide.

                                            Administration of tax
                                            The administration of tax requires substantial attention to detail.
                                            We have seen errors arise, where, for example:
                                              the resources provided for it have been inadequate
                                              tax policies have not been reviewed
                                              there has been change in investment structure, or
                                              there has been staff turnover.

                                            Particular care may be required in determining tax treatments where a
                                            pooled superannuation trust operates products in both an accumulation
                                            and a pension phase and does not segregate the assets.

                                            Treatment of imputation credits
                                            A company pays tax on its income before dividends are distributed.
                                            To avoid double taxation, a fund manager or life insurer investing in
                                            shares receives both a dividend and related imputation credits. These
                                            imputation credits refect tax already paid by the company and provide
                                            a reduction in tax liability for the fund manager or life insurer.

                                            We have seen issues relating to the time when the fund manager
                                            or life insurer recognises imputation credits for the calculation of
                                            the unit price. For example, we have found that imputation credits
                                            may not be counted at all, or may be counted later than appropriate.
                                            A change from direct investment in shares to investment in shares by
                                            way of a trust also leads to a change in the treatment of the associated
                                            imputation credits.

                                            A similar timing question may arise for foreign tax credits related to
                                            investments in international assets.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                           page 63
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                      5




                                        Treatment of deferred tax assets (future income tax
                                        benefts – FITBs)
                                        Funds may have actual or net unrealised tax losses that can be carried
                                        forward as deferred tax assets or future income tax benefts (FITBs).
                                        These FITBs are available to offset future capital gains tax liabilities or
                                        future unrealised gains. FITBs may also be written off – for example,
                                        if market movements mean they are unlikely to be realised. Issues
                                        arise relating to the amount of FITBs that can be recognised, and the
                                        circumstances in which FITBs can be recognised.

                                        Our unit pricing survey showed a range of practice in recognising FITBs.
                                        Our review also found that where a view has been formed that the
                                        deferred tax benefts have been overstated, FITBs may not have been
                                        reduced to an appropriate level.

                                        Treatment of capital gains
                                        Some assets are subject to capital gains tax. Capital gains (or losses) arise
                                        where a taxpayer disposes of such assets at a proft (or loss). Net capital
                                        gains are included in a taxpayer’s return as assessable income.

                                        There are special tax rules for the treatment of capital gains in
                                        superannuation vehicles. Where an asset is sold within 12 months of
                                        acquisition, the gain is generally taxable at 15%. Where it is sold more
                                        than 12 months after acquisition, the gain is generally taxed at 10%.
                                        For some assets that have been held for a long time, the prior basis,
                                        allowing for CPI indexation, may apply instead. Issues arise relating
                                        to the treatment of unrealised capital gains and losses, based on
                                        assumptions about future asset turnover.

                                        There have been instances where the amount of tax payable on the gain
                                        has been over – or underestimated in the unit price calculation.

                                        Reconciliation of tax amounts used in the accounts and
                                        for unit prices
                                        For both current and deferred tax allowances included in unit prices,
                                        reconciliations followed by investigation of differences – against
                                        periodic accounts, fnancial statements and tax returns – may help to
                                        prevent or identify unit pricing problems.

                                        Our unit pricing survey showed a range of practice. Most respondents
                                        reconciled tax frequently – for example, monthly or quarterly – although
                                        some reconciled current tax only when preparing the tax return.
                                        Deferred tax was generally reconciled less frequently than current tax.
                                        Some entities did not reconcile the movement between current and
                                        deferred tax.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 64
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                 5




                                        Issues arise relating to the timing of reconciliations and the treatment
                                        of any differences. Our review of unit pricing practice found that
                                        reconciliations may not be undertaken or differences investigated. We
                                        also found that tax refunds may not be promptly obtained or included
                                        in the reconciliation calculations.

                                        Our survey also showed that the great majority of respondents, when
                                        fnding a difference between current tax in unit pricing and in the
                                        fnancial statements, credited or debited the difference to unit holders.
                                        A few respondents credited or debited the difference to a reserve for
                                        the future beneft of unit holders.


                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining tax treatments
                                            We expect that you will obtain expert advice on tax issues as
                                            required and apply that advice to obtain equitable outcomes for
                                            unit holders.

                                            A reasonable estimate of the tax provision must be used each
                                            time a unit price is struck. This estimate must be reconciled with
                                            the tax provisions in the accounts from time to time.

                                            Administration of tax
                                            You need to develop sound, justifable and robust policies for
                                            tax treatments for the range of foreseeable circumstances. These
                                            policies must be documented, explaining the methodologies,
                                            the assumptions, and why they are reasonable and appropriate
                                            for the fund.

                                            You need to develop procedures to ensure consistent
                                            implementation of tax policies, including circumstances where
                                            the policies require the exercise of judgement. You need to
                                            monitor and report internally on the use of these policies
                                            and procedures.

                                            You should periodically review your policies and procedures
                                            and ensure that you are satisfed that your policies comply with
                                            relevant legislation, seek to achieve equity between investors,
                                            and are otherwise determined on a reasonable basis. Obtain
                                            expert professional advice where necessary.

                                            You need to provide appropriate resources for the unit pricing
                                            tax function.

                                            For more guidance see section 4.1, ‘Effective risk management
                                            culture’ and section 4.5, ‘Managing change’.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 65
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                      5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining tax treatments (cont.)

                                            Estimation and assumptions
                                            While tax treatments may involve some level of estimation – as the
                                            timing or size of future cash fows is uncertain – you should adjust
                                            these estimates as soon as information on the actual tax position
                                            becomes available.

                                            The use of an effective or estimated tax rate or rates in day-to-day
                                            unit pricing calculations may be appropriate where:

                                               there is frequent reconciliation, and adjustment mechanisms are
                                               in place

                                               the method allows for differences in taxable income that
                                               may arise from differences in asset types (that is, the rates
                                               incorporate estimates that refect different tax treatments for
                                               different components of the return)

                                               the rates treat different unit holders equitably.

                                            Where assumptions are used for tax treatments in unit pricing,
                                            those assumptions need to be checked periodically by internal or
                                            external tax specialists.

                                            Treatment of imputation credits
                                            The principle is that unit holders present in a product at the time
                                            an amount accrues should receive the beneft of that amount in
                                            the unit price, even if legal entitlement arises later. This principle
                                            should be refected in the policy for imputation credits to the
                                            extent possible.

                                            For entities responsible for paying tax in unit priced products,
                                            we expect imputation credits to be included in the unit price
                                            as soon as information is available. It is too late to wait for the
                                            year-end fnal distribution from a trust to include imputation
                                            credits. Where there is a periodic (for example, quarterly)
                                            distribution and the trust provides information on imputation
                                            credits, they should be included at that time. If not, a soundly
                                            based procedure to progressively estimate imputation credits
                                            during the year is preferred.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                             page 66
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                   5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining tax treatments (cont.)

                                            When determining an estimate, factors you should consider
                                            include, but are not limited to:

                                               prior year experience – franking credit history and
                                               dividend history

                                               the nature of the fund

                                               market trends, and

                                               the stability of your product’s holding in the investment.

                                            You need to address imputation credits in three cases:

                                            1. When you invest directly in shares, we expect you to recognise
                                               both the dividend and the imputation credit in the unit price
                                               from the date the share is ex-dividend, or when the information
                                               is available, or when an estimate can reasonably be made. At the
                                               ex-date, the dividend and the associated tax beneft are removed
                                               from market assessment of the asset value. If the imputation
                                               credit is not recognised with the dividend, the assets of the fund
                                               after tax will be understated. It is too late to wait for the annual
                                               tax return calculation to include these imputation credits.

                                            2. When you invest in a unit trust that you do not control, other
                                               than a pooled superannuation trust, and the trust invests in
                                               shares, your method for including imputation credits in the unit
                                               price will vary depending on the frequency of distributions by
                                               the trust and the availability of the related tax information, as
                                               set out above.

                                               When you select such investments, you also need to consider the
                                               timeliness of information provided by product providers.

                                            3. When you invest in a unit trust that you control, we expect
                                               imputation credits to be refected in the unit price in a way
                                               that mirrors the approach for non-controlled trusts. This could
                                               be on a progressive estimate basis, or on the basis of periodic
                                               (for example, quarterly) information. This will minimise the
                                               likelihood of a sizeable price discontinuity which could arise if
                                               the imputation credits were recognised once a year.

                                            We recognise that imputation credits should not be included in the
                                            unit price if the right to the credits is forfeited – for example, under
                                            the ‘45 day’ rule.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 67
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                  5




                                                   Guide to good practice in
                                                   determining tax treatments (cont.)

                                            Foreign tax credits, on the other hand, often have a smaller
                                            impact, are less predictable and are more diffcult to
                                            progressively estimate. Except in funds where foreign tax credits
                                            have been signifcant historically, it would be acceptable to wait
                                            for the annual tax calculation to include foreign tax credits.
                                            However, if you can include the effect more frequently because
                                            you have received the dividends, or information on the credits
                                            more frequently, then you should do so.

                                            Treatment of deferred tax assets (future income
                                            tax benefts – FITBs)
                                            FITBs should be included in unit prices to the extent that
                                            they have value for present or future unit holders, taking
                                            into account the circumstances of the fund, the governing
                                            documentation, possible events, the likelihood and timing
                                            of those events, and your approach to discounting to allow
                                            for the time value of money. The value of FITBs included in
                                            unit prices should be systematically reviewed to help achieve
                                            equity between investors and to minimise price discontinuities
                                            in unit prices.

                                            We would not expect to see a tax policy that always, or never,
                                            recognises FITBs. It is reasonable to consider capping the amount
                                            of FITBs included in unit prices.

                                            For these and other reasons, the amount of FITBs included in
                                            unit prices may not match the amount of FITBs reported in
                                            fnancial statements. Depending on the size or the reasons for
                                            the difference, differences may need to be explained in the
                                            fnancial statements.

                                            When determining the amount of FITBs in unit prices and any
                                            cap on FITBs, factors you should consider may include, but are
                                            not limited to:

                                               the level of unrealised gains/losses

                                               expectations of market movements and their likely volatility

                                               the investment timeframe

                                               likely investment infows and outfows for the fund




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 68
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                 5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining tax treatments (cont.)
                                              the extent to which FITBs in one pool can be applied against
                                              gains elsewhere in the same entity or consolidated entity

                                              the applicable tax rate

                                              exposure of the fund to possible signifcant redemptions, and

                                              marked change in the circumstances of your product.

                                           Treatment of capital gains
                                           Assessing deferred tax on unrealised gains and losses can be
                                           complicated because:

                                              the tax rules are complex

                                              a fund may have many types of assets in one taxation pool
                                              and there may be interaction of tax effects between multiple
                                              investor options within one taxation pool, and

                                              the assets are likely to have been held for various periods
                                              of time.

                                           The treatment will depend on the length of time the asset is
                                           held. Where an asset has been held for less than a year, in many
                                           cases deferred tax will be calculated on the full capital gain rate
                                           of 15%. In some cases, however, there may be a sound basis for
                                           adopting a different approach where the asset is expected to
                                           be held for more than a year. Where an asset has been held for
                                           more than a year, deferred tax will, in most cases, be calculated
                                           on the reduced capital gain rate of 10%, unless the old CPI
                                           basis applies.

                                           It may also be appropriate to make an allowance for the time
                                           value of money, depending on your approach to discounting.
                                           For more guidance see ‘Purpose of asset valuation policies’ in
                                           section 5.1, ‘Determining asset values’.

                                           Reconciliation of tax amounts used in the
                                           accounts and for unit prices
                                           You should prepare reconciliations that compare the amounts
                                           used in unit pricing with the amounts, separately calculated,
                                           which are reported in fnancial statements and annual
                                           tax returns.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 69
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                 5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining tax treatments (cont.)

                                            You should prepare at least the following three types of
                                            reconciliation to:

                                            1. compare and resolve differences between the allowance
                                               for current tax in the unit price with the corresponding
                                               provisions in the accounts. Also compare and resolve
                                               differences between the allowance for current tax in the
                                               unit price with tax returns and with full year payments to the
                                               Australian Tax Offce

                                            2. compare and resolve differences between the amounts of
                                               deferred tax in the unit price with the amounts of deferred
                                               tax in the accounts, and

                                            3. compare and resolve differences between the movement in
                                               current tax and the movement in deferred tax.

                                            Preparing reconciliations once a year, within three months of
                                            the due date for payment of tax, is the minimum acceptable
                                            frequency for preparation of reconciliations, and is appropriate
                                            only for funds with simple tax arrangements.

                                            Funds with more complex tax arrangements, including current
                                            and deferred tax, generally require quarterly or, at minimum,
                                            six-monthly reconciliations for both current and deferred tax.
                                            Current tax reconciliations could be performed more frequently.

                                            When determining the frequency of reconciliations, other
                                            factors to be considered include:

                                               whether you use estimates of tax rates – if so, more frequent
                                               reconciliations are required, and

                                               the types of asset held as investments.

                                            Preparing reconciliations more frequently increases the
                                            likelihood of identifying problems early, and thus minimises the
                                            likelihood of accumulating errors in the unit price.

                                            Treatment of differences identifed during
                                            reconciliation or apportionment
                                            For unit-linked investors where there are amounts held in
                                            mixed product pools, differences between tax amounts in the
                                            unit price and tax amounts in the fnancial statements should




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 70
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                  5




                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  determining tax treatments (cont.)

                                             be applied equitably, taking account of the reasons for the
                                             difference and the nature of the products. For example, this
                                             may include transfers within the fund between product pools to
                                             share losses and gains and to equitably compensate pools. Your
                                             compensation policy should consider the rate and the order in
                                             which losses are offset.

                                             We would normally expect any identifed differences (positive
                                             or negative) to be applied to unit holders – including where
                                             the differences result from the combination of, or other
                                             interactions between, different classes of unit holder. This
                                             practice needs to be applied consistently and disclosed. If
                                             an alternative is adopted, this needs to be well considered,
                                             documented and justifed.

                                             Crediting differences to a reserve is acceptable where the reserve
                                             complies with our guidance in section 5.3, ‘Determining the use
                                             of reserves’.

                                             Adjustments arising from consistent application
                                             of policy are not errors requiring compensation
                                             In considering whether compensation is required when you
                                             make an adjustment to a unit price, it is essential to consider
                                             whether the unit price being adjusted was developed in
                                             accordance with soundly based and appropriate tax policies that
                                             were applied consistently.

                                             For example, where estimates included in a unit price need
                                             adjustment as the actual amounts become known, or where
                                             a reasonable tax policy is nonetheless reviewed from time to
                                             time and updated, neither the unit price before the change nor
                                             the unit price after the change is incorrect for the purpose of
                                             deciding whether compensation is required.

                                             Where such a change is to be made to a unit price, the change
                                             should be made as soon as possible. Such change should not be
                                             implemented gradually over a period of time.

                                             It is important to note that compensation does need to be
                                             considered where tax policy has been, or is, inappropriate or
                                             where the application of tax policy has been, or is, defcient.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 71
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                       5




                                        5.3 Determining the use of reserves
                                            A reserve is an amount that is not presently allocated to members.
                                            It is an excess of assets over unit holder entitlements and fund
                                            liabilities. A reserve is an amount held separately to deal with various
                                            contingencies arising during the operation of the fund.

                                            A reserve is not the same as a provision, which is an amount set
                                            aside to meet specifc obligations of the fund, such as provisions for
                                            fee and tax payments. The guidance in this section does not relate to
                                            such provisions.

                                            Reserves affect the unit price by transferring amounts into or out of the
                                            pool of fund assets on which the unit price is calculated.

                                            Reserves should not be transferred to the product provider. Reserves
                                            belong to members and are recorded in the equity section of a fund’s
                                            balance sheet. Although members do not have a present entitlement to
                                            amounts recorded as reserves (including retained profts), these amounts
                                            remain attributable to unit holders if the reserve is no longer required
                                            or if a product is wound up. This is not the case with the accrual of
                                            management fees in a provision, where the accrued fees are attributable
                                            to the product provider.

                                            Using reserves
                                            Some product providers – for example, not-for-proft superannuation
                                            funds – may use reserves, which may include amounts for:
                                              future capital expenditure
                                              unforeseen operational losses, as a form of operational risk capital
                                              monies not yet allocated to members
                                              differences between valuation for accounting purposes and valuation
                                              for unit pricing purposes – the resulting reserve enables the statement
                                              of fnancial position to balance.

                                            You need to consider whether the use of your reserves is consistent with
                                            your obligations to unit holders. You also need to determine how you
                                            will disclose reserves to unit holders – for example, in the accounts or in
                                            a disclosure document – to comply with your obligations.

                                            We have found that some product providers do not:
                                              conduct suffcient periodic review of their basis for transferring
                                              amounts from unit holder funds into reserves. Reserves may become
                                              larger than required and the subsequent rectifcation and reallocation
                                              to unit holders can be complex




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 72
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                   5




                                          clearly defne the purpose of their reserves, or
                                          implement procedures to ensure that reserves are used only for the
                                          intended purpose.

                                        Reserves and crediting rates
                                        Reserves have been used for a number of reasons, most commonly as a
                                        general reserve or an investment fuctuation or ‘smoothing’ reserve.

                                        For funds using crediting rates, investment fuctuation reserves have
                                        been used to hold back investment returns in good years to supplement
                                        crediting rates in years of poor return. This may be perceived as
                                        affecting member equity, as members who have taken the investment
                                        risk in good years do not receive the benefts of having taken that risk
                                        if they leave the fund, while other members entering at a later time
                                        receive those benefts in their stead.

                                        Not-for-proft superannuation funds and other
                                        mutually owned entities
                                        We have also found that reserves have been used in other ways,
                                        particularly by not-for-proft superannuation funds and other mutually
                                        owned entities, which may have no source of funds other than money
                                        received from members in the normal operation of the fund.

                                        Smoothing reserves and unitisation
                                        Unitisation is a way to equitably attribute a share of the value
                                        of invested assets to people holding units. Unitisation also enables
                                        direct reporting of returns in relation to the performance of the
                                        fund at any time. Unitisation provides greater transparency about
                                        investment performance.

                                        The use of smoothing reserves to move returns from the period in which
                                        they were earned to later periods is not consistent with the principle of
                                        unitisation. Smoothing reserves should not be used with unit pricing for
                                        this purpose.

                                        We also note that a fund operating a smoothing reserve may not
                                        constitute a unitised fund for the purposes of the member protection
                                        standards under reg 5.14 of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision)
                                        Regulations 1994.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 73
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                   5




                                                 Guide to good practice in determining
                                                 the use of reserves

                                            You should only use reserves for an agreed purpose that has a
                                            reasonable basis. When reviewing the purpose and operation
                                            of reserves, we will consider ‘substance over form’ rather than
                                            considering the naming system used in the accounts.

                                            You need to develop sound and justifable policies for the use
                                            of reserves, including the principles that determine who has
                                            authority to decide:
                                               when reserves are established or changed
                                               the amounts held
                                               when amounts are to be transferred into the reserve, and
                                               when amounts can be used.
                                            These policies must be documented, explaining the assumptions
                                            and why they are reasonable and appropriate.

                                            You need to develop procedures to implement these policies,
                                            and monitor and report internally on the use of these
                                            procedures.

                                            On a regular basis you need to consider whether:

                                               the original purpose of the reserve is still relevant for the
                                               operation of the fund

                                               amounts held in reserves are appropriate for the stated
                                               purpose, and

                                               reserving policies and procedures continue to be relevant.

                                            Any excess over the appropriate amount should be allocated to
                                            the unit holders at the time of your review.

                                            The purpose of reserves, and policies governing the operation
                                            of reserves, should be clearly stated in a form accessible to
                                            unit holders, together with information about amounts held
                                            in reserves. You need to decide the most appropriate way to
                                            provide this information, depending on factors including, but
                                            not limited to, the nature of the product, the size and impact of
                                            reserves and the characteristics of unit holders. For example, it
                                            may be appropriate for you to provide information in fnancial
                                            statements, on a website, or on request.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 74
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                  5




                                                 Guide to good practice in determining
                                                 the use of reserves (cont.)

                                            Where a reasonable policy framework has been consistently
                                            applied within a well-controlled environment, the fact that a
                                            reserve is later found to be greater than expected would not
                                            constitute an error.

                                            Under s52(2)(g) of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision)
                                            Act 1993, any reserves must be prudentially managed in a manner
                                            consistent with the fund’s investment strategy and its capacity to
                                            discharge its liabilities as and when they fall due. Following the
                                            guidance in this section will help you comply with this obligation.

                                            Do not use smoothing reserves with unit prices
                                            While it may be appropriate to use smoothing reserves with
                                            crediting rates, you should not use smoothing reserves with
                                            unit pricing.

                                            Commencement of unitisation
                                            If you are considering a change from a crediting rate system
                                            to unit pricing and you have reserves in place, you need to
                                            re-evaluate the need for any ongoing use of reserves before
                                            moving to unit pricing. In general, you should distribute
                                            smoothing or investment fuctuation reserves to members
                                            before the transition to unit pricing.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 75
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                      5




                                        5.4 Applying accounting standards
                                            Product providers that are Australian ‘reporting entities’ must use the
                                            Australian equivalents of International Financial Reporting Standards
                                            (IFRS) to prepare fnancial statements for reporting periods commencing
                                            on or after 1 January 2005.

                                            AASB 139
                                            AASB 139 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement provides
                                            that:
                                              fair value is the amount for which an asset can be exchanged between
                                              knowledgeable, willing parties in an arm’s length transaction
                                              for a fnancial instrument quoted in an active market, the fair value is
                                              the quoted price. The appropriate price in an active market is usually
                                              the current bid price
                                              if the current bid price is not available, the price of the most recent
                                              transaction is evidence of the current fair value if there has not been
                                              a signifcant change in economic circumstances since the time of the
                                              transaction, and
                                              fnancial assets are measured at fair value without any deduction for
                                              transaction costs that may be incurred on sale or other disposal.

                                            Other asset valuation standards also require the use of fair value.

                                            AASB 139 does not change the requirements for those superannuation
                                            funds that comply with AAS 25 Financial Reporting by Superannuation
                                            Plans.

                                            The change in accounting standards brings into sharp focus the question
                                            of whether the asset values used for unit pricing need to match the asset
                                            values used in the fnancial statements, particularly for equity funds.

                                            Some entities currently use the last sale price for both fnancial reporting
                                            and for unit pricing. If the bid price is to be used for fnancial reporting,
                                            these entities will need to either:
                                              use different asset values for fnancial reporting (bid price) and unit
                                              pricing (last sale price). That is, they will need to keep two sets of
                                              records, with reconciliations and disclosures to explain the difference,
                                              and meet the consequent increased record-keeping costs, or
                                              change the basis for calculating the unit price, if possible, so that
                                              the bid price is used for both fnancial reporting and unit pricing.
                                              Again, there may be consequent increased costs.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 76
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                       5




                                        Product providers have noted that, in some cases, the constituent
                                        documents of unit priced funds specify detailed methods of calculating
                                        unit prices. For example, there may be reference to calculating net
                                        asset value in accordance with accounting standards, or there may be
                                        reference to the use of last sale price to determine the price of fund
                                        investments. This issue has been addressed in some cases – for example,
                                        in ASIC Class Order [CO 04/1575]: see below. However, there are different
                                        considerations for life policies.

                                        In some cases, product providers have indicated that change may not
                                        be possible. In such cases, the clauses of the constituent documents will
                                        determine whether the asset values used for unit pricing match the asset
                                        values used in the fnancial statements.

                                        Product providers have also noted that benchmarking indices are
                                        calculated using last sale price. If bid price is used to calculate unit
                                        price, and so measure fund performance, there might be ongoing
                                        discrepancies between index performance and fund performance,
                                        depending on the actual differences between last sale price and
                                        bid price.

                                        AASB 132
                                        AASB 132 Financial Instruments: Disclosure and Presentation provides
                                        that a fnancial instrument can be recorded as equity only if the
                                        instrument does not include a contractual obligation to deliver cash to
                                        another entity (among other conditions). Because a unit pricing product
                                        provider has a contractual obligation to deliver cash to unit holders
                                        when units are redeemed, unit holder entitlements will now be recorded
                                        as liabilities rather than equity in fnancial statements.

                                        Some product providers have stated that confusion may arise where
                                        unit holders are accustomed to referring to the equity section of the
                                        fnancial statements (assets minus liabilities) to determine total unit
                                        holder entitlements.

                                        Some product providers have also noted that, where unit holder
                                        entitlements are classifed as liabilities instead of equity, the amount of
                                        equity shown in the fnancial statements might more frequently appear
                                        as a negative amount. This may be a cause of confusion to unit holders
                                        and to users of fnancial statements generally.

                                        We note that, for many years, life companies have recorded unit
                                        holder entitlements as liabilities, because payments based on insurance
                                        contracts are liabilities.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                              page 77
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                 5




                                        Class Order [CO 04/1575]
                                        ASIC Class Order [CO 04/1575] Managed investment schemes: unit
                                        pricing allows responsible entities of registered managed investment
                                        schemes to make amendments to scheme constitutions without a special
                                        resolution of members. Amendments can be made so that references
                                        to accounting standards in constitutions are to accounting standards in
                                        force immediately prior to 1 January 2005 and are not affected by the
                                        transition for fnancial reporting purposes to Australian equivalents of
                                        IFRS. Any such amendments must substantially preserve the rights of
                                        members as they were before the amendment.


                                                  Guide to good practice in applying
                                                  accounting standards

                                             Compliance with Australian equivalents of IFRS
                                             The Financial Reporting Council has determined that the
                                             standards of the International Accounting Standards Board,
                                             as implemented by the AASB, apply for reporting periods
                                             beginning on or after 1 January 2005.

                                             Accordingly, as a reporting entity you must ensure that you
                                             comply – for example, by:

                                                reviewing your agreements with unit holders, including
                                                governing documents, and reviewing disclosure documents
                                                and managed investment scheme compliance plans, to
                                                ensure that the impact of the new accounting standards on
                                                the operation of the fund is understood

                                                implementing change to documents, where necessary

                                                implementing change in unit pricing practice, where
                                                necessary

                                                modifying computer systems and unit pricing and
                                                accounting record-keeping procedures, where necessary,
                                                and

                                                determining what new disclosures, if any, are required and
                                                establishing systems and procedures to ensure that those
                                                disclosures are made.

                                             For more guidance see section 4.5, ‘Managing change’.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 78
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Technical issues                                                                                                     5




                                                  Guide to good practice in applying
                                                  accounting standards (cont.)

                                            Disclosures to unit holders
                                            Where there is potential for confusion about unit holder
                                            entitlements – for example, where entitlements are reclassifed
                                            from equity to liabilities – you need to clearly explain the change
                                            to unit holders and tell them where they can fnd information
                                            about unit holder entitlements.

                                            Where fnancial statements show negative equity, you need to
                                            ensure that you make appropriate disclosures to unit holders to
                                            explain the signifcance of this equity position. Auditors need
                                            to consider the relevant facts and take these explanations into
                                            account when forming their opinion on the fnancial statements.

                                            In the fnancial statements, you need to provide a summary of
                                            your practice regarding the matters discussed in this section
                                            (section 5.4). Use reconciliations, if appropriate, to explain the
                                            consequences for unit holders of the approach you have used.

                                            For more guidance see ‘Purpose of asset valuation policy’ in
                                            section 5.1, ‘Determining asset values’.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                            page 79
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                      6




                                        Consumer issues
                     6                      Chapter 6 outlines a range of important consumer issues in unit pricing
                                            and includes guidance on good practice. The good practice guidance is
                                            presented as boxed text at the end of each section.

                                        6.1 Providing information about unit pricing
                                            You are subject to a range of obligations to provide information. For
                                            example, there are specifc obligations to provide PDSs and periodic
                                            statements to unit holders.

                                            In addition, you may provide information to unit holders to meet other
                                            obligations, or voluntarily.

                                            In other cases you must provide information directly to regulators
                                            – for example, to notify ASIC of non-compliance with AFS licensee
                                            obligations.

                                            We have seen cases where statements about unit pricing have not been
                                            consistent in all the documents that relate to any unit priced product.
                                            For example, the statements in a scheme constitution have not been
                                            consistent with the statements in the related PDS. Unit pricing errors
                                            may arise where documents are not consistent.

                                            We have also seen cases where statements in documents have not
                                            matched practice. For example, a change in calculation method or asset
                                            valuation methodology or a change in treatment of fees has not been
                                            supported by the statements in the related life policy or PDS.

                                            Some of the ways in which information may be provided to unit holders
                                            are set out below.

                                            Documents setting out the rights and obligations of
                                            product providers and unit holders
                                            These documents include:
                                              scheme constitutions for managed investment products
                                              insurance policies for investment life insurance products
                                              governing rules of the fund, including the trust deed, for
                                              superannuation products.

                                            These documents generally explain matters including the circumstances
                                            in which units can be acquired or disposed of, and the approach to
                                            determining unit price. For example, a managed investment scheme
                                            constitution must make provision for a unit price that is independently
                                            verifable: see s601GA of the Corporations Act 2001 and ASIC Regulatory
                                            Guide 134 Managed investments: Constitutions [RG 134].


                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 80
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                 6




                                        Documents setting out compliance obligations
                                        Compliance plans of registered managed investment schemes and
                                        risk management plans of registered superannuation entities discuss
                                        procedures for calculating and reviewing unit prices and valuing
                                        assets: see s601HA of the Corporations Act 2001 and s29P of the
                                        Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993.

                                        PDSs
                                        Your PDS is directed to people who are deciding whether to acquire
                                        units in a product, and discusses matters including the benefts, risks and
                                        costs associated with investing in the product: see s1013D, 1013E, 1013F
                                        of the Corporations Act 2001.

                                        ASIC Regulatory Guide 168 Disclosure: Product Disclosure Statements
                                        (and other disclosure obligations) [RG 168] notes a statement of
                                        legislative objective:

                                            ‘the broad objective of point of sale obligations is to provide
                                            consumers with suffcient information to make informed decisions in
                                            relation to the acquisition of fnancial products, including the ability
                                            to compare a range of products’: [RG 168.20].

                                        A supplementary PDS is used, for example, to:
                                          update the information in the PDS
                                          correct an omission from the PDS
                                          correct a misleading or deceptive statement in the PDS.

                                        See s1014A of the Corporations Act 2001 for more information.

                                        Information to be considered for disclosure
                                        Taking into account your legal obligations and the nature of your
                                        products, you may decide to provide information in the PDS and/or in
                                        some other accessible document or form.

                                        For example, as a part of explaining key provisions of the constitution,
                                        trust deed, policy and other governing documents, or otherwise, you
                                        need to consider for each product whether it is appropriate to provide
                                        the following information and the form in which the information will
                                        be provided:
                                          how scheme assets and scheme liabilities are valued and the
                                          frequency of valuation. This would include, for example, any impact
                                          of complying with AASB 139 Financial Instruments: Recognition
                                          and Measurement
                                          whether income entitlements are included in asset values to calculate
                                          unit price


                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 81
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                     6




                                          how fee and taxation amounts are included in the unit price,
                                          particularly for products with complex structures
                                          details of other fees relating to the acquisition and disposal of units
                                          how the unit price is calculated and the frequency of calculation
                                          the method of calculating the costs of acquiring or disposing of
                                          underlying investments, and the effect of these transaction costs on
                                          unit price, as people acquire or dispose of units
                                          the types of costs, such as brokerage, that are included in transaction
                                          costs
                                          whether the price may be changed or transactions suspended where
                                          historic pricing is used
                                          other circumstances in which unit pricing might be suspended
                                          the purpose of, and the procedures relating to any reserves.

                                        For more information see ASIC Regulatory Guide 182 Dollar disclosure
                                        [RG 182], ASIC Information Release [IR 05–19] ASIC provides answers on
                                        some fees and costs questions and the fee disclosure template prescribed
                                        in Schedule 10 of the Corporations Regulations 2001.

                                        Transaction confrmations
                                        Where a person acquires or disposes of a unitised product, generally
                                        you must confrm the details of the transaction including the date and
                                        description of the transaction and the amount paid: see s1017F of the
                                        Corporations Act 2001.

                                        Ongoing disclosure to unit holders about changes
                                        and events
                                        You must provide to unit holders information about material changes
                                        and signifcant events to the extent that, if people were acquiring units,
                                        that information would need to be included in the PDS: see s1017B of
                                        the Corporations Act 2001 and see also the modifcations to s1017B in
                                        relation to superannuation products set out in Part 10 of Schedule 10A
                                        of the Corporations Regulations 2001.

                                        Some managed investment product providers must instead comply with
                                        the continuous disclosure provisions, providing information that is not
                                        generally available, either to the market (for listed entities), or to ASIC
                                        (for unlisted entities), where a reasonable person would expect such
                                        information to materially affect the price or value of units: see s1017B(2)
                                        and Chapter 6CA of the Corporations Act 2001.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 82
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                   6




                                        Information about superannuation products
                                        Providers of superannuation products must, at the request of
                                        current unit holders, or people who have been unit holders in
                                        the last 12 months, provide additional information: see s1017C
                                        of the Corporations Act 2001.

                                        Periodic statements
                                        Each year you must give information to unit holders of managed
                                        investment, superannuation and investment life insurance products:
                                        see s1017D of the Corporations Act 2001. This information is generally
                                        in the form of a periodic statement and includes:
                                          opening and closing balances for the period
                                          details of transactions during the period
                                          return on investment during the period, and
                                          details of any change in circumstance affecting the investment that
                                          has not been notifed since the previous periodic statement.

                                        Financial statements
                                        Companies, registered schemes and disclosing entities provide annual
                                        fnancial reports to members. These reports provide information relevant
                                        for unit pricing, such as information about bases of asset valuation, and
                                        information about unit holder entitlements: see s314 of the Corporations
                                        Act 2001. If a fxed dollar minimum is applied to compensation amounts
                                        in respect of a unit pricing error for exited unit holders, this information
                                        must be included in the annual fnancial report for the relevant fund.

                                        Websites
                                        Where there is no specifc obligation on you to provide information,
                                        but you decide it is consistent with your broader obligations to do so,
                                        we expect that you will make this information available in an
                                        appropriate form. Depending on the circumstances, you may use
                                        channels such as websites, call centres or correspondence, or include
                                        information in documents provided under statutory obligations.

                                        For example, you may include the PDS and current prices for unitised
                                        products on your website.

                                        If a problem has arisen, website material may include frequently asked
                                        questions, media releases and information sheets to explain what has
                                        happened and how the problem is being rectifed. If a fxed dollar
                                        minimum is applied to compensation amounts in respect of a unit
                                        pricing error for exited unit holders, this information must be made
                                        available on your website.



                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 83
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                    6




                                        Correspondence with unit holders
                                        If a problem has arisen, you may decide that the best way to
                                        communicate with unit holders is to write directly to each affected
                                        unit holder, explaining what has happened and how the problem is
                                        being rectifed. If a fxed dollar minimum is applied to compensation
                                        amounts in respect of a unit pricing error for exited unit holders, this
                                        information must be made available on your website.

                                        Call centres
                                        Call centres may be a signifcant source of information for unit holders.
                                        If a problem has arisen, in addition to other means of communication,
                                        you may provide call centre staff with scripts to explain what has
                                        happened and how the problem is being rectifed.

                                        Breach notifcations
                                        You must notify ASIC of signifcant breaches of AFS licensee obligations:
                                        see s912D of the Corporations Act 2001. Depending on the circumstances
                                        this may include notifcation of problems in unit pricing.

                                        For more guidance see ‘Communicating with the regulators about
                                        errors’ in section 6.3, ‘Managing errors and compensation’. You
                                        should also refer to the ASIC guide Breach reporting by AFS licensees
                                        (October 2004).


                                                  Guide to good practice in providing
                                                  information about unit pricing

                                            Develop and apply appropriate policy
                                            You need to develop sound and justifable policies for providing
                                            information. Your policies must comply with relevant legislation.
                                            Your policies need to be documented, and need to explain why
                                            they are reasonable and appropriate.

                                            You need to develop procedures to ensure consistent
                                            implementation of your policies. For example:

                                               you retain responsibility for compliance with obligations.
                                               However, it may assist if, in large corporate groups where one
                                               service provision area (for example, marketing or legal) provides
                                               services to many unit pricing entities in the group, individuals
                                               in that service provision area are nominated to assist each unit
                                               pricing entity to meet information provision obligations




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 84
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                  6




                                                  Guide to good practice in providing
                                                  information about unit pricing (cont.)

                                               you need to establish communication channels between
                                               work areas including unit pricing, tax, accounting, product
                                               development, marketing, risk management and legal and you
                                               need to establish periodic independent internal or external
                                               reviews to:

                                                  ensure ongoing consistency of documents and unit pricing
                                                  practice

                                                  ensure that all work areas have the same understanding of
                                                  timing to implement change.

                                            Where there are changed circumstances, to the extent possible
                                            you should:

                                               provide complete information about a change as it affects
                                               unit holders, including the products affected, the cause of the
                                               change, the size of the difference in unit price, the impact on
                                               individual unit holders, and who is bearing the costs. It may
                                               be appropriate to provide a chronology of events

                                               check disclosures for clarity and completeness. Information
                                               should be provided in a coherent and accessible form, not in a
                                               fragmentary or obscure manner. For complex issues, working
                                               with marketing or other communications experts, or consumer
                                               testing may help you develop clarity in the information you
                                               provide to unit holders

                                               provide information as soon as possible to prospective,
                                               current or past unit holders, advisers or employer sponsors
                                               of superannuation schemes. Where possible, provide
                                               information before a change takes place to assist unit holders
                                               and potential unit holders to make appropriate decisions.
                                               Failure to disclose appropriate information in a timely way
                                               may be a breach of fnancial services laws

                                               update all relevant documents to refect the change and
                                               co-ordinate updating of documents to match the timing
                                               of the change.

                                            You need to monitor and report internally on the use of
                                            your procedures.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 85
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                6




                                                  Guide to good practice in providing
                                                  information about unit pricing (cont.)

                                             You should also periodically review your policy and procedures
                                             and obtain expert professional advice where necessary.

                                             For more guidance see section 4.1, ‘Effective risk management
                                             culture’, section 4.5, ‘Managing change’ and section 6.3,
                                             ‘Managing errors and compensation’.

                                             Apply Good Disclosure Principles
                                             You need to consider the Good Disclosure Principles for PDS
                                             disclosure described in [RG 168]. These principles are:

                                             1. Disclosure should be timely

                                             2. Disclosure should be relevant and complete

                                             3. Disclosure should promote product understanding

                                             4. Disclosure should promote comparison

                                             5. Disclosure should highlight important information

                                             6. Disclosure should have regard to consumer needs.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 86
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                   6




                                        6.2 Managing complaints
                                           The term ‘complaint’ refers collectively to any enquiry, complaint
                                           or dispute, however defned, that may be dealt with under a given
                                           internal dispute resolution procedure or by a particular external dispute
                                           resolution scheme: see ASIC Regulatory Guide RG 165 Licensing: Internal
                                           and external dispute resolution [RG 165] for more information.

                                           If you’re an AFS licensee, you must provide dispute resolution systems for
                                           retail clients: see s912A of the Corporations Act 2001. These obligations
                                           also apply where you provide a fnancial product to retail clients and you
                                           do not hold an AFS licence: see s1017G of the Corporations Act 2001.

                                           You must comply with additional complaints management obligations if
                                           you are:
                                             the responsible entity of a registered managed investment scheme:
                                             see s601GA of the Corporations Act 2001 and ASIC Regulatory Guide
                                             134 Managed investments: Constitutions [RG 134]
                                             the trustee of a superannuation fund (other than self managed
                                             superannuation funds): see s101 of the Superannuation Industry
                                             (Supervision) Act 1993.

                                           The Financial Services Guide provided to retail clients by an AFS licensee
                                           or by the licensee’s representative, and the PDS must provide information
                                           about the dispute resolution system that covers complaints by clients to
                                           whom the fnancial service is provided, as well as information about how
                                           that system can be accessed: see s941A, 941B, 942B, 942C and 1013D(1)(g)
                                           of the Corporations Act 2001.

                                           External dispute resolution systems, including the Financial Ombudsman
                                           Service (FOS) and the Superannuation Complaints Tribunal (SCT), are not
                                           required to deal with all types of complaint:
                                           see [RG 165].

                                           Depending on the nature of the issue, concerns about unit pricing may
                                           be outside the jurisdiction of FOS and the SCT. Such complaints may be
                                           excluded under the rules of these bodies, as unit pricing relates to the
                                           management of a fund as a whole and not to individual decisions.

                                           Nevertheless, you need to address any unit holder concerns or complaints
                                           about unit pricing through your internal dispute resolution system.

                                           Effective complaints handling should, among other outcomes, increase
                                           levels of consumer satisfaction, and help to improve the quality of
                                           your products and services: see Australian Standard AS 4269–1995
                                           Complaints handling.




                                           © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 87
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                  6




                                        Our review found that:
                                          unit holders do not have access to the same information as product
                                          providers and usually do not have suffcient information to identify
                                          a unit pricing problem. An error may have existed for some time
                                          before unit holders notice any impact. A query about unexpectedly
                                          low returns may refect a unit pricing error. You may need to analyse
                                          certain types of complaint for unit pricing impact in addition to
                                          considering the specifc issues raised by the unit holder
                                          a cursory approach to complaints classifcation will not help you
                                          identify hidden trends
                                          receipt of complaints may be uncoordinated. For example, a unit
                                          holder may make a complaint directly in an email or a letter, or as
                                          part of correspondence primarily addressing another matter, or in a
                                          telephone conversation with a call centre operator.


                                                  Guide to good practice in
                                                  managing complaints
                                            Where an external dispute resolution (EDR) scheme is not
                                            available, there is increased emphasis on the need for effective
                                            internal dispute resolution procedures.

                                            You need to consider management of complaints and other
                                            customer feedback as an essential part of risk management.
                                            Analysing customer complaints can help identify systemic
                                            problems and emerging trends.

                                            You should ensure that:

                                               resources are made available to manage complaints effectively
                                               and consistently

                                               employees are encouraged to report instances of customer
                                               dissatisfaction, and

                                               all customer feedback is taken seriously and a summary of
                                               trends and key issues from all parts of the organisation is
                                               reported to senior management.

                                            Communication channels should be set up across organisational
                                            divisions to ensure that the causes of complaints are understood
                                            and addressed. These divisions may include, for example,
                                            consumer affairs, risk management, legal, marketing, product
                                            development, unit pricing and other operational areas.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 88
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                    6




                                                     Guide to good practice in
                                                     managing complaints (cont.)

                                            For more guidance see section 4.1, ‘Effective risk management
                                            culture’.

                                            [RG 165] provides that you should document your internal
                                            dispute resolution procedures to make them as transparent
                                            and accessible as possible and to assist with staff training and
                                            awareness. This includes:

                                            (a) the procedures and policies for:

                                               (i)    receiving complaints

                                               (ii) investigating complaints

                                               (iii) responding to complaints within appropriate time limits

                                               (iv) referring unresolved complaints to an EDR scheme

                                               (v) recording information about complaints

                                               (vi) identifying and recording systemic issues

                                            (b) the types of remedies available for resolving complaints

                                            (c) internal structures and reporting requirements for complaint
                                                handling.

                                            You should provide a copy of your complaints handling
                                            procedures to all relevant staff. A simple and easy-to-use guide
                                            to the procedures should also be made available to consumers,
                                            either on request or when they want to make a complaint.

                                            [RG 165] provides guidance on the application of AS 4269-1995
                                            to internal dispute resolution procedures in the fnancial services
                                            industry. You should refer to both [RG 165] and AS 4269-1995.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 89
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                       6




                                        6.3 Managing errors and compensation
                                           This section should be read in conjunction with good practice principles
                                           2.3 and 2.4 in Chapter 2.

                                           Errors
                                           If there are errors in unit pricing, unit holders do not receive the share
                                           of the value of the fund to which they are entitled. As noted throughout
                                           this guide, errors may arise from various sources.

                                           There may be errors in the number of units allocated. There may also be
                                           errors in the price per unit, for example:

                                           Errors adversely affecting unit holders on entry and exit

                                           If an error in calculation causes:
                                             the unit price to be too high, then fewer units are issued on entry
                                             to the fund. If there is no correction to the number of units, the
                                             unit holder will hold a lower value in the fund than should have
                                             been received
                                             the unit price to be too low at the time of withdrawal then, when a
                                             unit holder withdraws from the fund, the total amount paid to the
                                             unit holder for units redeemed is less per unit than the unit holder’s
                                             actual entitlement to fund value.

                                           Errors adversely affecting ongoing unit holders

                                           If an error in calculation causes:
                                             the unit price to be too low then, when a unit holder makes
                                             contributions, that unit holder gains the benefts that accrue from the
                                             greater number of units acquired, at the expense of ongoing
                                             unit holders
                                             the unit price to be too high then, when a unit holder withdraws
                                             from the fund, the total amount paid to that unit holder for units
                                             redeemed is too high, at the expense of ongoing unit holders.

                                           Where errors are not detected for long periods, compensation costs can
                                           be substantial, as unit price determines both numbers of units issued and
                                           amounts received on redemption. Where there is a pricing error for a
                                           transaction, the effect of that error – whether number of units on issue
                                           or price of units – fows through all subsequent transactions, in addition
                                           to the effect of repeating the initial error in subsequent transactions,
                                           until the error is identifed and stopped. Errors may affect many
                                           thousands of transactions.




                                           © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                       page 90
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                    6




                                        Where unit holders have gained an advantage due to a unit pricing
                                        error, you may choose to bear the cost, or you may seek to recover
                                        the amount from those unit holders. It may not be feasible or legally
                                        possible to recover amounts overpaid in some cases.

                                        Compensation
                                        In principle, compensation returns unit holders to the fnancial position
                                        that would have existed if the error had not occurred. Depending on
                                        the circumstances, including whether members are ongoing or exited,
                                        and whether performance has been positive or negative, appropriate
                                        compensation will include an amount for:
                                          investment performance (the investment rate of return is applied to
                                          the amount invested for the relevant period), or
                                          the time value of money (a rate such as the RBA cash rate is applied to
                                          the amount for the period of the error).

                                        For ongoing unit holders, compensation may be paid by issuing more
                                        units or by adjusting the price of units. For unit holders who have left
                                        the fund, compensation is often paid by cheque.

                                        In addition, unit holders in a registered managed investment scheme
                                        may take action against the responsible entity under s601MA of the
                                        Corporations Act 2001 for any loss, while unit holders in superannuation
                                        funds may take action for loss under s55 of the Superannuation Industry
                                        (Supervision) Act 1993. For more information see section 6.2, ‘Managing
                                        complaints’.

                                        Impact on product provider
                                        The costs of error rectifcation and compensation can be substantial.
                                        Costs may include:
                                          management effort or distraction from other parts of your business
                                          damage to your reputation
                                          the costs of calculating the amounts of compensation payable and the
                                          payment of those amounts
                                          the costs of system and procedure rectifcation, and
                                          amounts paid for any external review or advice.

                                        Identifying a source of funds to pay these costs and to pay compensation
                                        is a particular issue where you are a not-for-proft superannuation fund,
                                        without substantial capital reserves. In such a case, you may look to
                                        insurance or to a service provider that caused the error, or you may be
                                        able to draw on a compensation reserve built up over time from within
                                        the fund.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 91
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                  6




                                        You may need to involve the ATO when considering errors and
                                        compensation. There may be consequential impacts on unit holders – for
                                        example, regarding overpaid tax or compensation for tax. These impacts
                                        need to be factored into your approach to determining compensation.

                                        Issues may arise where compensation is to be paid to a unit holder who
                                        has already commenced an income stream product. Other issues may
                                        arise where compensation is being paid within the superannuation
                                        system. It may be appropriate to discuss these issues with regulators.



                                                 Guide to good practice in managing
                                                 errors and compensation

                                            Manage unit pricing errors effectively
                                            Regardless of the quality of your systems and controls, errors may
                                            occur. You need to establish policies and procedures for managing
                                            unit pricing errors and addressing compensation issues.

                                            You should have these policies and procedures in place so that,
                                            in the event of an error being identifed, you can give priority
                                            to limiting damage, addressing the loss to unit holders and
                                            preventing recurrence of the error. In our review we found cases
                                            where an error was identifed but the product provider was
                                            instead focused on establishing processes to deal with the error.

                                            Your policies and procedures for managing unit pricing errors and
                                            compensation should include steps to:

                                               limit the consequences as far as possible and monitor new
                                               applications and redemptions while you identify the extent of
                                               the problem;

                                               determine the number of disadvantaged unit holders – who has
                                               entered and exited the fund during the period of the error;

                                               consider the need for compensation – who has gained and who
                                               has lost, and by how much;

                                               compensate unit holders – the individuals or the fund –
                                               if compensation is appropriate. This includes making reasonable
                                               efforts to contact former unit holders; and

                                               communicate appropriately with unit holders. Our review found
                                               instances where complete information wasn’t provided to unit
                                               holders about the steps and timing to fx an error, including an




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 92
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                    6




                                                 Guide to good practice in managing
                                                 errors and compensation (cont.)

                                               explanation of how any compensation would be paid. You
                                               need to clearly and plainly tell them what went wrong and
                                               why, as well as how the problem will be fxed and when. This
                                               includes:

                                                  communicating with individual unit holders affected by the
                                                  error, and advisers if appropriate; and

                                                  making reasonable efforts to contact affected former
                                                  unit holders.

                                            Depending on the nature of the error, you may wish to
                                            communicate with all unit holders, whether or not affected.

                                               provide information as soon as possible after an error has
                                               been discovered. It is necessary to strike a balance between
                                               providing information quickly and providing information that
                                               is suffciently complete so as to be meaningful to unit holders.
                                               You should move promptly to ascertain the nature and scale
                                               of the problem so you can notify affected people – the shorter
                                               the delay, the better;

                                               determine the appropriate timing and frequency of
                                               communications, consistent with your obligations. Factors you
                                               need to consider may include, but would not be limited to,
                                               the size of the error in total and the size of the error for each
                                               affected person;

                                               where a correction is required, appropriately manage the
                                               possibility of arbitrage, to the extent that there is the
                                               possibility that people can time their buying or selling to
                                               take advantage of a change in unit price or a change in the
                                               number of units;

                                               recover amounts from any other entities responsible for
                                               the error;

                                               prevent recurrence of the error – for example, by reviewing
                                               and amending policies or practice, rectifying computer
                                               systems, or changing service level agreements with service
                                               providers; and

                                               properly consider who pays recovery costs. Unit holders do not
                                               usually bear the costs of compensation.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 93
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                   6




                                                 Guide to good practice in managing
                                                 errors and compensation (cont.)

                                            Independent review by external experts is likely to be important
                                            in quantifying errors and rectifying your systems. Thorough
                                            review may help you to avoid future errors.

                                            For more guidance see section 4.1, ‘Effective risk management
                                            culture’.

                                            Communicating with the regulators about errors
                                            You need to communicate with us as soon as possible when a
                                            unit pricing error has been detected.

                                            For AFS licensees, unit pricing errors may be signifcant breaches
                                            requiring notifcation under s912D of the Corporations Act
                                            2001. For responsible entities of registered managed investment
                                            schemes, unit pricing errors may involve a breach requiring
                                            reporting under s601FC(1)(l) of the Corporations Act 2001.
                                            For superannuation trustees, unit pricing errors may be breaches
                                            requiring notifcation under s29JA(1) of the Superannuation
                                            Industry (Supervision) Act 1993.

                                            You need to notify us of a unit pricing error as soon as possible.
                                            You should then move as quickly as possible to provide full
                                            advice to us about the error and your proposed course of
                                            action. We acknowledge that you may not be able to provide
                                            all of this information when you initially notify us of the error.
                                            The information we will seek from you will include:

                                               the name, type and size of product(s) affected by the error;

                                               the timeframe and project management approach for
                                               investigation, if required;

                                               any proposals for external review;

                                               the nature, size and cause of the unit pricing error;

                                               the period(s) over which the error occurred;

                                               whether you have notifed other regulators – for example,
                                               the ATO where tax is an issue;

                                               the numbers of unit holders and former unit holders affected
                                               by the error including those exited unit holders where




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 94
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                    6




                                                 Guide to good practice in managing
                                                 errors and compensation (cont.)

                                               compensation, if paid, would be below the fxed dollar
                                               minimum applying in accordance with the following section;

                                               your basis for determining whether compensation is payable
                                               including the basis for determining any fxed dollar minimum
                                               to be applied to compensation amounts to exited unit holders
                                               in accordance with the following section;

                                               your basis for deciding the amounts of compensation to be
                                               paid and who will receive it:

                                                  you need to have a policy that takes account of all legal
                                                  obligations relevant to your circumstances

                                                  you need to apply this policy, to determine compensation
                                                  payable, in a way that is consistent with your obligations

                                                  you should not proft from any error

                                                  you need to demonstrate to us how your approach is
                                                  consistent with all of your obligations, in your circumstances

                                                  you may need to obtain legal advice

                                               proposed timeframe for payment;

                                               proposed communications package and timeframe for
                                               communication with unit holders and former unit holders
                                               affected by the error;

                                               proposals to correct published information about unit prices
                                               and performance, where relevant; and

                                               timeframe and process for system rectifcation to prevent
                                               future errors.

                                            Principles Relating to the Compensation of Unit
                                            Pricing Errors
                                            When considering the need for compensation in the
                                            circumstances of your fund, you must take all relevant legal
                                            obligations into account and be able to demonstrate how you
                                            have addressed each of those obligations. You have duties and
                                            obligations under both common law and statute.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                          page 95
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                     6




                                                  Guide to good practice in managing
                                                  errors and compensation (cont.)

                                            We note that, historically, when determining whether to pay
                                            compensation and to whom, product providers have considered
                                            whether it is consistent with their obligations to set a threshold,
                                            or to differentiate between unit holders – for example, based on
                                            the size of the loss, or the costs of compensation.

                                            Consistent with the objective of seeking fair and equitable
                                            treatment of unit holders, we are generally of the view that:

                                               unit holders are entitled to receive compensation to the
                                               extent that they have been disadvantaged by a unit pricing
                                               error;

                                               all ongoing unit holders must be fully compensated,
                                               regardless of the amount;

                                               subject to the application of any fxed dollar minimum, where
                                               compensation is payable, it is payable to everyone who was a
                                               unit holder at the time the error occurred;

                                               you are responsible for all administrative expenses incurred in
                                               rectifying the error (however, see below in relation to not-for-
                                               proft superannuation funds);

                                               in determining compensation, reasonable efforts should be
                                               made to return all unit holders (including the fund and the
                                               ongoing unit holders) to the fnancial position that would
                                               have existed if the error had not occurred;

                                               you must not beneft from an error in unit pricing – where it
                                               is not possible to restore all parties to the position that would
                                               have applied if the error had not occurred, you are responsible
                                               for meeting any defcit, while any surplus should remain in the
                                               fund for the beneft of ongoing unit holders; and

                                               in the case of superannuation funds, you are responsible to
                                               ensure that there is no breach of the SIS Act.

                                            You have a responsibility to prevent unit pricing errors. You also
                                            have a duty to act in the best interests of unit holders as a whole.
                                            You must act honestly, diligently and impartially. As between unit
                                            holders, you must treat unit holders of the same class equally and
                                            unit holders in different classes fairly. You need to take particular
                                            care when determining compliance with your obligations.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 96
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                  6




                                                  Guide to good practice in managing
                                                  errors and compensation (cont.)

                                            When determining compensation in the circumstances of your
                                            fund (including not-for-proft superannuation funds), you must
                                            take all relevant legal obligations into account and be able to
                                            demonstrate how you have reconciled those obligations with
                                            your plans for rectifying the error and compensating affected
                                            members. In doing so, you should note that the allowance by the
                                            regulators of fxed dollar minima on compensation amounts to
                                            exited members does not affect third party rights against you in
                                            relation to non- compensation.

                                            However, we acknowledge that, when determining compliance
                                            with obligations, there are a number of factors to be considered
                                            and balanced. As noted earlier in this guide, soundly based
                                            estimates may be used for some elements of unit price calculation.
                                            When deciding the extent to which compensation is payable,
                                            it may be relevant to consider the degree of precision that can
                                            be used in calculating unit prices. Any decisions based on such
                                            assessment would need to be well-founded and documented.

                                            When is Compensation Payable
                                            When determining whether compensation is payable, you need
                                            to consider the impact on each individual unit holder of one or
                                            more unresolved errors. You need to:

                                               compare the value that would have accumulated if the
                                               unresolved error(s) had not arisen with the value that
                                               accumulated in the presence of the error(s), from the date the
                                               error(s) started to the date the effect of the error(s) ceased.
                                               You can regard an error as resolved if it was appropriately
                                               identifed and addressed within the terms of reasonable error
                                               management policy and reasonable compensation policy in
                                               effect at that time;

                                               if the difference is equal to or greater than 0.3% (30 basis
                                               points) of the value that would have accumulated without the
                                               error, pay compensation; and

                                               if the difference is less than 0.3%, consider whether
                                               compensation should be paid. For example:

                                                  this may depend on the type of asset. It may be appropriate
                                                  to compensate smaller errors for some products, for
                                                  example, cash management trusts;




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 97
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Consumer issues                                                                                                  6




                                                  Guide to good practice in managing
                                                  errors and compensation (cont.)

                                                  where an error arises due to miscalculation of fees, it must
                                                  be compensated in all cases; and

                                                  there may be other circumstances when it is appropriate
                                                  to compensate when the difference is less than 0.3%.
                                                  You need to consider the circumstances and your
                                                  obligations in each case.

                                            Considerable costs (including bank, correspondence preparation
                                            and postage charges) may be incurred in compensating unit
                                            holders who have left a fund before an error is identifed but
                                            who held affected units at the time the error arose.

                                            We also note that in some cases product providers may
                                            themselves be paid compensation. Unit holders entitled to
                                            compensation will not always be retail investors. In the case of a
                                            fund of funds, the unit holder might be a product provider in a
                                            layered sequence of product providers. Compensation might be
                                            payable by one product provider to another, who would then
                                            independently determine any need to compensate its own unit
                                            holders.

                                            Payments to Exited Members
                                            For exited unit holders a fxed dollar minimum can apply to
                                            compensation amounts. The following principles apply:

                                                  compensation should be paid where the amount of
                                                  compensation is $20 and above. You can compensate below
                                                  this level if you wish; and

                                                  if you apply a fxed dollar minimum, then disclosure must
                                                  be made on your website and in the annual fnancial report
                                                  for the relevant fund.

                                            For funds with crediting rates rather than unit pricing the
                                            principles above also apply for exited members.




                                        © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                        page 98
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Obligations relevant to unit pricing                                                                                    7




                                        Obligations relevant to unit pricing
                    7                       The entities most likely to provide unit priced products in Australia are
                                            life companies, superannuation providers and fund managers. All such
                                            entities are subject to a range of duties when providing unit priced
                                            products both at common law and under relevant statutes. Some of the
                                            specifc statutory duties and obligations are briefy outlined below.

                                            The information in this chapter is a general guide and should not
                                            be regarded as legal advice. You are encouraged to seek your own
                                            professional advice in relation to the matters discussed in this guide.

                                        7.1 Entities regulated under the Superannuation
                                            Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
                                            Section 52 of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 deems
                                            that a number of covenants by trustees are included in the governing
                                            rules of each regulated superannuation fund, approved deposit fund
                                            and pooled superannuation trust. The following covenants by trustees
                                            are relevant to unit pricing:
                                              to act honestly in all matters concerning the entity: see s52(2)(a)
                                              to exercise, in relation to all matters affecting the entity, the same
                                              degree of care, skill and diligence as an ordinary prudent person
                                              would exercise in dealing with property of another for whom the
                                              person felt morally bound to provide: see s52(2)(b)
                                              to ensure that the trustee’s duties and powers are performed and
                                              exercised in the best interests of the benefciaries: see 52(2)(c)
                                              not to enter into any contract, or do anything else, that would
                                              prevent the trustee from, or hinder the trustee in, properly
                                              performing or exercising the trustee’s functions and powers:
                                              see s52(2)(e)
                                              if there are any reserves of the entity, to formulate and to give
                                              effect to a strategy for their prudential management, consistent
                                              with the entity’s investment strategy and its capacity to discharge its
                                              liabilities (whether actual or contingent) as and when they fall due:
                                              see s52(2)(g)
                                              to allow a benefciary access to prescribed information, namely the
                                              information and documents that are available to a concerned person
                                              under s1017C of the Corporations Act 2001: see 52(2)(h).

                                            The Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 provides for
                                            a two-year transitional period commencing on 1 July 2004, during
                                            which all existing trustees must obtain a Registrable Superannuation
                                            Entity (RSE) licence. All RSEs in existence at 1 July 2004 must also be



                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                           page 99
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Obligations relevant to unit pricing                                                                                  7




                                            registered during the transition period that ends on 30 June 2006. Since
                                            1 July 2004, all new trustees have been required to be licensed and RSEs
                                            registered prior to commencing operations.

                                            Operating standards made in relation to licensing requirements and
                                            relevant for unit pricing deal with adequacy of resources, outsourcing
                                            and risk management: see APRA Superannuation Guidance SGN Note
                                            140.1 Adequacy of Resources, SGN 130.1 Outsourcing and SGN 120.1
                                            Risk Management.

                                        7.2 Entities regulated under the Corporations
                                            Act 2001

                                            Australian fnancial services licensees
                                            Unit pricing entities holding AFS licences include life companies, some
                                            superannuation trustees, and fund managers including responsible
                                            entities of registered managed investment schemes. Obligations for
                                            provision of fnancial services under an AFS licence include:
                                              doing all things necessary to ensure the services are provided
                                              effciently, honestly and fairly: see s912A(1)(a)
                                              having adequate arrangements to manage conficts of interest:
                                              see s912A(1)(aa)
                                              having adequate fnancial, technological and human resources,
                                              unless the licensee is a body regulated by APRA: see s912A(1)(d)
                                              maintaining the competence to provide those services: see s912A(1)(e)
                                              ensuring that representatives are adequately trained and competent
                                              to provide those services: see s912A(1)(f)
                                              having complying dispute resolution systems where services are
                                              provided to retail clients: see s912A(1)(g)
                                              having adequate risk management systems, unless the licensee is a
                                              body regulated by APRA: see s912A(1)(h).

                                            Responsible entities of registered managed investment
                                            schemes
                                            Fund managers operating managed investment schemes registered
                                            under Chapter 5C have additional obligations as responsible entities.
                                            These obligations include:
                                              acting honestly: see s601FC(1)(a)
                                              exercising the degree of care and diligence that a reasonable person
                                              would exercise in that position: see s601FC(1)(b)




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                      page 100
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Obligations relevant to unit pricing                                                                                   7




                                              acting in the best interests of the members and if there is a confict
                                              between the members’ interests and the interests of the responsible
                                              entity, giving priority to the members’ interests: see s601FC(1)(c)
                                              treating members who hold interests in the same class equally and
                                              members who hold interests in different classes fairly: see s601FC(1)(d)
                                              ensuring that scheme property is valued at regular intervals
                                              appropriate to the nature of the property: see s601FC(1)(j)
                                              ensuring that all payments out of the scheme property are made in
                                              accordance with the scheme’s constitution and with the Corporations
                                              Act 2001: see s601FC(1)(k)
                                              ensuring that the constitution of a registered scheme makes adequate
                                              provision for matters including consideration to be paid to acquire
                                              interests in a scheme, withdrawal from a scheme, and dealing with
                                              complaints: see s601GA and ASIC Regulatory Guide 134 Managed
                                              investments: Constitutions [RG 134].

                                            Offcers of responsible entities have related obligations, including taking
                                            steps to ensure compliance with the scheme’s constitution: see s601FD.

                                            Directors and other offcers
                                            Directors and other offcers of a corporation have obligations including
                                            the requirements to exercise their powers and discharge their duties:
                                              with the degree of care and diligence that a reasonable person would
                                              exercise in those circumstances: see s180
                                              In good faith in the best interests of the corporation: see s181.

                                        7.3 Entities regulated under the Life Insurance
                                            Act 1995
                                            As well as being subject to the requirements of the Corporations Act
                                            2001, life insurance companies and friendly societies are also regulated
                                            under the Life Insurance Act 1995. The Life Insurance Act 1995 imposes a
                                            number of obligations that are generally relevant, although not specifc,
                                            to unit priced products.

                                            These include the obligation for a director of a life company or friendly
                                            society to take reasonable care and use due diligence to see that, in the
                                            investment, administration and management of the assets of a statutory
                                            fund, the life company gives priority to the interests of the owners and
                                            prospective owners of policies referable to the fund: see s48(2).

                                            In addition, s116 of the Life Insurance Act 1995 provides that the
                                            appointed actuary must include advice on unit value methods as part of
                                            the advice in relation to issuing new types of policies that include units.




                                            © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                         page 101
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Key terms                                                                                                               8




                                        Key terms
                     8                    AASB                       Australian Accounting Standards Board

                                          APRA                       Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

                                          ASIC                       Australian Securities & Investments Commission

                                          ATO                        Australian Taxation Offce

                                          fund                       pooled investment product

                                          governing documents        These documents set out the rights and
                                                                     obligations of product providers and unit
                                                                     holders and include:

                                                                          scheme constitutions and compliance plans
                                                                          for managed investment schemes

                                                                          insurance policies for investment life
                                                                          insurance products

                                                                          governing rules of the fund, including the
                                                                          trust deed, for superannuation funds.

                                                                     Statements made in PDSs and other documents
                                                                     relating to the product need to be consistent
                                                                     with statements in the governing documents.

                                          independent review         Independent reviews can be undertaken by
                                                                     parties that are not directly involved in the unit
                                                                     pricing function. For example, independent
                                                                     review may be undertaken by internal audit,
                                                                     the compliance unit, the risk management unit,
                                                                     external auditors, actuaries or by other external
                                                                     advisers, depending on the circumstances.
                                                                     Product providers must decide who is the
                                                                     appropriate entity to undertake independent
                                                                     review, based on the circumstances and taking
                                                                     account of legal obligations.

                                          PDS                        Product Disclosure Statement

                                          periodic review            The frequency and nature of reviews are at
                                                                     the discretion of the product provider, based
                                                                     on the circumstances and taking account of
                                                                     legal obligations



                                          © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                            page 102
Unit pricing — guide to good practice
Key terms                                                                                                              8




                                        product                  Unit priced products include:

                                                                     investment life insurance policies

                                                                     allocated annuity and pension products provided
                                                                     by life insurance companies

                                                                     superannuation funds

                                                                     wholesale or retail managed investment schemes

                                                                     pooled superannuation trusts.

                                        product provider         Providers of unit priced products include life
                                                                 companies offering investment life products and
                                                                 superannuation, allocated annuity and pension
                                                                 products, superannuation trustees offering
                                                                 superannuation funds, responsible entities offering
                                                                 registered managed investment schemes and other
                                                                 fund managers offering managed investment schemes
                                                                 or pooled superannuation trusts.

                                        service provider         Where a product provider decides to outsource
                                                                 certain functions, those functions are performed by
                                                                 a service provider.

                                        superannuation fund      Registrable superannuation entity as defned in s10 of
                                                                 the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993

                                        the regulators           APRA and ASIC

                                        we/us/our                the regulators

                                        you/your                 product provider




                                              © ASIC and APRA > August 2008                                     page 103
                              UP_GGP_082008_ex



© ASIC and APRA August 2008




          www.asic.gov.au
          www.apra.gov.au
