REGULATORY GUIDE 58


Reporting by registered
foreign companies and
Australian companies with
foreign shareholders

June 2020




About this guide
This guide is for registered foreign companies and companies in which a
foreign company has an interest.

It describes the relief we may grant to:
    exempt these companies from certain financial reporting obligations in
     the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act); and
    allow the financial year of a company, registered managed investment
     scheme or disclosing entity to be synchronised with that of its foreign
     parent company.

Note: From 27 July 2020, applications for relief should be submitted through
the ASIC Regulatory Portal. For more information, see how you apply for
relief.
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in June 2020 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. The note on the front page was inserted
                             on 27 July 2020.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 58, Reporting requirements: Registered
                                     foreign companies and Australian companies, issued January 2008,
                                     reissued November 2009, May 2011 and July 2018
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 58, issued June 1993, reissued May
                                     1997, September 1998, April 2000 and February 2005, rebadged as a
                                     regulatory guide 5 July 2007
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 36, issued October 1992, incorporated
                                     into Regulatory Guide 58 in June 1993 and withdrawn


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 2
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Financial reporting obligations ........................................................... 4
                                    Relief from reporting obligations ........................................................ 5
                                    Synchronising a financial year with a foreign parent ......................... 5
                             B      Financial reporting obligations ...................................................... 6
                                    Who has to prepare annual financial reports and directors’ reports .. 6
                                    What is a ‘large group’? ..................................................................... 7
                             C      Relief from reporting obligations ................................................. 10
                                    Registered foreign companies ......................................................... 10
                                    Large proprietary companies with foreign company shareholders .. 11
                                    Small proprietary companies controlled by foreign companies ....... 11
                                    Audit relief: ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 14
                             D      Synchronising a financial year with a foreign parent ................ 15
                                    Financial year length ........................................................................ 15
                                    Relief under ASIC Corporations (Synchronisation of Financial Years)
                                    Instrument 2016/189 ........................................................................ 15
                                    Individual relief ................................................................................. 16
                             Appendix: General reporting requirements ........................................ 19
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 21
                             Related information ............................................................................... 23




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                                          Page 3
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               This guide explains the relief we give to:
                               • registered foreign companies and companies in which a foreign
                                 company has an interest from certain financial reporting obligations in
                                 the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act); and
                               • a company, registered managed investment scheme (registered
                                 scheme) or disclosing entity to allow its financial year to be
                                 synchronised with that of its foreign parent company.




Financial reporting obligations
              RG 58.1        Under s292(2)(b), a small proprietary company that is controlled by a
                             foreign company must prepare and lodge a financial report if:
                             (a)   it was controlled by a foreign company for all or part of the year; and
                             (b)   it is not consolidated for that period in financial statements lodged with
                                   ASIC for that year by a registered foreign company, company,
                                   registered scheme or disclosing entity.

              RG 58.2        Registered foreign companies or small proprietary companies that are
                             controlled by a foreign company may be eligible for relief from preparing
                             and lodging financial reports if they are not part of a ‘large group’ under
                             ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports)
                             Instrument 2017/204. We use the test in s45A(3) to define when a group is a
                             ‘large group’: see Section B.

              RG 58.3        While ASIC may provide relief to registered foreign companies from some
                             or all of the requirements of s601CK, the relief may not be granted where it
                             results in a registered foreign company lodging less information than an
                             equivalent Australian company.

              RG 58.4        ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports)
                             Instrument 2017/204 also puts the reporting requirements of small
                             proprietary companies that are controlled by a foreign company on par with
                             other Australian small proprietary companies.

                                   Note: See the appendix for an overview of the general financial reporting requirements
                                   for registered foreign companies and small proprietary companies that are controlled by
                                   a foreign company if no relief is applied.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                       Page 4
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




Relief from reporting obligations
              RG 58.5        We give relief from certain financial reporting obligations to:
                             (a)   registered foreign companies;
                             (b)   large proprietary companies that have foreign company shareholders;
                                   and
                             (c)   small proprietary companies that are controlled by foreign companies.

              RG 58.6        Registered foreign companies or companies must notify us when the relief
                             will be applied and when it will cease. We may also notify a registered
                             foreign company or a company that it cannot rely on the relief for a specific
                             financial year: see Section C.



Synchronising a financial year with a foreign parent
              RG 58.7        A company, registered scheme or disclosing entity may synchronise its
                             financial year with a foreign parent if it is eligible under ASIC Corporations
                             (Synchronisation of Financial Years) Instrument 2016/189, or by applying
                             for individual relief if the instrument does not apply: see Section D.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 5
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




B          Financial reporting obligations

                               Key points

                               A small proprietary company that is controlled by a foreign company must
                               apply the principles in s292(2)(b) when lodging financial statements.

                               Registered foreign companies or small proprietary companies that are
                               controlled by a foreign company may be eligible for relief from preparing
                               and lodging financial reports if they are not part of a ‘large group’ under
                               ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports)
                               Instrument 2017/204. We use the test in s45A(3) to define when a group is
                               a ‘large group’.




Who has to prepare annual financial reports and directors’ reports
              RG 58.8        Under s292(2)(b), a small proprietary company that is controlled by a
                             foreign company must prepare and lodge a financial report only if:
                             (a)   it was controlled by a foreign company for all or part of the year; and
                             (b)   it is not consolidated for that period in financial statements lodged with
                                   ASIC for that year by a registered foreign company, company,
                                   registered scheme or disclosing entity.

              RG 58.9        For the purposes of s292(2)(b) and using the definition of ‘control’ in s9, the
                             control test in s50AA must be used to determine whether a small proprietary
                             company is controlled by a foreign company.

              RG 58.10       Section 292(2)(b) was not intended to allow a foreign company to lodge its
                             financial statements with ASIC under the Corporations Act. It also does not
                             permit a small proprietary company to lodge the financial statements of a
                             foreign parent company under its Australian Company Number (ACN).
                             However, under s3CA of the Tax Administration Act 1953, significant global
                             entities must lodge their general purpose financial statements with the
                             Commissioner of Taxation for income tax purposes. A copy of an entity’s
                             general purpose financial statements is provided to ASIC—it appears on the
                             register and is available to the public.

              RG 58.11       The Corporations Act only requires the lodgement of financial reports by
                             companies that are registered foreign companies. We therefore cannot accept
                             financial statements lodged by non-registered foreign companies in place of
                             the financial, directors’ and auditors’ reports of a controlled small
                             proprietary company.

              RG 58.12       Registered foreign companies must lodge financial information once in
                             every calendar year and at intervals of no more than 15 months: see s601CK.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 6
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




                             However, an Australian small proprietary company that is controlled by a
                             foreign company must lodge four months after the end of the financial year.
                             This means that if a registered foreign company plans to lodge consolidated
                             financial statements:
                             (a)   the Australian small proprietary company it controls does not have to
                                   prepare and lodge its own financial, directors’ and auditors’ reports; and
                             (b)   the registered foreign company must lodge its consolidated financial
                                   statements within four months after the end of the financial year of the
                                   Australian small proprietary company.

              RG 58.13       We will consider applications for individual relief under s340 to extend this
                             time: see Regulatory Guide 43 Financial reports and audit relief (RG 43)
                             and Regulatory Guide 51 Applications for relief (RG 51). Pre-conditions for
                             relief under s340 are set out in s342. The Corporations Act sets out specific
                             deadlines in which a statutory financial report must be lodged with ASIC.
                             Only in rare circumstances will we grant an extension of this time on the
                             basis that it is an unreasonable burden. In the case of a disclosing entity any
                             relief is unlikely to be for more than four weeks.

              RG 58.14       When it lodges its consolidated financial statements, the controlling foreign
                             company does not have to be a registered foreign company at the end of the
                             controlled small proprietary company’s financial year. However, the foreign
                             company needs to be registered under Pt 5B.2 when it lodges its
                             consolidated financial statements.



What is a ‘large group’?
              RG 58.15       Registered foreign companies or small proprietary companies that are
                             controlled by a foreign company may be eligible for relief from preparing
                             and lodging financial reports if they are not part of a ‘large group’ in
                             Australia under ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports)
                             Instrument 2017/204. This stops companies that are foreign controlled
                             separating into smaller companies to avoid their financial reporting
                             obligations.

              RG 58.16       Under ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports)
                             Instrument 2017/204, a ‘group’ comprises:
                             (a)   the entity in question;
                             (b)   entities that control the entity in question and are incorporated or
                                   formed in Australia or carry on business in Australia;
                             (c)   any other entities (the other entities) controlled by any foreign company
                                   that controls the entity in question that are incorporated, formed or
                                   carrying on business in Australia; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 7
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




                             (d)   any entities that are controlled by the entity in question or the other
                                   entities.

              RG 58.17       To be included in the group, the controlled entities of the entity in question
                             and the other entities do not have to be incorporated, formed or carrying on
                             business in Australia.

              RG 58.18       For financial years commencing on or after 1 July 2019, a group is a ‘large
                             group’ when, on a combined basis, it satisfies at least two of the following
                             criteria for the financial year of the company in question:
                             (a)   its combined revenue for the financial year is $50 million, or other
                                   amount prescribed by the regulations, or more;
                             (b)   the combined value of its gross assets at the end of the financial year is
                                   $25 million, or other amount prescribed by the regulations, or more;
                                   and/or
                             (c)   it has 100, or any other prescribed number, or more, employees at the
                                   end of the financial year (part-time employees are counted as an
                                   appropriate fraction of a full-time equivalent).

              RG 58.19       For financial years commencing before 30 June 2019, a group is a ‘large
                             group’ when, on a combined basis, it satisfies at least two of the following
                             criteria for the financial year of the company in question:
                             (a)   its combined revenue for the financial year is $25 million, or other
                                   amount prescribed by the regulations, or more;
                             (b)   the combined value of its gross assets at the end of the financial year is
                                   $12.5 million, or other amount prescribed by the regulations, or more;
                                   and/or
                             (c)   it has 50, or any other prescribed number, or more, employees at the
                                   end of the financial year (part-time employees are counted as an
                                   appropriate fraction of a full-time equivalent).

                                   Note: The above size criteria are based on the size criteria for financial reporting by
                                   proprietary companies under s45A(3).

              RG 58.20       Combining the financial information of the group is a process similar to
                             consolidation. Groups which cannot be combined are:
                             (a)   foreign parent companies that do not carry on business in Australia
                                   unless they are controlled by an entity operating or incorporated in
                                   Australia; and
                             (b)   entities controlled by a foreign company that are not incorporated,
                                   formed or do not carry on business in Australia unless those entities are
                                   controlled through an entity that is incorporated or formed in Australia
                                   or carries on business in Australia.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                           Page 8
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




              RG 58.21       As part of the consolidation process, elimination entries required by
                             Australian Accounting Standard AASB 10 Consolidated financial statements
                             should be made—for example, inter-company debts, investments and
                             revenue.

              RG 58.22       Entities should be included in the group only for the part of the year when
                             they were controlled by the common foreign company. Entities incorporated,
                             formed or carrying on business in Australia for only part of the year should
                             be included in the group—together with the entities which they control—for
                             that part of the year, even if they ceased to operate in Australia and/or were
                             deregistered before the end of the financial year.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 9
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




C          Relief from reporting obligations

                               Key points

                               We provide conditional relief from financial or audit reporting obligations to
                               registered foreign companies, large proprietary companies that have
                               foreign company shareholders and small proprietary companies that are
                               controlled by foreign companies.

                               Registered foreign companies or companies must notify us when the relief
                               will be applied and when it will cease. We may also notify a registered
                               foreign company or a company that it cannot rely on the relief for a
                               specified financial year.




Registered foreign companies
              RG 58.23       Registered foreign companies must lodge a balance sheet, profit and loss
                             statement, and cash flow statement with ASIC: see s601CK. This should
                             include all notes to the financial statement. We may provide relief to
                             registered foreign companies from this requirement: see s601CK(7).

              RG 58.24       We are unlikely to give relief to a registered foreign company carrying on
                             business in Australia if it means that the registered foreign company would
                             lodge less information with ASIC than an equivalent Australian company
                             would: see s601CK(7). This is particularly the case for registered foreign
                             companies where relief would result in them lodging less information than
                             equivalent ‘non-grandfathered’ Australian proprietary companies that are
                             controlled by foreign companies.

              RG 58.25       We have therefore provided relief under s601CK(7) only for registered
                             foreign companies that:
                             (a)   are subject to provisions corresponding with, and no less strict than,
                                   those imposed on Australian proprietary companies by s113;
                             (b)   are not required to prepare any one or more of the following under the
                                   law applicable to the company in their place of origin:
                                   (i)     a balance sheet at the end of their last financial year;
                                   (ii)    a profit and loss statement for their last financial year; or
                                   (iii)   a cash flow statement for their last financial year;
                             (c)   have not been a disclosing entity, borrowing corporation or guarantor of
                                   a borrowing corporation at any time during the calendar year;
                             (d)   are not large under a test similar to that applied to proprietary
                                   companies under s45A; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 10
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




                             (e)   are either:
                                   (i)    not a part of a group that is a large group (see RG 58.15–
                                          RG 58.21); or
                                   (ii)   have been consolidated for their entire financial year in
                                          consolidated financial statements lodged with ASIC by one or
                                          more parents of the company that are registered foreign companies,
                                          companies or disclosing entities.

                                   Note: See ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports)
                                   Instrument 2017/204.

              RG 58.26       Registered foreign companies eligible for relief under the instrument must
                             lodge an annual return in the prescribed form, Form 406 Annual return of a
                             foreign company, with ASIC at least once in each calendar year: see
                             s601CK(9).



Large proprietary companies with foreign company shareholders
              RG 58.27       Parliament has granted ‘grandfathered’ large proprietary companies some
                             exemptions from lodging financial reports, provided they meet specific
                             criteria. These criteria include meeting their obligations to ensure their
                             financial reports are audited before the deadline for reporting to members,
                             and that their ownership structures remain private.

              RG 58.28       In limited circumstances, ASIC Corporations (Exempt Proprietary
                             Companies) Instrument 2015/840 provides relief to preserve the
                             ‘grandfathered’ status of certain large proprietary companies from the
                             obligation to lodge their annual report with ASIC when they have not met
                             the ‘grandfathering’ conditions. This relief is provided in particular and in
                             very limited circumstances that do not detract from the conditions
                             underlying their exempt status: see s319(1).



Small proprietary companies controlled by foreign companies
              RG 58.29       Certain small proprietary companies that are controlled by foreign
                             companies are required to prepare and lodge an audited financial report and
                             a directors’ report with us: see s292(2)(b). Within the context of this
                             legislative framework, we have executed two instruments to ensure parity,
                             ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports) Instrument
                             2017/204 and ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784.

              RG 58.30       Section 292(2)(b) requires a small proprietary company that was controlled
                             by a foreign company for all or part of a financial year to comply with the
                             financial reporting obligations under Pt 2M.3 unless it was consolidated for



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 11
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




                               that period in financial statements lodged with ASIC by a registered foreign
                               company, a company, a disclosing entity or a registered scheme.

              RG 58.31         ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports) Instrument
                               2017/204 makes sure that the reporting requirements of small proprietary
                               companies controlled by a foreign company that are not part of a ‘large
                               group’ are equal to other Australian small proprietary companies. Under this
                               instrument these companies are eligible for relief from:
                               (a)   preparing and lodging a financial and directors’ report with ASIC; and
                               (b)   the requirement to have their financial report audited.


                               Notification requirements

              RG 58.32         Registered foreign companies or companies must notify us when the relief
                               will be applied and when it will cease. We may also notify a registered
                               foreign company or a company that it cannot rely on the relief for a specific
                               financial year. Table 1 outlines the process for applying and ceasing to apply
                               the relief.

Table 1:     Process for applying the relief under ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled
             Company Reports) Instrument 2017/204

 Situation                       Process requirements

 How to apply the relief         Directors must resolve to apply the relief no earlier than three months before the
 in the first financial year     first financial year to which it is to apply.

                                 The company must lodge Form 384 Resolution by directors of a small proprietary
                                 company controlled by a foreign company which is not part of a ‘large group’ no
                                 earlier than three months before the start of the first relevant financial year and no
                                 later than four months after the end of the first relevant financial year.

 How to apply the relief         If the relief was applied in the immediately preceding financial year and the
 in subsequent financial         company is continuing to apply the relief, the directors must resolve to apply the
 years                           relief no earlier than three months before each financial year to which it is to
                                 apply. Form 384 does not need to be lodged again.

 How to discontinue the          If the company does not or cannot continue to apply the relief, it must lodge:
 application of the relief        Form 394 Notice of cessation of reliance on ASIC Corporations (Foreign-
 in a subsequent                   Controlled Company Reports) Instrument 2017/204 during the period
 financial year                    three months before the start of the relevant financial year and ending
                                   four months after the end of the relevant financial year (and lodge an annual
                                   financial report within the reporting deadline under Ch 2M); or
                                  an annual financial report prepared under Ch 2M—if we have given notice that
                                   the relief does not apply for a specified financial year.

                                 Failure to do either of these things means the company will be unable to reapply
                                 the relief in future years.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                      Page 12
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




 Situation                     Process requirements

 How to reapply the            To reapply the relief in future years, the directors must again:
 relief in future years         resolve to apply the relief no earlier than three months before each financial
 after a discontinuation         year to which it is to apply; and
                                lodge Form 384 (for the first relevant financial year) no earlier than three months
                                 before the start of the financial year and no later than four months after the end
                                 of the financial year.



                             Conditions of relief

              RG 58.33       The Corporations Act requires small proprietary companies that are
                             controlled by foreign companies to prepare and lodge audited financial
                             statements and reports. Relief from these requirements under ASIC
                             Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports) Instrument 2017/204 is
                             a privilege rather than a right. In order to take advantage of that privilege
                             companies must lodge, as relevant, Form 384 or Form 394 on time.

              RG 58.34       Lodging Form 384 or Form 394 and the processing of these forms onto the
                             ASIC database does not indicate that we have given any form of approval
                             and does not enable a company to take advantage of relief under ASIC
                             Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports) Instrument 2017/204.
                             A company will only have the benefit of relief if it meets all of the
                             instrument’s requirements.

              RG 58.35       Even if the relief applies, shareholders holding 5% or more of the voting
                             shares in the company may ask the company to prepare a financial report and
                             directors’ report, and to have the financial report audited.


                             Notification not to rely on relief

              RG 58.36       Consistent with other instruments providing financial reporting and audit
                             relief, ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports)
                             Instrument 2017/204 allows us to notify individual registered foreign
                             companies and small proprietary companies that are controlled by foreign
                             companies that they may not rely on the relief provided by the instrument for
                             a specified financial year.

              RG 58.37       In deciding whether to notify an entity that it may not rely on the relief for a
                             specified financial year, we consider the information needs of users and
                             potential users of the financial report. Users may include creditors, suppliers,
                             other regulators and the public. In making our decision, we may use
                             information provided by other regulators, such as the Australian Taxation
                             Office (ATO). For example, we would consider if the information in the
                             financial report would assist the public and provide more transparency so
                             that they can understand the extent to which the company is paying tax on




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 13
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




                             revenue derived from Australian sources. We will also seek, and consider,
                             any comments from the affected entity before issuing any notice.

              RG 58.38       The likelihood of us being asked by the ATO to notify an entity that it may
                             not rely on the relief has diminished with amendments to income taxation
                             legislation, which require large global entities to lodge general purpose
                             financial statements with the ATO. The requirement to lodge financial
                             statements under income tax legislation applies irrespective of any relief or
                             exemptions under the Corporations Act.

                                   Note: Visit the ATO’s website for information on the provision of general purpose
                                   financial statements by significant global entities.




Audit relief: ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784
              RG 58.39       Small proprietary companies that are controlled by foreign companies may
                             be eligible for relief from having their financial reports audited: see ASIC
                             Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 and Regulatory Guide 115
                             Audit relief for proprietary companies (RG 115).

              RG 58.40       One condition of the relief is that shareholders and directors must
                             unanimously resolve to take advantage of this relief within the 19-month
                             period, commencing three months immediately before the start of the
                             relevant financial year and no later than four months after the end of the
                             financial year.

              RG 58.41       The company must notify ASIC of this resolution, using Form 382
                             Notification of resolutions for audit relief: Proprietary companies, within
                             the specified timeframe: see RG 115.44.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                     Page 14
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




D          Synchronising a financial year with a foreign
           parent

                               Key points

                               A company, registered scheme or disclosing entity may synchronise its
                               financial year with a foreign parent if it is eligible under ASIC Corporations
                               (Synchronisation of Financial Years) Instrument 2016/189 or by applying
                               for individual relief if the instrument does not apply.




Financial year length
              RG 58.42       The first financial year for a company, registered scheme or disclosing entity
                             starts on the day of its registration: see s323D. The first financial year may
                             last for 12 months or for a period no longer than 18 months, determined by
                             the directors: see s323D(1).

              RG 58.43       Under s323D(2), each subsequent financial year must:
                             (a)   start at the end of the previous financial year; and
                             (b)   be 12 months long.

              RG 58.44       Exceptions to the 12-month rule under s323D(2) may exempt some entities
                             from having a financial year of 12 months.

              RG 58.45       Section 323D(2A) allows a financial year of an entity to be less than
                             12 months if there has not been a financial year of less than 12 months in the
                             last five years, and the change is made in good faith and in the best interests
                             of the entity. If an entity cannot rely on ASIC Corporations (Synchronisation
                             of Financial Years) Instrument 2016/189 to synchronise its financial year
                             with that of a foreign parent, it can normally rely on s323D(2A) to do so.



Relief under ASIC Corporations (Synchronisation of Financial
Years) Instrument 2016/189
              RG 58.46       A company, registered scheme or disclosing entity must ensure the financial
                             years of its consolidated entities are synchronised with its own financial
                             year: see s323D(3).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 15
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




              RG 58.47       Under ASIC Corporations (Synchronisation of Financial Years)
                             Instrument 2016/189 and subject to certain conditions, an entity may
                             synchronise its financial year with that of a foreign parent where:
                             (a)   the entity’s foreign parent is required by the law in its place of origin to
                                   cause the financial year of the entity to be changed; and
                             (b)   the financial year of the entity is changed in accordance with that
                                   requirement.



Individual relief
              RG 58.48       We may be asked to provide case-by-case relief where an entity cannot rely
                             on our relief under the ASIC Corporations (Synchronisation of Financial
                             Years) Instrument 2016/189 or under s323D(2A). We may grant this relief
                             so an entity can change its financial year by way of a transitional period of
                             14 months or less, where the applicant can demonstrate that complying with
                             the requirement for a 12-month financial year would impose unreasonable
                             burdens. We do not usually grant this relief with a transitional period of
                             longer than 14 months. This is because s323D(2A) expresses a legislative
                             preference for transitional periods to be less than 12 months.

              RG 58.49       When applying to ASIC for individual relief, the directors of an entity
                             should include:
                             (a)   a realistic estimate of the additional costs of preparing the required
                                   consolidated financial statements by a foreign parent and the realistic
                                   additional costs of an audit of that information, when applicable. These
                                   costs should only be those in excess of costs associated with normal
                                   management reporting;
                             (b)   if a financial year of greater than 12 months is requested, the reasons
                                   why the entity’s directors believe that users of the financial report—
                                   including investors, creditors, employees, potential investors, potential
                                   creditors and potential employees—will not be disadvantaged;
                             (c)   if a financial year of greater than 12 months is requested, whether the
                                   entity has been, or is expected to be, affected by any material, unusual
                                   transactions or events, extraordinary items, significant operating losses,
                                   acquisitions or sales of major assets (including businesses and
                                   controlled entities) and any factors which significantly affect the
                                   financial condition of the company;
                             (d)   whether, in the directors’ opinion, there are reasonable grounds to
                                   believe that the entity will be able to pay its debts as and when they
                                   become due and payable;
                             (e)   if the entity is a proprietary company, whether the change in financial
                                   year will result in the company being treated as a small proprietary



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 16
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




                                   company when it would otherwise be a large proprietary company
                                   (see RG 58.18–RG 58.19);
                             (f)   whether all other entities controlled by the entity’s ultimate foreign
                                   parent will be synchronised with the ultimate foreign parent at the same
                                   time—and, if not, the reasons why not;
                             (g)   any other information that may be relevant to our decision whether to
                                   grant relief; and
                             (h)   written confirmation from the ultimate foreign parent that all group
                                   entities worldwide are synchronising, and that synchronisation is not
                                   required by law in the place of origin of the ultimate parent or of any
                                   other parents of the company seeking relief.

                                   Note: See RG 43.37–43.51 for the definition of ‘unreasonable burden’.

              RG 58.50       Applications for relief which result in the financial year of an entity being
                             unsynchronised with that of a parent will only be considered in rare and
                             exceptional circumstances.

              RG 58.51       When applying for relief, entities should comply with s323D(2A) of the
                             Corporations Act and follow our guidance in RG 43 and RG 51.

              RG 58.52       A proprietary company may apply for a financial year of less than
                             12 months: see s323D(2A). This may result in the company being treated as
                             a small proprietary company under s45A(2) for the financial year when it
                             may otherwise have been expected to be a large proprietary company. This
                             could occur when, for example:
                             (a)   for financial years commencing on or after 1 July 2019:
                                   (i)    the company’s revenue is $50 million, or other amount prescribed
                                          by the regulations, or more, for a 12-month period; or
                                   (ii)   the company has assets of $25 million, or other amount prescribed
                                          by the regulations, or more, and wants to extend its financial year
                                          in anticipation of having less than $25 million, or other amount
                                          prescribed by the regulations, of assets at the end of subsequent
                                          financial years; and/or
                             (b)   for financial years commencing before 30 June 2019:
                                   (i)    the company’s revenue is $25 million, or other amount prescribed
                                          by the regulations, or more, for a 12-month period; or
                                   (ii)   the company has assets of $12.5 million, or other amount
                                          prescribed by the regulations, or more, and wants to extend its
                                          financial year in anticipation of having less than $12.5 million, or
                                          other amount prescribed by the regulations, of assets at the end of
                                          subsequent financial years.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 17
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




              RG 58.53       If we were to grant unconditional relief, the company would not be required
                             to prepare and lodge an audited financial report or a directors’ report unless:
                             (a)   it is controlled by a foreign company;
                             (b)   it is not part of a ‘large group’; and
                             (c)   its parent does not lodge consolidated financial statements with ASIC.

              RG 58.54       In these cases, we may grant relief but are likely to either impose a condition
                             or make a direction under s294 requiring the company to prepare and lodge
                             an audited financial report and a directors’ report for the financial year.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 18
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




Appendix: General reporting requirements

              RG 58.55          Section 292 requires all disclosing entities, public companies, companies
                                limited by guarantee (except small companies limited by guarantee), all large
                                proprietary companies that are not disclosing entities, all registered schemes
                                and small proprietary companies that are controlled by a foreign company to
                                prepare financial reports.

              RG 58.56          Section 601CK requires registered foreign companies to lodge balance
                                sheets, profit and loss statements, cash flow statements and other documents
                                with ASIC.

              RG 58.57          In limited circumstances, under the Corporations Act, specific companies are
                                exempt from the requirement to prepare and lodge financial reports or be
                                audited.

              RG 58.58          Table 2 summaries the financial reporting requirements of registered foreign
                                companies and other registered companies. Table 3 summarises the financial
                                reporting requirements of small proprietary companies that are controlled by
                                foreign companies and are not disclosing entities.

Table 2:     Reporting requirements of registered foreign companies and other registered
             foreign companies

 Entity description                  Reporting requirements                Do you need to       Do you need to be
                                                                           prepare reports      audited under the
                                                                           under Ch 2M?         Corporations Act?

 Registered foreign companies        Lodge annual return, Form 406,        No                   No
 where s601CK(7) declaration         but no financial report with ASIC
 applies

 All other registered foreign        Lodge financial report with ASIC,     Yes—if a             Only if an audit is
 companies                           prepared under the law in your        financial report     required in your place
                                     place of origin. If they are not      is not required in   of origin, no financial
                                     required in your place of origin or   your place of        report needs to be
                                     if ASIC directs, prepare a            origin or if ASIC    prepared in your
                                     financial report under Ch 2M          directs              place of origin, or
                                                                                                ASIC requires an
                                                                                                audit




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                     Page 19
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




Table 3:     Reporting requirements of small proprietary companies that are controlled by
             foreign companies and are not disclosing entities

 Entity description                  Reporting requirements                 Do you need     Do you need to be
                                                                            to prepare      audited under the
                                                                            reports under   Corporations Act?
                                                                            Ch 2M?

 Small proprietary companies         Not required to prepare or lodge       No              No
 controlled by foreign companies     financial reports if directors
 that are not part of a large        resolve to apply relief under
 group                               ASIC Corporations (Foreign-
                                     Controlled Company Reports)
                                     Instrument 2017/204. Lodge
                                     notice of that resolution within the
                                     timeframe and meet all other
                                     conditions of the instrument

 Small proprietary companies         Not required to appoint auditors,      No              No
 controlled by foreign companies     or to prepare or lodge financial
 where a parent company, which       reports
 must be an Australian company
 or a registered foreign
 company, lodges consolidated
 financial statements covering
 the small proprietary company
 for the year with ASIC

 Other small proprietary             Lodge unaudited financial reports      Yes             No—if the conditions
 companies controlled by foreign     with ASIC if all the conditions                        under ASIC
 companies that have not been        under ASIC Corporations (Audit                         Corporations
 audited in any financial year       Relief) Instrument 2016/784 are                        (Audit relief)
 since 1993, with the exception      met                                                    Instrument 2016/784
 of a year ending after                                                                     are met
 9 December 1995 and before
 24 April 1997

 All other small proprietary         Lodge audited financial reports        Yes             Yes
 companies controlled by foreign     with ASIC
 companies




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 20
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




Key terms

                                Term                      Meaning in this document

                                AASB                      Australian Accounting Standards Board

                                AASB 10 (for              An accounting standard issued by the Australian
                                example)                  Accounting Standards Board (in this example numbered
                                                          10)

                                accounting standards      Standards issued by the Australian Accounting Standards
                                                          Board under s334 of the Corporations Act

                                ACN                       Australian Company Number

                                ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                                ATO                       Australian Taxation Office

                                Ch 2M (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 2M), unless otherwise specified

                                Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                                disclosing entity         Has the meaning given in s111AC of the Corporations
                                                          Act

                                financial report          The documents referred to in s295 and 303 of the
                                                          Corporations Act—that is, financial statements, notes to
                                                          the financial statements and the directors’ declaration
                                                          about the statements and notes

                                financial statements      The statements required by accounting standards—that
                                                          is, the statement of financial position, the statement of
                                                          comprehensive income, the statement of changes in
                                                          equity and the statement of cash flows
                                                               Note: This excludes the directors’ declaration and the
                                                               notes to the financial statements.

                                individual relief         Relief given by ASIC to individual parties on application to
                                                          ASIC

                                large proprietary         Has the meaning given in s45A(3) of the Corporations Act
                                company

                                Pt 5B.2 (for example)     A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                          5B.2), unless otherwise specified

                                registered foreign        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                                company

                                registered scheme         A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                          s601EB of the Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                      Page 21
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




                                Term                      Meaning in this document

                                RG 43 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 43)

                                s601CK(7) (for            A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                example)                  numbered 601CK(7)), unless otherwise specified

                                small proprietary         Has the meaning given in s45A(2) of the Corporations Act
                                company




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                   Page 22
    REGULATORY GUIDE 58: Reporting by registered foreign companies and Australian companies with foreign shareholders




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             audit relief, foreign company, large proprietary company, registered foreign
                             company, small proprietary company, synchronisation of financial year

                             Instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784

                             ASIC Corporations (Exempt Proprietary Companies) Instrument 2015/840

                             ASIC Corporations (Foreign-Controlled Company Reports) Instrument
                             2017/204

                             ASIC Corporations (Synchronisation of Financial Years) Instrument
                             2016/189

                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 43 Financial reports and audit relief

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 115 Audit relief for proprietary companies

                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Ch 2M, Pts 2M.3, 5B.2, s9, 45A, 45A(2), 45A(3), 113,
                             292, 292(2)(b), 294, 319(1), 323D, 323D(1), 323D(2), 323D(2A), 323D(3),
                             340, 342, 50AA, 601CK, 601CK(7), 601CK(9)

                             Tax Administration Act 1953, s3CA

                             ASIC forms
                             Form 382 Notification of resolutions for audit relief: Proprietary companies

                             Form 384 Resolution by directors of a small proprietary company controlled
                             by a foreign company which is not part of a ‘large group’

                             Form 394 Notice of cessation of reliance on ASIC Corporations (Foreign-
                             Controlled Company Reports) Instrument 2017/204

                             Form 406 Annual return of a foreign company

                             Accounting standards

                             AASB 10 Consolidated financial statements



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 23
