REGULATORY GUIDE 85

Reporting requirements for
non-reporting entities

March 2022




About this guide
This guide provides guidance on application of the reporting entity test and
the reporting obligations for non-reporting entities.

In particular, ASIC believes that non-reporting entities, which are required to
prepare financial reports in accordance with Ch 2M of the Corporations Act
2001 (Corporations Act), should comply with the recognition and
measurement requirements of accounting standards.

This guide also discusses:
    the obligations of directors and auditors to carefully consider whether an
     entity should be classified as a reporting entity or a non-reporting entity;
     and
    when consolidated financial statements must be prepared.
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 85: Reporting requirements for non-reporting entities




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in March 2022 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 85, issued July 2005
                                    Superseded Information Release [IR 00/025] Reporting requirements
                                     for non-reporting entities


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2022                                                 Page 2
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 85: Reporting requirements for non-reporting entities




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                             B      Guidance........................................................................................... 5
                                    Accounting provisions applicable to non-reporting entities ............... 5
                                    Significance of reporting entity status ................................................ 7
                                    Classification as a non-reporting entity .............................................. 8
                                    Consolidated financial statements ..................................................... 8
                             Key terms ................................................................................................. 9
                             Related information ............................................................................... 10




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2022                                                                         Page 3
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 85: Reporting requirements for non-reporting entities




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               From years commencing 1 July 2021, the reporting entity regime is no
                               longer available to for-profit entities in the private sector that lodge financial
                               reports with ASIC.

                               Some companies which prepare financial reports as non-reporting entities
                               may be reporting entities. Classification of the company as a reporting or
                               non-reporting entity affects the disclosures made in the financial report.
                               Users of the reports may not be receiving all the information they need to
                               make investment decisions.

                               The financial reports are not always prepared in compliance with the
                               recognition and measurement requirements of the accounting standards.
                               We believe compliance with those requirements is necessary to meet the
                               financial reporting obligations under the Corporations Act.


              RG 85.1        From years commencing on or after 1 July 2021, the reporting regime for
                             non-reporting entities ceases to be available to for-profit entities in the
                             private sector that lodge financial reports with ASIC. However, the regime
                             remains available to not-for-profit entities and to for-profit entities.

              RG 85.2        ASIC’s reviews of financial reports have shown that some companies that
                             claimed to be non-reporting entities should have been classified as reporting
                             entities.

              RG 85.3        Those reviews have also revealed that recognition and measurement
                             requirements of the accounting standards have not been complied with by a
                             number of companies. These requirements include those relating to
                             depreciation of non-current assets, tax effect accounting, lease accounting,
                             measurement of inventories, and recognition and measurement of liabilities
                             relating to employee entitlements.

              RG 85.4        We believe there needs to be assurance for all companies whose financial
                             reports are prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Corporations
                             Act that the balance sheet reflects all, and only all, assets and liabilities, and
                             that the profit and loss statement (income statement) reflects all, and only all,
                             revenues and expenses.

              RG 85.5        Key representatives of the accounting profession who we consulted in
                             preparing this release share our concerns over the quality of financial
                             reports.

              RG 85.6        The purpose of this guide is to provide guidance on the application of
                             accounting standards to entities which are required to prepare a financial
                             report in accordance with the Corporations Act.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2022                                                 Page 4
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 85: Reporting requirements for non-reporting entities




B          Guidance

                               Key points

                               This section provides guidance for financial reporting by non-reporting
                               entities on:
                               • the need to apply the recognition and measurement requirements of
                                 accounting standards;
                               • the importance of disclosing information necessary to give a true and
                                 fair review as well as information mandated by accounting standards;
                                 and
                               • the preparation of consolidated financial statements.




Accounting provisions applicable to non-reporting entities
              RG 85.7        The accounting standards provide a framework for determining a consistent
                             meaning of ‘financial position’ and ‘profit or loss’ in financial reporting
                             across entities.

              RG 85.8        In the absence of any such framework, the figures disclosed in financial
                             statements would lose their meaning and could be determined completely at
                             the whim of the directors of individual entities. The profit or loss reported by
                             an individual entity would vary greatly depending on which individuals were
                             responsible for preparing its financial statements.

              RG 85.9        This would not be consistent with the requirements of the Corporations Act
                             for financial reports to give a true and fair view (s297), prohibiting the
                             giving of false and misleading information (s1308), and the provisions for
                             paying dividends (s254T).

              RG 85.10       The following requirements of accounting standards that apply to all entities
                             reporting under Ch 2M are also relevant:
                             (a)   Paragraph AusCF15 of Accounting Standard AASB 101 Presentation
                                   of Financial Statements (AASB 101) requires the financial report to
                                   present fairly the financial position, financial performance and cash
                                   flows. Fair presentation requires ‘the faithful representation of the
                                   effects of transactions, other events and conditions in accordance with
                                   the definitions and recognition criteria for assets, liabilities, income and
                                   expenses set out in the Framework [for the Preparation and
                                   Presentation of Financial Statements] (Framework)’.
                             (b)   Paragraph 27 of AASB 101 requires all entities reporting under Ch 2M
                                   to apply the accrual basis of accounting.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2022                                                 Page 5
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 85: Reporting requirements for non-reporting entities




                             (c)   Paragraphs 10 and AusCF11 of Accounting Standard AASB 108
                                   Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors
                                   provides that, in the absence of an Australian accounting standard that
                                   specifically applies to a transaction, other event or condition,
                                   management should refer to, and consider the applicability of, the
                                   following sources in descending order:
                                   (i)    the requirements in Australian accounting standards dealing with
                                          similar and related issues; and
                                   (ii)   the definitions, recognition criteria and measurement concepts for
                                          assets, liabilities, income and expenses in the Framework.

              RG 85.11       Hence, the recognition and measurement requirements of accounting
                             standards must also be applied in order to determine the financial position
                             and profit or loss of any entity preparing financial reports in accordance with
                             the Corporations Act.

              RG 85.12       As noted earlier, the recognition and measurement requirements of the
                             accounting standards include requirements relating to depreciation of non-
                             current assets, tax effect accounting, lease accounting, measurement of
                             inventories, and recognition and measurement of liabilities for employee
                             entitlements.

              RG 85.13       The provisions of accounting standards dealing with the classification of
                             items as assets, liabilities, equity, income and expenses also apply. This
                             would include the provisions of Accounting Standard AASB 132 Financial
                             Instruments: Presentation concerning the classification of financial
                             instruments issued as debt or equity.

              RG 85.14       ASIC Corporations (Non-Reporting Entities) Instrument 2015/841 allows
                             non-reporting entities to take advantage of concessions to the measurement
                             requirements of accounting standards. Examples of these concessions
                             include the provisions of Accounting Standard AASB 1 First-time Adoption
                             of Australian Accounting Standards and transitional provisions in new
                             accounting standards.

              RG 85.15       Directors of non-reporting entities must also consider carefully the need to
                             make disclosures which are not directly prescribed by accounting standards,
                             but which may be necessary in order for the financial statements to give a
                             true and fair view. Such disclosures could include certain significant related
                             party transactions.

              RG 85.16       We will look closely at cases where non-reporting entities have not complied
                             with the recognition and measurement requirements of accounting standards.

              RG 85.17       Non-reporting entities which hold out their financial reports to be general
                             purpose financial reports must comply with all requirements of accounting
                             standards.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2022                                                  Page 6
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 85: Reporting requirements for non-reporting entities




Significance of reporting entity status
              RG 85.18       Reporting entities required to prepare a financial report in accordance with
                             Ch 2M of the Corporations Act must comply with the requirements of all
                             accounting standards.

              RG 85.19       The directors’ determination as to whether a company should be classified as
                             a reporting entity or a non-reporting entity is an important decision affecting
                             the level of disclosure in the company’s financial report. Directors are
                             required under s295(4)(d) of the Corporations Act to make a declaration as
                             to whether a company’s financial statements comply with accounting
                             standards. Directors need to make their decision regarding reporting entity
                             status carefully in view of the requirement to make this declaration.

              RG 85.20       Directors of an entity that identifies itself as a non-reporting entity and elects
                             not to adopt the requirements of all accounting standards would be in breach
                             of the requirement to comply with accounting standards contained in s296 of
                             the Corporations Act if the circumstances of the entity point to it being a
                             reporting entity. ‘Reporting entity’ is defined for the purposes of Accounting
                             Standard AASB 1053 Application of Tiers of Australian Accounting
                             Standards as follows:
                                   ‘An entity in respect of which it is reasonable to expect the existence of
                                   users who rely on the entity’s general purpose financial statements for
                                   information that will be useful to them for making and evaluating decisions
                                   about the allocation of resources. A reporting entity can be a single entity
                                   or a group comprising a parent and all of its subsidiaries.’

              RG 85.21       The auditor of a company will also need to make a decision about the
                             appropriateness of the classification of an entity as a non-reporting entity in
                             forming an opinion in accordance with s307 of the Corporations Act as to
                             whether the entity’s financial report complies with accounting standards.

              RG 85.22       The following accounting standards apply in full to non-reporting entities
                             required to prepare a financial report in accordance with Ch 2M of the
                             Corporations Act:
                             (a)   AASB 101 Presentation of Financial Statements;
                             (b)   AASB 107 Statement of Cash Flows;
                             (c)   AASB 108 Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and
                                   Errors;
                             (d)   AASB 1048 Interpretation of Standards;
                             (e)   AASB 1053 Application of Tiers of Australian Accounting Standards;
                                   and
                             (f)   AASB 1054 Australian Additional Disclosures.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2022                                                 Page 7
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 85: Reporting requirements for non-reporting entities




Classification as a non-reporting entity
              RG 85.23       In applying the definition of ‘reporting entity’, directors and auditors must
                             consider whether there are existing or potential users who may be dependent
                             on general purpose financial reports. Existing shareholders are not the only
                             users to consider; therefore, an entity should not be regarded as a non-
                             reporting entity solely because there is little or no separation between its
                             members and management (e.g. the shareholders are involved in the day-to-
                             day management of the company).

              RG 85.24       Our review of financial reports has revealed that some companies that
                             claimed to be non-reporting entities should have been classified as reporting
                             entities. These companies had a significant number of creditors and
                             employees and it was reasonable to expect the existence of users dependent
                             on general purpose financial reports. The financial reports of these
                             companies had been accessed on ASIC’s public database on a number of
                             occasions by external parties during a 12-month period.

              RG 85.25       We will look closely at cases where entities claim to be non-reporting
                             entities and will seek explanations from directors where it appears
                             reasonable to expect that there are users dependent on general purpose
                             financial reports.



Consolidated financial statements
              RG 85.26       Some companies have failed to prepare consolidated financial statements on
                             the grounds that the parent entity was not a reporting entity. Accounting
                             Standard AASB 10 Consolidated Financial Statements applies to each entity
                             that is the parent of a group that is a reporting entity regardless of whether
                             the parent entity itself is a reporting entity. For example, a parent entity with
                             nominal capital and no active operations is expected to prepare consolidated
                             financial statements if the group is a reporting entity.

              RG 85.27       Considerations in determining whether a group is a reporting entity may
                             include that creditors which provide finance to a company which has entered
                             into deeds of cross guarantee with other entities within the group would be
                             interested in the consolidated financial statements of the group.

              RG 85.28       Even where there are no such deeds, consolidated financial statements may
                             provide creditors of a parent entity with information such as the activities of
                             the group, assets within the group, and the ability of controlled entities to
                             generate future income and pay dividends to the parent. Consolidated
                             financial statements prepared by a parent entity may similarly provide
                             creditors of one of its controlled entities with information on the ability of
                             the other entities in the group to support the controlled entity.

              RG 85.29       The sole determining factor as to whether consolidated financial statements
                             are required is whether the group is a reporting entity.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2022                                                 Page 8
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 85: Reporting requirements for non-reporting entities




Key terms


                               Term                        Meaning in this document

                               AASB                        The Australian Accounting Standards Board

                               accounting standards        As defined in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               ASIC                        Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               Ch 2M (for example)         A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                           numbered 2M), unless otherwise specified

                               Corporations Act            The Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made
                                                           for the purposes of the Corporations Act

                               Framework                   The Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of
                                                           Financial Statements as cited in Australian accounting
                                                           standards

                               reporting entity            See definition of ‘reporting entity’ in RG 85.20 above

                               s297 (for example)          A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                           numbered 297), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2022                                                       Page 9
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 85: Reporting requirements for non-reporting entities




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             accounting standards, conceptual framework, consolidated financial
                             statements, non-reporting entities, not-for-profit entities, note disclosure,
                             public sector entities, recognition and measurement, reporting framework,
                             special purpose financial reports, true and fair view


                             Legislative instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Non-Reporting Entities) Instrument 2015/841


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Ch 2M; s254T, 295(4)(d), 296, 297, 307, 1308


                             Accounting standards

                             AASB 1 First-time Adoption of Australian Accounting Standards

                             AASB 10 Consolidated Financial Statements

                             AASB 101 Presentation of Financial Statements

                             AASB 107 Statement of Cash Flows

                             AASB 108 Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and
                                     Errors

                             AASB 132 Financial Instruments: Presentation

                             AASB 1048 Interpretation of Standards

                             AASB 1053 Application of Tiers of Australian Accounting Standards

                             AASB 1054 Australian Additional Disclosures

                             Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2022                                                Page 10
