REGULATORY GUIDE 54

Principles for cross-border
financial regulation

June 2012




About this guide
This guide sets out ASIC’s approach to recognising overseas regulatory
regimes for the purpose of facilitating cross-border financial regulation.

It explains our role in regulating financial facilities, services and products
across borders, in particular, the principles we use to assess whether to
recognise an overseas regulatory regime unilaterally or under a mutual
recognition arrangement for the provision of some form of regulatory relief.
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This version was issued in June 2012 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 54, issued November 2002 as a guide
                                     and rebadged as a regulatory guide in July 2007.


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                    Page 2
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Facilitating cross-border financial regulation ...........................................4
                                    Unilateral and mutual recognition ............................................................5
                                    Principles for cross-border financial regulation........................................6
                                    Scope of this regulatory guide .................................................................6
                             B      Unilateral and mutual recognition .......................................................7
                                    What is unilateral recognition?.................................................................7
                                    What is mutual recognition? ....................................................................8
                                    Our approach to unilateral and mutual recognition ...............................10
                             C      Principles for cross-border financial regulation ..............................12
                                    General Principles .................................................................................12
                                    Equivalence Principles ...........................................................................13
                             D      Commentary on the General Principles ............................................15
                                    Principle 1: Sufficiently equivalent regulation ........................................15
                                    Principle 2: Fullest possible recognition ................................................17
                                    Principle 3: Effective cooperation arrangements ...................................18
                                    Principle 4: Enforcement of Australian laws ..........................................20
                                    Principle 5: Adequate rights and remedies ............................................21
                                    Principle 6: Adequate disclosure ...........................................................23
                             E      Commentary on the Equivalence Principles.....................................25
                                    Principle 7: Clear, transparent and certain ............................................25
                                    Principle 8: Consistent with IOSCO Objectives and Principles of
                                    Securities Regulation .............................................................................26
                                    Principle 9: Adequately enforced ...........................................................27
                                    Principle 10: Equivalent outcomes ........................................................28
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................31
                             Related information .....................................................................................33




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                                          Page 3
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               ASIC has developed principles to guide its decision-making relating to the
                               granting of relief to foreign providers from certain Australian regulatory
                               requirements. One key requirement is that the foreign provider is subject to
                               a sufficiently equivalent overseas regulatory regime.

                               Recognition of an overseas regulatory regime may be unilateral or through
                               a mutual recognition arrangement.

                               Recognising overseas regulatory regimes in this way reduces the
                               regulatory barriers between national markets and facilitates the provision
                               of financial facilities, services and products across borders.


Facilitating cross-border financial regulation
              RG 54.1        ASIC regulates foreign providers of financial facilities, services and
                             products (foreign providers) that operate in Australia with the aim of
                             improving access to:
                             (a)   Australian markets by foreign providers; and
                             (b)   foreign markets by Australian providers of financial facilities, services
                                   and products (Australian providers).

              RG 54.2        We do this by giving conditional relief from certain Australian regulatory
                             requirements to foreign providers, and seeking similar relief from foreign
                             requirements for Australian providers where possible.

              RG 54.3        Lowering regulatory barriers between national markets in this way reduces:
                             (a)   the initial time and cost associated with gaining entry to a foreign market;
                             (b)   the ongoing cost for foreign providers operating in those markets; and
                             (c)   the cost of foreign products for investors.

                                   Note: See, for example, our report, Effects of the Australia–New Zealand mutual
                                   recognition scheme for securities offerings (REP 174), which looks at the benefits of the
                                   Australia–New Zealand mutual recognition of offerings scheme.

              RG 54.4        The provision of financial facilities, services and products across borders can
                             deliver significant economic benefits to Australian markets, investors and
                             providers. The benefits of improving foreign providers’ access to Australian
                             markets can include:
                             (a)   enhancing competition and innovation in the financial industry; and
                             (b)   increasing Australian investors’ access to financial facilities, services
                                   and products that meet their risk and return preferences.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                         Page 4
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




              RG 54.5        The benefits of improving Australian providers’ access to foreign markets
                             can include:
                             (a)   facilitating access to a wider pool of investors to make it easier for
                                   Australian issuers to raise capital;
                             (b)   providing Australian market intermediaries with access to a broader
                                   range of markets and clients; and
                             (c)   facilitating more liquid Australian markets by increasing the number of
                                   investors in Australian facilities, services and products.

              RG 54.6        Our approach to cross-border financial regulation aims to facilitate these
                             benefits, but also to ensure that:
                             (a)   Australian investors who access foreign facilities, services and products
                                   are adequately protected;
                             (b)   foreign facilities, services and products do not adversely affect the
                                   integrity of Australian financial markets;
                             (c)   foreign facilities, services and products do not create systemic risks in
                                   the Australian financial system;

                                   Note: The Reserve Bank of Australia plays the primary role in reducing systemic risk: see
                                   paragraph 8.8, Revised Explanatory Memorandum, Financial Services Reform Bill 2001.

                             (d)   we deal consistently with the regulatory issues that arise from the
                                   availability and provision of foreign facilities, services and products in
                                   Australia; and
                             (e)   we encourage and maximise opportunities to foster closer relations with
                                   our overseas regulatory counterparts.



Unilateral and mutual recognition
              RG 54.7        The Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) and the Corporations
                             Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations) empower ASIC, and in some
                             circumstances the Minister, to recognise overseas regulatory regimes that are
                             ‘sufficiently equivalent’ to the Australian regulatory regime.

              RG 54.8        To minimise unnecessary regulatory duplication, where foreign providers are
                             subject to a sufficiently equivalent regulatory regime, ASIC or the Minister
                             can:
                             (a)   exempt foreign providers from certain Australian regulatory
                                   requirements; and/or
                             (b)   modify other requirements.

              RG 54.9        Recognition of an overseas regulatory regime may be unilateral or through a
                             mutual recognition arrangement: see Section B.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                       Page 5
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




Principles for cross-border financial regulation
              RG 54.10       ASIC has developed principles to guide our decision making on whether to
                             recognise an overseas regulatory regime unilaterally or through a mutual
                             recognition arrangement (see Section C). These principles include General
                             Principles (see Section D) and Equivalence Principles (see Section E).

              RG 54.11       We use these principles to inform the decisions we make on whether to:
                             (a)   exercise a specific statutory discretion to recognise an overseas
                                   regulatory regime or regulatory authority;
                             (b)   grant discretionary relief to a foreign provider so it can provide a
                                   foreign facility, service or product in Australia without being subject to:
                                   (i)    Australian regulatory requirements that are incompatible with the
                                          relevant overseas regulatory regime; or
                                   (ii)   unnecessary regulatory duplication; or
                             (c)   advise the Minister to exercise a specific statutory discretion to
                                   recognise an overseas regulatory regime or regulatory authority;
                             (d)   advise the Australian Government on whether to recognise an overseas
                                   regulatory regime in other circumstances; and
                             (e)   establish mutual recognition arrangements.



Scope of this regulatory guide
              RG 54.12       The approach articulated in this guide is not directly relevant to the
                             following matters:
                             (a)   the regulation of foreign providers who seek to fully comply with those
                                   parts of Australian law that apply to comparable Australian providers; or
                                   Note: Foreign providers may enter the Australian market by complying with the laws
                                   imposed on comparable Australian providers. For example, foreign market operators
                                   may obtain an Australian market licence under s795B(1), and foreign providers of
                                   financial services may obtain an Australian financial services (AFS) licence and comply
                                   with all applicable parts of the Corporations Act.

                             (b)   the jurisdictional reach of the Corporations Act or other Australian laws.
                                   Note: For example, this guide does not address the degree of connection between
                                   Australian and the foreign provider, facility, service or product that is necessary before
                                   Australian law applies: see Regulatory Guide 121 Doing financial services business in
                                   Australia (RG 121), Section C.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                           Page 6
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




B          Unilateral and mutual recognition

                               Key points

                               ‘Unilateral recognition’ and ‘mutual recognition’ describe two different ways
                               ASIC can facilitate cross-border financial regulation. This section explains
                               the key features of each.

                               Where possible, ASIC will pursue opportunities for mutual recognition
                               where unilateral recognition has already been applied. This means
                               investors have the benefits of unilateral recognition where mutual
                               recognition is not immediately feasible.




What is unilateral recognition?
              RG 54.13       ‘Unilateral recognition’ describes ASIC’s recognition of an overseas
                             regulatory regime for the purpose of facilitating access by foreign providers
                             to Australian markets without reciprocal recognition of Australia’s
                             regulatory regime.

              RG 54.14       Under a unilateral recognition arrangement, an entity operating in both
                             Australia and a foreign jurisdiction under the terms of such an arrangement
                             need not comply with specified Australian regulatory requirements if they
                             are subject to a sufficiently equivalent overseas regulatory regime and meet
                             other conditions.

              RG 54.15       The Australian Government and relevant foreign government are generally
                             not involved in unilateral recognition arrangements.

                                   Note: Some involvement by the Australian Government is required under the
                                   Corporations Act for overseas market licences: see Regulatory Guide 177 Australian
                                   market licences: Overseas operators (RG 177).


                             What are the benefits of unilateral recognition?

              RG 54.16       The key benefits of unilateral recognition are the availability to Australian
                             investors of a broader range of diverse financial facilities, services and
                             products, and enhanced competition and innovation in the financial industry.

              RG 54.17       As reciprocal recognition is not required, the regulatory burden on
                             Australian providers seeking to access the foreign jurisdiction is not affected.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                     Page 7
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             Conditions for unilateral recognition

              RG 54.18       Before ASIC will unilaterally recognise an overseas regulatory regime, we
                             must be satisfied that the regime satisfies the principles set out in this guide:
                             see Section C.



What is mutual recognition?
              RG 54.19       Mutual recognition describes an arrangement where two or more regulatory
                             authorities agree to recognise each other’s regulatory regimes. This enables
                             agreed classes of entities from all jurisdictions that are party to the mutual
                             recognition arrangement to operate in the other jurisdiction(s) on agreed terms,
                             on the basis of compliance with the regulatory framework of their home
                             jurisdiction.

              RG 54.20       Unlike unilateral recognition, mutual recognition involves a joint
                             commitment between the governments and regulators of each jurisdiction to:
                             (a)   the implementation of recognition between the relevant jurisdictions;
                                   and
                             (b)   a more enhanced ongoing level of cooperation between the regulators.

              RG 54.21       Mutual recognition can be effected in the following ways:
                             (a)   Governments may agree to a single legislative framework allowing
                                   agreed classes of entities in each jurisdiction access to the other
                                   jurisdictions. This form of mutual recognition arrangement is
                                   implemented by altering the domestic legislative framework.
                                   Note: An example of this type of arrangement is the treaty agreed between Australia and
                                   New Zealand on 22 February 2006, known as the Agreement between the Government of
                                   Australia and the Government of New Zealand in relation to the mutual recognition of
                                   securities offerings. Australian and New Zealand issuers can offer securities in both
                                   jurisdictions using a single disclosure document: see Regulatory Guide 190 Offering
                                   securities in New Zealand and Australia under mutual recognition (RG 190).

                             (b)   Authorities may agree that each will facilitate access to their
                                   jurisdiction by entities from other jurisdictions, although the processes
                                   and conditions for access may differ. This form of mutual recognition
                                   arrangement does not necessarily rely on legislative action but may, if
                                   circumstances allow, be achieved by use of our administrative
                                   modification and exemption powers.
                                   Note: An example of this type of arrangement is the Declaration of mutual recognition
                                   entered into by ASIC and Hong Kong’s Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) in July
                                   2008. Under the arrangement, ASIC and the SFC agreed to reduce regulatory duplication
                                   around the sale of retail funds to investors in each other’s market, through the concurrent
                                   application of unilateral regulatory relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                         Page 8
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             What are the benefits of mutual recognition?

              RG 54.22       Mutual recognition arrangements reduce the regulatory burden for both foreign
                             providers seeking to access the Australian market and Australian providers
                             seeking to access foreign markets. This facilitates quicker entry to markets,
                             increased competition, greater capital flows, more liquid markets and investor
                             choice. Unlike unilateral recognition, reciprocity is the defining characteristic of
                             mutual recognition.

              RG 54.23       The associated compliance costs for Australian and foreign providers
                             operating in each other’s respective markets under a mutual recognition
                             arrangement are also likely to be lower than those associated with unilateral
                             recognition. This is because mutual recognition involves greater reliance on
                             the relevant overseas regulatory authority, and closer cooperation between
                             regulators reduces the need for direct contact between the foreign provider
                             and the relevant regulator in the host jurisdiction.

              RG 54.24       For example, foreign providers of financial services who are granted relief
                             under Regulatory Guide 176 Licensing: Discretionary powers: Wholesale
                             foreign financial services providers (RG 176) (i.e. through unilateral
                             recognition) must notify ASIC of certain events, such as a significant change
                             to the provider’s authorisation, or any significant investigation, enforcement
                             or surveillance action against them. This is because our relationship with the
                             relevant overseas regulatory authority is unlikely to require that regulator to
                             notify us of such changes directly or proactively.

              RG 54.25       The closer cooperation afforded by mutual recognition facilitates deeper,
                             ongoing relationships between regulators, improving their capacity to carry
                             out their oversight, investigation and enforcement functions for cross-border
                             activities. Improved international cooperation allows quicker and more
                             effective flows of information between regulators, leading to an increased
                             confidence in the financial markets.


                             Conditions for mutual recognition

              RG 54.26       Before ASIC will enter into a mutual recognition arrangement, we must be
                             satisfied that:
                             (a)   the overseas regulatory regime satisfies the principles set out in this
                                   guide (see Section C); and
                             (b)   the relevant authorities are committed to the arrangement.

              RG 54.27       Mutual recognition is based on mutual reliance on regulatory regimes in
                             each country, so the relevant authorities must be jointly committed to the
                             arrangement. Without mutual ongoing commitment, there is potential for:
                             (a)   negotiated mutual recognition arrangements not to be fully or
                                   effectively implemented;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                    Page 9
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             (b)   changes to be made to the overseas regulatory regime without due
                                   notification, which may render the mutual recognition arrangements
                                   ineffective; and/or
                             (c)   cooperation between regulators to be insufficient to protect Australian
                                   investors, market integrity and the stability of the Australian financial
                                   system.

              RG 54.28       Commitment to the ongoing conditions of mutual recognition may be
                             demonstrated, for example, by:
                             (a)   timely and effective cooperation between the relevant authorities during
                                   the negotiation and assessment process;
                             (b)   agreement that providers in each jurisdiction will be subject to
                                   substantially equivalent levels of regulation; and/or
                             (c)   regulators’ willingness to enter into enhanced effective cooperation and
                                   supervisory cooperation agreements, which involve a proactive
                                   approach by each regulator to assist the other in a timely and effective
                                   manner on enforcement and surveillance activities (and which may
                                   include the ability to conduct joint or parallel surveillances).

              RG 54.29       If authority for regulating the foreign facilities, services and products has
                             been delegated to a self-regulatory organisation, that organisation may need
                             to be a party to the mutual recognition arrangement.



Our approach to unilateral and mutual recognition
              RG 54.30       ASIC will use both frameworks—unilateral and mutual recognition—to
                             facilitate cross-border financial regulation. This approach:
                             (a)   allows us to explore opportunities for mutual recognition of benefit to
                                   Australian providers; and
                             (b)   means investors can continue to have the benefits of unilateral
                                   recognition where mutual recognition is not feasible.

              RG 54.31       We may unilaterally recognise an overseas regulatory regime either on our own
                             initiative or on application by a foreign entity, industry association or regulator.

              RG 54.32       Similarly, we will pursue mutual recognition arrangements with foreign
                             jurisdictions either on our own initiative or following an approach by an
                             overseas regulatory authority and/or foreign government.

              RG 54.33       In assessing applications for unilateral recognition, we will consider whether
                             it might be more appropriate to pursue a mutual recognition arrangement
                             with the jurisdiction concerned. In other words, we will continue to apply
                             our approach to unilateral recognition against a background of maximising
                             opportunities for mutual recognition where possible.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 10
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




              RG 54.34       In particular, we will consider:
                             (a)   whether access to the foreign jurisdiction would sufficiently benefit
                                   Australian providers (we may consult publicly or with industry on this
                                   issue);
                             (b)   whether there is some indication of willingness by the relevant parties
                                   to negotiate such an arrangement;
                             (c)   any time and resources constraints involved relative to the potential
                                   benefits of mutual recognition over unilateral recognition; and
                             (d)   the likelihood of similar providers from the relevant foreign jurisdiction
                                   seeking access to the Australian market.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 11
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




C          Principles for cross-border financial regulation

                               Key points

                               The principles for cross-border financial regulation (comprising General
                               Principles and Equivalence Principles) guide ASIC’s decision making on
                               both unilateral and mutual recognition.

                               The principles assist ASIC to ensure that its commitment to protect and
                               promote the interests of Australian investors, protect the integrity of
                               Australian markets, and manage systemic risks is not compromised by the
                               reduction of regulatory burden or duplication for foreign providers in
                               Australia.




General Principles
              RG 54.35       The General Principles (see Table 1), in conjunction with the Equivalence
                             Principles (see Table 2), guide our decision making about whether ASIC
                             should:
                             (a)   exercise our statutory discretion under s911A(2)(h) of the Corporations
                                   Act to exempt foreign providers of financial services from the
                                   obligation to hold an AFS licence where the providers are regulated by
                                   an overseas regulatory authority and only provide services to wholesale
                                   clients;
                                   Note: See RG 176.

                             (b)   grant other discretionary relief to foreign providers so they can provide a
                                   foreign facility, service or product (e.g. a collective investment scheme)
                                   in Australia without being subject to:
                                   (i)    Australian regulatory requirements that are incompatible with the
                                          relevant overseas regulatory regime; or
                                   (ii)   unnecessary regulatory duplication;
                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 178 Foreign collective investment schemes (RG 178) and
                                   the general relief provisions in s601QA and 911A(2)(l) of the Corporations Act.

                             (c)   advise the Minister on whether to exercise a specific statutory discretion
                                   to recognise an overseas regulatory regime or regulatory authority;
                                   Note 1: ASIC must advise the Minister on applications for Australian market licences,
                                   including whether to grant an Australian market licence to an overseas market under
                                   s795B(2): see RG 177.

                                   Note 2: We also have a role advising the Minister on applications for licences for
                                   clearing and settlement facilities under s824B(2): see Regulatory Guide 211 Clearing
                                   and settlement facilities: Australian and overseas operators (RG 211).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                      Page 12
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             (d)   advise the Australian Government on whether to recognise an overseas
                                   regulatory regime in other circumstances; or
                                   Note: For example, we may provide advice on whether a particular jurisdiction should
                                   be prescribed in the Corporations Regulations as a recognised jurisdiction for the
                                   purposes of the mutual recognition of securities offers under Ch 8 of the Corporations
                                   Act.

                             (e)   establish mutual recognition arrangements.

                RG 54.36     We will monitor whether the overseas regulatory regime continues to satisfy
                             these principles on an ongoing basis to make sure the conditions for
                             unilateral or mutual recognition continue to be met.

Table 1:       General Principles of cross-border financial regulation

 Principle 1           ASIC recognises overseas regulatory regimes that are sufficiently equivalent to the
                       Australian regulatory regime, in relation to the degree of investor protection, market
                       integrity and reduction of systemic risk that they achieve.

 Principle 2           ASIC gives the fullest possible recognition to sufficiently equivalent overseas regulatory
                       regimes.

 Principle 3           ASIC must have effective cooperation arrangements with the relevant overseas
                       regulatory authorities regulating foreign facilities, services and products available in
                       Australia.

 Principle 4           ASIC must be able to enforce the Australian laws that apply to foreign facilities, services
                       and products.

 Principle 5           Adequate rights and remedies must be practically available to Australian investors who
                       access foreign facilities, services and products in Australia.

 Principle 6           Adequate disclosure must be made of information that Australian investors may
                       reasonably require to make an informed assessment of the consequences of any
                       significant differences between the regulation of the foreign facilities, services and
                       products and the regulation of comparable Australian facilities, services and products.




Equivalence Principles
                RG 54.37     The Equivalence Principles (see Table 2) guide our assessment of the
                             degree to which a relevant overseas regulatory regime is equivalent to the
                             Australian regulatory regime under Principle 1 of the General Principles.
                             We will treat an overseas regulatory regime, or the relevant parts of it, as
                             sufficiently equivalent to the Australian regulatory regime if it satisfies
                             these principles.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                       Page 13
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




Table 2:       Equivalence Principles for cross-border financial regulation

 Principle 7           An equivalent regulatory regime is clear, transparent and certain.

 Principle 8           An equivalent regulatory regime is consistent with the IOSCO Objectives and Principles of
                       Securities Regulation.

 Principle 9           An equivalent regulatory regime is adequately enforced in the home jurisdiction.

 Principle 10          An equivalent regulatory regime achieves equivalent outcomes to the Australian
                       regulatory regime.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 14
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




D          Commentary on the General Principles

                               Key points

                               Under the General Principles (Principles 1–6):
                               • the overseas regulatory regime must be sufficiently equivalent to the
                                 Australian regulatory regime in terms of investor protection, market
                                 integrity and reduction of systemic risk (Principle 1);
                               • ASIC gives the fullest possible recognition to a sufficiently equivalent
                                 overseas regulatory regime (Principle 2);
                               • ASIC must have effective cooperation arrangements with the overseas
                                 regulatory authority (Principle 3);
                               • ASIC must be able to enforce applicable Australian laws (Principle 4);
                               • Australian investors must have access to adequate rights and remedies
                                 (Principle 5); and
                               • disclosure to Australian investors must be adequate for informed choice
                                 (Principle 6).



Principle 1: Sufficiently equivalent regulation
                               Principle 1

                               ASIC recognises overseas regulatory regimes that are sufficiently equivalent
                               to the Australian regulatory regime, in relation to the degree of investor
                               protection, market integrity and reduction of systemic risk that they achieve.


                             Why is Principle 1 important?
              RG 54.38       The equivalence test in Principle 1, an outcomes-focused test, is essential to
                             the protection of Australian investors, the integrity of Australian markets and
                             its financial system. Recognition of an overseas regulatory regime means that
                             we rely on that regime’s regulation, at least in part, over the operation or
                             provision of a foreign facility, service or product in Australia. We must
                             therefore make some assessment of the quality of an overseas regulatory
                             regime and be satisfied that the regime is sufficiently equivalent to the
                             Australian regulatory regime.

                             What does Principle 1 mean?
                             What does ‘recognise’ mean?

              RG 54.39       ASIC recognises an overseas regulatory regime when, because of how that
                             regime applies to the relevant foreign facilities, services and products:
                             (a)   we declare, or advise the Minister, that the overseas regulatory regime
                                   meets explicit statutory criteria for such recognition (e.g. s795B(2)(c));




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 15
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             (b)   we give, or advise the Minister to give, foreign providers regulated by
                                   that regime varying degrees of relief from the requirements of the
                                   Australian regulatory regime; or
                             (c)   we enter into a unilateral or mutual recognition arrangement with the
                                   overseas regulatory authority.

              RG 54.40       Recognition of an overseas regulatory regime means foreign providers can
                             operate in Australia because they are subject to that overseas regulatory
                             regime, even though that overseas regulatory regime differs from the
                             Australian regulatory regime.

                             What does ‘equivalent’ mean?

              RG 54.41       The equivalence test articulated in Principle 1:
                             (a)   defines equivalence according to the outcomes achieved by the
                                   regulatory regime. It requires a comparison of the outcomes of the
                                   Australian regulatory regime and the relevant overseas regulatory
                                   regime. It does not necessarily involve a comparison of the regulatory
                                   mechanisms used to achieve those outcomes; and

                                   Note: Many different regulatory mechanisms may achieve the desired investor
                                   protection, market integrity and systemic risk outcomes. Defining equivalence
                                   according to regulatory mechanisms alone does not take into account whether those
                                   regulatory mechanisms are effectively implemented; a flexible outcomes-focused test
                                   involves an assessment of the effectiveness of the overseas regulatory regime.

                             (b)   considers equivalence largely from the point of view of:
                                   (i)     the protection of Australian investors;
                                   (ii)    the integrity of Australian markets; and
                                   (iii)   the reduction of systemic risk in the Australian financial system.

                                   Note: Some overseas regulatory regimes may not satisfy the equivalence test simply
                                   because the jurisdictional reach of their regulatory regime is such that they do not
                                   protect Australian investors and markets, or Australia’s financial system. This may be
                                   the case even though those regulatory regimes offer equivalent protection to their own
                                   investors and their own markets, and reduce systemic risk in their own financial system.

              RG 54.42       The equivalence test does not require that the Australian and overseas
                             regulatory regimes impose comparable regulatory burdens on regulated entities.

              RG 54.43       Principle 1 is consistent with s795B(2)(c) and 824B(2)(c) of the
                             Corporations Act under which recognition of an overseas regulatory regime
                             is subject to an outcomes-focused equivalence test.

                                   Note: See also the IOSCO Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation, which are
                                   expressed in terms of outcomes rather than regulatory mechanisms.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                       Page 16
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             What does ‘sufficiently’ mean?

              RG 54.44       The equivalence test in Principle 1 is flexible. What degree of equivalence is
                             ‘sufficient’ will depend on a number of factors. For example, if a foreign
                             provider is given only limited relief from the Australian regulatory regime, it
                             may not be necessary for the relevant overseas regulatory regime to achieve all
                             the relevant outcomes of the Australian regulatory regime: see Principle 10.

              RG 54.45       Likewise, the degree of equivalence that is sufficient may be affected by the
                             conditions imposed on any relief from the Australian regulatory regime granted
                             to a foreign provider.


Principle 2: Fullest possible recognition

                               Principle 2

                               ASIC gives the fullest possible recognition to sufficiently equivalent overseas
                               regulatory regimes.


                             Why is Principle 2 important?

              RG 54.46       This principle allows ASIC to balance the goals of:
                             (a)   facilitating cross-border business through improving the availability and
                                   provision of foreign facilities, services and products in Australia; and
                             (b)   protecting Australian investors, reducing systemic risks and facilitating
                                   fair and efficient financial markets in Australia.


                             What does Principle 2 mean?

              RG 54.47       When regulating foreign facilities, services and products, we will rely on
                             equivalent overseas regulation to the greatest extent possible, thereby
                             imposing the minimum additional regulatory burden on foreign providers.
                             We will only require compliance with those Australian laws that are
                             necessary to ensure that:
                             (a)   Australian investors who access foreign facilities, services and products
                                   are protected;
                             (b)   foreign facilities, services and products do not adversely affect the
                                   fairness and efficiency of Australian markets; and
                             (c)   foreign facilities, services and products do not create systemic risks in
                                   the Australian financial system.

                                   Note: In some circumstances, we do not have the power to give relief from compliance
                                   with Australian laws. For example, Pt 7.2 of the Corporations Act sets out all
                                   obligations imposed on overseas market operators licensed under s795B(2). ASIC does
                                   not have the power to give relief from compliance with these obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                    Page 17
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




              RG 54.48       This principle means we will only supplement the overseas regulatory regime
                             by requiring the foreign provider to comply with those conditions and Australian
                             laws that are necessary to ensure the achievement of these outcomes.

              RG 54.49       For example:
                             (a)   if the disclosure laws of the overseas regulatory regime are insufficient to
                                   ensure that Australian investors can make confident and informed decisions
                                   about whether to invest in a foreign financial product, we may impose some
                                   Australian disclosure laws on the foreign provider of that product;

                                   Note: This situation may occur even if the foreign disclosure laws are comparable to
                                   Australian disclosure laws. The foreign disclosure laws may have a limited
                                   jurisdictional scope and not apply to offers made to Australian investors.

                             (b)   if the overseas regulatory regime does not offer practical rights and
                                   remedies to Australian investors, we may require a foreign provider of
                                   financial services to retail clients to comply with the obligation under
                                   s912A(2)(b) of the Corporations Act to be a member of an external
                                   dispute resolution (EDR) scheme.


Principle 3: Effective cooperation arrangements

                               Principle 3

                               ASIC must have effective cooperation arrangements with the relevant overseas
                               regulatory authorities regulating foreign facilities, services and products
                               available in Australia.


                             Why is Principle 3 important?

              RG 54.50       Under Principle 2, foreign facilities, services and products will largely be
                             regulated by the law of their home jurisdiction. However, there may be
                             circumstances where the activities of foreign providers in their home jurisdiction
                             may impact Australian investors, Australian markets and systemic risks in the
                             Australian financial system. Generally, we cannot enforce the law of the home
                             jurisdiction or bring enforcement action as regulator in the home jurisdiction.
                             ASIC’s ability to conduct compulsory supervision or investigations outside
                             Australia may be restricted without assistance from the relevant overseas
                             regulatory authority. It is therefore important that effective cooperation
                             arrangements are in place between ASIC and the overseas regulatory authority.

              RG 54.51       To enable ASIC to properly regulate foreign providers in Australia that have
                             the benefit of some form of regulatory relief, we may need to ask the
                             overseas regulatory authority:
                             (a)   for access to information about the foreign provider that is only
                                   available from the overseas regulatory authority;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                       Page 18
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             (b)   to supervise or investigate activities of the foreign provider conducted
                                   in its home jurisdiction; and/or
                             (c)   to take enforcement action against the foreign provider in its home
                                   jurisdiction.

              RG 54.52       These actions should be as effective as actions the overseas regulatory authority
                             would take to protect investors, market integrity and reduce systemic risk in its
                             own jurisdiction.


                             What does Principle 3 mean?

              RG 54.53       Effective cooperation arrangements should encompass:
                             (a)   the prompt sharing of information about foreign facilities, services and
                                   products and foreign providers; and
                             (b)   effective cooperation in relation to:
                                   (i)    the supervision and investigation of foreign facilities, services and
                                          products and foreign providers; and
                                   (ii)   enforcement actions involving foreign providers.

              RG 54.54       In general, effective cooperation arrangements will not be possible unless the
                             overseas regulatory authority has power under the overseas regulatory
                             regime to cooperate with ASIC in these ways.

              RG 54.55       Effective cooperation arrangements may be bilateral or multilateral. They
                             will generally be in the form of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), or
                             some other documented arrangement. They may, however, be supplemented
                             by less formal arrangements and relationships.

              RG 54.56       In assessing the effectiveness of cooperation arrangements with an overseas
                             regulatory authority, we will consider whether:
                             (a)   there are supervisory cooperation arrangements between the overseas
                                   regulatory authority and ASIC that are consistent with the IOSCO
                                   Principles Regarding Cross-Border Supervisory Cooperation;
                                   Note: These principles provide a framework for regulators seeking to establish
                                   supervisory cooperation agreements. Supervisory cooperation involves the day-to-day
                                   exchange of information for general supervisory and oversight purposes (i.e. not just for
                                   enforcement purposes).

                             (b)   the overseas regulatory authority is a signatory to Appendix A of the IOSCO
                                   Multilateral Memorandum of Understanding Concerning Consultation and
                                   Cooperation and the Exchange of Information (IOSCO MMOU); and
                                   Note: The IOSCO MMOU sets an international benchmark for cross-border cooperation
                                   between securities regulators on enforcement matters. In general, we consider IOSCO
                                   MMOU Appendix A signatory status as a good indicator of effective cooperation.
                                   However, we will also consider IOSCO MMOU Appendix B signatory status as an
                                   indicator together with the particular circumstances of the relevant overseas regulatory
                                   authority.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                        Page 19
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             (c)   there is an existing MOU between the overseas regulatory authority and
                                   ASIC that creates an effective cooperation arrangement.

                                   Note: Where an overseas regulatory authority is not a member of IOSCO, we will
                                   consider bilateral agreements and the overseas regulator’s experience with reference to
                                   the terms of the IOSCO MMOU Appendix A and Appendix B.




Principle 4: Enforcement of Australian laws

                               Principle 4

                               ASIC must be able to enforce the Australian laws that apply to foreign
                               facilities, services and products.


                             Why is Principle 4 important?

              RG 54.57       We may rely on the overseas regulatory authority to bring enforcement
                             action against a foreign provider in its home jurisdiction: see Principle 3.
                             However, we must be able to enforce in Australia those Australian laws that
                             apply to the foreign provider. This is because:
                             (a)   the Australian laws that apply to the foreign provider will be those that
                                   we consider are essential to protecting Australian investors, Australian
                                   markets and reducing systemic risks; and
                             (b)   the relevant overseas regulatory authority may not be able to enforce
                                   those Australian laws in its home jurisdiction.


                             What does Principle 4 mean?

              RG 54.58       In order to take enforcement action in Australia against foreign providers for
                             breaches of Australia law, we must have both sufficient information and
                             legal power to commence enforcement action.

              RG 54.59       To ensure that we have sufficient information and legal power, we may:
                             (a)   impose, or advise the Minister to impose, appropriate conditions on a
                                   licence; or
                             (b)   impose appropriate conditions on any relief from the Australian
                                   regulatory regime granted to a foreign provider.

              RG 54.60       Appropriate conditions may include requiring the foreign provider to:
                             (a)   enter into cooperation arrangements with us that will enable us to obtain
                                   information from the foreign provider;
                             (b)   register under Div 2 of Pt 5B.2 of the Corporations Act;
                             (c)   submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the Australian courts;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                       Page 20
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             (d)   appoint an agent in Australia to accept service of process on behalf of
                                   the foreign provider; and
                             (e)   comply with any lawful direction of ASIC or an Australian court.



 Principle 5: Adequate rights and remedies

                               Principle 5

                               Adequate rights and remedies must be practically available to Australian
                               investors who access foreign facilities, services and products in Australia.


                             Why is Principle 5 important?

              RG 54.61       We have adopted this principle because adequate rights and remedies are
                             essential to the protection of Australian investors. Investors must have the
                             ability to protect their own interests, because neither the relevant overseas
                             regulatory authority nor ASIC will be able to pursue all breaches of
                             investors’ rights.


                             What does Principle 5 mean?

              RG 54.62       In general, Australian investors who use foreign facilities, services and
                             products should have practical access to rights and remedies that provide the
                             same level of protection as the rights and remedies available to Australian
                             investors who use comparable Australian facilities, services and products.

              RG 54.63       The phrase ‘rights and remedies’ includes:
                             (a)   the right to seek remedies through private judicial actions;
                             (b)   access to internal and external alternative dispute resolution; and
                             (c)   access to compensation arrangements.

              RG 54.64       Australian investors who access foreign facilities, services and products may
                             be either wholesale or retail investors. The nature of the investor will affect
                             the determination of:
                             (a)   what rights and remedies are adequate; and
                             (b)   when those rights and remedies are practically available.

                             What does ‘adequate’ mean?

              RG 54.65       When determining what constitutes adequate rights and remedies, we will
                             give effect to the objectives of the Corporations Act, which are that retail
                             clients should generally have access to non-judicial, as well as judicial,
                             remedies.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 21
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




              RG 54.66       Under s912A(2) and 912B, retail clients of financial services providers have
                             access to both:
                             (a)   administrative compensation arrangements; and
                             (b)   internal and external dispute resolution.

              RG 54.67       Retail clients who use financial markets licensed under s795B(1) through
                             licensed participants may also make a claim under the markets’ compensation
                             arrangements: see s881A and 888A, and the regulations made under s888A.

              RG 54.68       On the other hand, under the Corporations Act, wholesale investors are
                             generally only entitled to pursue their rights through private litigation.
                             Therefore, we will generally treat the ability to pursue rights against foreign
                             providers through private judicial action as adequate for wholesale investors.

                             What does ‘practically available’ mean?

              RG 54.69       A right or remedy may not be practically available to retail investors if it can
                             only be pursued through private action in a foreign jurisdiction. High costs, the
                             problems associated with briefing foreign lawyers, and other practical matters
                             are likely to be a significant impediment to any attempt by a retail investor
                             client to obtain remedies through private judicial action in a foreign jurisdiction.

              RG 54.70       On the other hand, such remedies are more likely to be practically available
                             to wholesale investors, who can be assumed to be better resourced.

                             What does this principle mean for foreign providers who deal with
                             retail clients?

              RG 54.71       In many circumstances, overseas regulatory regimes will not give Australian
                             retail investors practical access to rights and remedies that provide the same
                             level of protection as the rights and remedies that are available to Australian
                             retail investors who use comparable Australian facilities, services and
                             products. In these circumstances, we will require the foreign provider to
                             comply with a modified version of those parts of the Australian regulatory
                             regime that relate to remedies.

              RG 54.72       We may, for example, require a foreign provider of financial services to be a
                             member of an Australian EDR scheme. In other circumstances, we may be
                             satisfied that a foreign alternative dispute resolution scheme (such as an
                             ombudsman scheme) is practically accessible to Australian retail clients.

              RG 54.73       In addition, to facilitate private judicial actions by Australian retail investors
                             against foreign providers, we may require foreign providers who are not
                             registered under Div 2 of Pt 5B.2 of the Corporations Act to:
                             (a)   submit to the jurisdiction of the Australian courts; and/or
                             (b)   appoint an agent in Australia to accept service of process on behalf of
                                   the provider.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 22
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




Principle 6: Adequate disclosure
                               Principle 6

                               Adequate disclosure must be made of information that Australian
                               investors may reasonably require to make an informed assessment of the
                               consequences of any significant differences between the regulation of the
                               foreign facilities, services and products and the regulation of comparable
                               Australian facilities, services and products.


                             Why is Principle 6 important?
              RG 54.74       Disclosure fulfils an important investor protection role in the Australian
                             regulatory regime. A key purpose of both Chapters 6D and 7 of the
                             Corporations Act is to ensure that retail investors have access to sufficient
                             information to make confident and informed decisions: see, in particular,
                             s710 and 760A(a). This purpose is achieved by requiring certain disclosures
                             and by ensuring that those disclosures are made in an appropriate form.
              RG 54.75       The principles in this guide (particularly Principles 1 and 2) require the
                             regulatory outcomes of the overseas and Australian regulatory regimes to be
                             sufficiently equivalent from the perspective of Australian investors. This is
                             so that they can be confident and informed when relying on information they
                             receive from the foreign provider, even if the provider is exempt from any
                             Australian disclosure requirements. Therefore, significant and detailed
                             additional disclosures, beyond those ordinarily required by the relevant
                             overseas regulatory regime and those applicable parts of the Australian
                             regulatory regime, will generally be unnecessary.
              RG 54.76       Nevertheless, some additional disclosures will still be required. Even if the
                             regulatory outcomes of a relevant overseas regulatory regime are deemed to
                             be sufficiently equivalent, the regulation itself differs from the regulation
                             imposed on comparable Australian facilities, services and products. This fact
                             should be disclosed to all Australian investors so that they can themselves
                             assess whether this difference is significant to them. Moreover, retail
                             investors should be informed of the consequences of any special risks
                             associated with the foreign facility, service or product.
              RG 54.77       Principle 6 achieves an appropriate balance between the need to protect
                             Australian investors in this way and the desire to facilitate the availability
                             and provision of foreign facilities, services and products in Australia.

                             What does Principle 6 mean?
              RG 54.78       Under this principle, the disclosures required to enable investors to make an
                             informed assessment will vary depending on whether the relevant investors
                             are wholesale or retail.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 23
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




              RG 54.79       Foreign providers who deal with retail investors will generally need to
                             disclose the following information in an appropriate manner:
                             (a)   that the foreign facility, service or product is regulated, at least in part,
                                   by the laws of a foreign jurisdiction, and those laws differ from
                                   Australian laws;
                             (b)   that the rights and remedies available to Australian investors who
                                   access the foreign facility, service or product may differ from those of
                                   Australian investors who access comparable Australian facilities,
                                   services and products;
                             (c)   the nature of the rights and remedies available to Australian investors
                                   under the overseas regulatory regime and how those rights and remedies
                                   can be accessed;
                             (d)   the nature of any special risks associated with the foreign facility,
                                   service or product, such as risks arising from taxation, foreign currency
                                   or time differences; and
                             (e)   the nature and consequences of significant differences in the regulatory
                                   regime, such as the use of accounting standards that differ from those
                                   used in Australia.

              RG 54.80       Foreign providers who deal solely with wholesale investors will generally
                             only need to disclose that the foreign facility, service or product is regulated,
                             at least in part, by the laws of a foreign jurisdiction and those laws differ
                             from Australian laws.

              RG 54.81       In general, we will ensure that such disclosure is made by:
                             (a)   imposing, or advising the Minister to impose, suitable conditions on a
                                   licence; or
                             (b)   imposing suitable conditions on any relief from the Australian
                                   regulatory regime granted to a foreign provider.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 24
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




E          Commentary on the Equivalence Principles

                               Key points

                               The Equivalence Principles (Principles 7–10) guide our assessment of the
                               degree to which an overseas regulatory regime is sufficiently equivalent to
                               the Australian regulatory regime under Principle 1.

                               We will treat an overseas regulatory regime, or the relevant parts of it, as
                               sufficiently equivalent to the Australian regulatory regime if it:
                               • is clear, transparent and certain (Principle 7);
                               • is consistent with the IOSCO Principles and Objectives of Securities
                                 Regulation (Principle 8);
                               • is adequately enforced in its home jurisdiction (Principle 9); and
                               • achieves equivalent outcomes to the Australian regulatory regime
                                 (Principle 10).




Principle 7: Clear, transparent and certain

                               Principle 7

                               An equivalent regulatory regime is clear, transparent and certain.


                             Why is Principle 7 important?

              RG 54.82       A regulatory regime that is not clear, transparent and certain will not be
                             regarded as sufficiently equivalent to the Australian regulatory regime
                             because:
                             (a)   it cannot be consistently or reliably applied or enforced;
                             (b)   Australian investors will not be able to understand their rights and
                                   remedies under such a regulatory regime; and/or
                             (c)   we will not be able to obtain sufficient knowledge of how the regime
                                   works in practice to assess the regime.


                             What does Principle 7 mean?

              RG 54.83       A ‘clear’ regulatory regime is one that is clearly articulated and easily
                             understood. A ‘transparent’ regulatory regime is one whose rules, policies
                             and practices are readily available to and known by all relevant persons.
                             A ’certain’ regulatory regime is one that is consistently applied and not
                             subject to indiscriminate change.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 25
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




              RG 54.84       At a minimum, this principle means that the relevant parts of the regulatory
                             regime must be:
                             (a)   in written form;
                             (b)   available in English (even if this is a translation from an original
                                   version in another language); and
                             (c)   not subject to an unfettered, arbitrary discretion.



Principle 8: Consistent with IOSCO Objectives and Principles of
Securities Regulation

                               Principle 8

                               An equivalent regulatory regime is consistent with the IOSCO Objectives and
                               Principles of Securities Regulation.


                             Why is Principle 8 important?

              RG 54.85       The aims, purposes and outcomes of the Australian regulatory regime are
                             consistent with the IOSCO Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation.
                             Therefore, implementation of these objectives and principles in the overseas
                             regulatory regime indicates that the Australian and overseas regulatory regimes:
                             (a)   share a similar regulatory philosophy; and
                             (b)   are, at least at a high level, equivalent.


                             What does Principle 8 mean?

              RG 54.86       In assessing whether a overseas regulatory regime meets this principle,
                             we will consider:
                             (a)   whether the relevant overseas regulatory authority has assessed its
                                   regulatory regime against the IOSCO Objectives and Principles of
                                   Securities Regulation and has reasonably determined that the regulatory
                                   regime broadly complies with them; and
                             (b)   whether other international organisations have assessed the regulatory
                                   regime against the IOSCO Objectives and Principles of Securities
                                   Regulation and have reasonably determined that the regulatory regime
                                   broadly complies with them.

                                   Note: For example, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Financial
                                   Stability Board all assess national financial systems against these objectives and
                                   principles.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                    Page 26
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




Principle 9: Adequately enforced

                               Principle 9

                               An equivalent regulatory regime is adequately enforced in the home
                               jurisdiction.


                             Why is Principle 9 important?

              RG 54.87       A regulatory regime that is infrequently or inconsistently enforced in its home
                             jurisdiction will not be sufficiently equivalent to the Australian regulatory
                             regime. Unless a regulatory regime is adequately enforced, it will frequently be
                             ignored and, consequently, it will not reliably deal with and deter misconduct.
                             Many investors have insufficient resources and powers to monitor and
                             investigate compliance with laws designed to protect investors, market integrity
                             and systemic stability, and to bring private enforcement action to protect their
                             own interests.


                             What does Principle 9 mean?

              RG 54.88       A regulatory regime is adequately enforced if the overseas regulatory
                             authority (or other responsible authority):
                             (a)   has sufficient powers of investigation and enforcement;
                             (b)   has sufficient resources to use those powers;
                             (c)   uses those powers and resources to promote compliance with the
                                   regulatory regime; and
                             (d)   operates within a legal system that is independent and has a well-
                                   founded reputation for integrity.

              RG 54.89       In assessing whether the overseas regulatory regime is adequately enforced,
                             we will rely on matters such as:
                             (a)   the international reputation of the overseas regulatory regime;
                             (b)   self-assessments by the overseas regulatory authority; and
                             (c)   assessments by international financial institutions and other
                                   international organisations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 27
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




Principle 10: Equivalent outcomes

                               Principle 10

                               An equivalent regulatory regime achieves equivalent outcomes to the
                               Australian regulatory regime.


                             Why is Principle 10 important?

              RG 54.90       ASIC assesses the equivalence of an overseas regulatory regime according to
                             the outcomes achieved by that regime: see RG 54.41–RG 54.43. An equivalent
                             regulatory regime must achieve sufficiently equivalent outcomes to the
                             Australian regulatory regime.

              RG 54.91       These outcomes are the outcomes achieved by the Corporations Act and the
                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act) as
                             they apply to Australian providers of facilities, services and products.


                             What does Principle 10 mean?

              RG 54.92       Whatever its regulatory mechanisms, an equivalent regulatory regime must
                             achieve, in the relevant areas, sufficiently equivalent outcomes to the
                             Australian regulatory regime.

              RG 54.93       The Australian regulatory regime ensures that certain outcomes are
                             achieved for:
                             (a)   financial markets (see RG 54.95);
                             (b)   clearing and settlement (see RG 54.96);
                             (c)   financial services (see RG 54.97–RG 54.98); and
                             (d)   financial products (see RG 54.99).

              RG 54.94       We will assess whether these outcomes are met by the overseas regulatory
                             regime largely from the perspective of Australian investors, Australian
                             markets, and the Australian financial system.

                             Financial markets

              RG 54.95       Australian laws on financial markets promote fair, orderly and transparent
                             financial markets by ensuring that, to the greatest extent possible:
                             (a)   the market operator is authorised against objective criteria before
                                   starting business (e.g. fit and proper standards apply);
                             (b)   the market operator is subject to ongoing, active and timely regulatory
                                   supervision;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 28
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             (c)   market users use the market on an informed basis (e.g. listed entities are
                                   subject to price sensitive disclosure obligations; pre- and post-trading
                                   information is made available on a timely basis);
                             (d)   market users are confident that the market as a whole operates fairly
                                   and that they will be treated fairly (e.g. trading occurs on an open and
                                   fair basis);
                             (e)   market users are confident about the market participants they deal with
                                   (e.g. participants are subject to obligations to comply with the market’s
                                   trading rules and to protect their client’s interests; there is a
                                   compensation scheme for clients who suffer loss arising from fraud);
                             (f)   market supervision is effective so that listed entities, market participants
                                   and market users that breach the law or the market’s operating rules are
                                   likely to be detected and disciplined (e.g. participants and users are not
                                   disadvantaged by breaches of the operating rules; market supervision is
                                   not compromised by conflicts of interest held by the market operator);
                             (g)   the market operates reliably and is not at risk of failing (e.g. the market
                                   operator has adequate resources to operate the market);
                             (h)   the price formation process operates reliably; and
                             (i)   transactions entered into on the market are cleared and settled promptly,
                                   fairly and effectively (e.g. arrangements are in place to minimise default
                                   risk).

                                   Note: These outcomes are set out in more detail in Regulatory Guide 172 Australian
                                   market licences: Australian operators (RG 172), Table A ‘Regulatory outcomes and
                                   mechanisms in financial markets’.


                             Clearing and settlement

              RG 54.96       Australian laws on clearing and settlement promote prompt, fair and
                             effective services by clearing and settlement facilities, and the reduction of
                             systemic risk, by ensuring that, to the greatest extent possible:
                             (a)   the clearing and settlement process operates reliably and is not at risk
                                   of failing;
                             (b)   users of clearing and settlement facilities are confident that the facility
                                   operates fairly and that settlement obligations will be met;
                             (c)   the facility and its participants are properly supervised so that breaches of
                                   the law or the facility’s rules are likely to be detected and disciplined; and
                             (d)   systemic and other risks relating to default are anticipated and
                                   appropriately dealt with.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                     Page 29
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                             Financial services

              RG 54.97       Australian laws on financial services promote the provision of efficient,
                             honest and fair financial services by ensuring that, to the greatest extent
                             possible, financial services are provided by persons who:
                             (a)   are subject to adequate conduct of business obligations and misconduct
                                   prohibitions;
                             (b)   are fair and honest (e.g. they are authorised against objective criteria
                                   before starting business);
                             (c)   are competent to provide fair and quality financial services;
                             (d)   have adequate resources to operate in compliance with the law; and
                                   Note: The Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority (APRA) is the prudential
                                   regulator of banks, insurance companies, superannuation funds, credit unions, building
                                   societies and friendly societies.

                             (e)   have adequate risk management processes, internal controls and
                                   compliance arrangements to act fairly and reliably (e.g. arrangements
                                   for the holding of client assets, maintenance of financial records,
                                   managing conflicts of interest).

              RG 54.98       Australian laws on financial services also require retail investors to have
                             access to the information they need to make confident and informed
                             decisions, as well as access to adequate dispute resolution and compensation
                             arrangements to deal with losses arising from the use of financial services.

                             Financial products

              RG 54.99       Australian laws on financial products promote confident and informed decisions
                             by investors by ensuring that investors are provided with all information they
                             reasonably require to make an informed decision about whether to:
                             (a)   buy a financial product; and
                             (b)   in appropriate circumstances, sell or hold a financial product.

                                   Note 1: The amount of information that must be provided to an investor to allow the
                                   investor to make an informed decision will depend on whether the investor is a
                                   wholesale or retail investor.

                                   Note 2: Australian continuous disclosure laws benefit both investors and market
                                   integrity. This outcome does not relate solely to retail investor protection.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                         Page 30
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




Key terms

                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               AFS licence                An Australian financial services licence under s913B of the
                                                          Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries on
                                                          a financial services business to provide financial services
                                                                Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                                Corporations Act.

                               ASIC                       Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                   Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                                                          Act 2001

                               Australian facilities,     Market and clearing and settlement facilities, financial
                               services and products      services, and financial products, originating in and
                                                          regulated in Australia under Australian law

                               Australian providers       Providers of Australian facilities, services and products

                               Ch 8 (for example)         A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 8)

                               Corporations Act           Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                               Corporations               Corporations Regulations 2001
                               Regulations

                               Div 2 (for example)        A division of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 2)

                               EDR                        External dispute resolution

                               Equivalence                The principles set out in Table 2 and Section E of
                               Principles                 this guide

                               foreign facilities,        Market and clearing and settlement facilities, financial
                               services and products      services, and financial products, originating in and
                                                          regulated in a foreign jurisdiction and accessible to
                                                          persons in Australia

                               foreign providers          Providers of foreign facilities, services and products

                               General Principles         The principles set out in Table 1 and Section D of
                                                          this guide

                               home jurisdiction          The jurisdiction in which the relevant foreign facility,
                                                          service or product originates and is regulated

                               host jurisdiction          A jurisdiction, other than the jurisdiction in which the
                                                          foreign provider originates, in which the foreign provider
                                                          provides a financial facility, service or product

                               overseas regulatory        A body established by a foreign government to regulate a
                               authority                  foreign facility, service or product




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                           Page 31
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               overseas regulatory       The regulatory regime supervised and administered by
                               regime                    the overseas regulatory authority

                               IOSCO                     International Organization of Securities Commissions

                               IOSCO MMOU                The IOSCO Multilateral Memorandum of Understanding
                                                         Concerning Consultation and Cooperation and the
                                                         Exchange of Information

                               IOSCO Objectives          The Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation,
                               and Principles of         originally adopted by IOSCO in September 1998, as
                               Securities Regulation     amended from time to time

                               IOSCO Principles          The Principles Regarding Cross-Border Supervisory
                               Regarding Cross-          Cooperation, originally adopted by IOSCO in May 2010,
                               Border Supervisory        as amended from time to time
                               Cooperation

                               market users              Investors who acquire or dispose of financial products in
                                                         a financial market. They may be market participants
                                                         dealing for themselves or, where market participants act
                                                         as intermediaries, the clients of the participants

                               MOU                       Memorandum of Understanding

                               principles for cross-     The General Principles and Equivalence Principles
                               border financial
                               regulation

                               regulators                ASIC and the overseas regulatory authority/authorities

                               regulatory regime         The rules that govern a financial facility, service or
                                                         product and includes legislation, the rules, policies and
                                                         practices of a regulator, and the rules, policies and
                                                         practices of a self-regulatory organisation, such as a
                                                         financial market operator

                               Pt 7.2 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                         7.2)

                               RG 54 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 54)

                               s795B (for example)       A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 795B)

                               SFC                       Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                    Page 32
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 54: Principles for cross-border financial regulation




Related information
                             Headnotes
                             Australian providers, clearing and settlement facilities, effective cooperation
                             arrangements, exemption, financial products, financial services, foreign
                             providers, markets, mutual recognition, overseas regulatory regimes,
                             sufficiently equivalent, unilateral recognition

                             Regulatory guides
                             RG 121 Doing financial services business in Australia
                             RG 172 Australian market licences: Australian operators
                             RG 176 Licensing: Discretionary powers: Wholesale foreign financial
                             services providers
                             RG 177 Australian market licences: Overseas operators
                             RG 178 Foreign collective investment schemes
                             RG 190 Offering securities in New Zealand and Australia under mutual
                             recognition
                             RG 211 Clearing and settlement facilities: Australian and overseas operators

                             Legislation
                             ASIC Act
                             Corporations Act, Pts 5B.2 and 7.2, Div 2, Chs 6D, 7 and 8, s601QA, 710,
                             760A(a), 795B(1), 795B(2), 824B(2), 881A, 888A, 911A(2)(h), 912A(2),
                             912B; Corporations Regulations

                             Consultation papers and reports
                             CP 98 Cross-border recognition: Facilitating access to overseas markets
                             and financial services
                             REP 134 Enhancing capital flows into and out of Australia
                             REP 174 Effects of the Australia–New Zealand mutual recognition scheme
                             for securities offerings

                             Media and information releases
                             MR 08-152 Australia and Hong Kong sign deal to allow cross-border
                             marketing of retail funds
                             MR 08-193 SEC, Australian authorities sign mutual recognition agreement
                             AD 09-205 Significant benefits from mutual recognition of securities offerings
                             AD 11-51 Guide for Trans-Tasman mutual recognition of securities
                             offerings updated


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2012                                                   Page 33
