Note: From 27 July      REGULATORY GUIDE 86
2020, applications
for relief, including
for the issue of
beneficial tracing      Tracing beneficial ownership
notices, should be      Part 6C.2 — Tracing beneficial ownership of shares
submitted through
the ASIC Regulatory     Reissued 26/6/2007
Portal. For more        Previous version: See Superseded Policy Statement 86 [SPS 86] in the
information, see how    ASIC Digest CD-ROM
you apply for relief.
                        From 5 July 2007, this document may be referred to as Regulatory
                        Guide 86 (RG 86) or Policy Statement 86 (PS 86). Paragraphs in this
                        document may be referred to by their regulatory guide number
                        (e.g. RG 86.1) or their policy statement number (e.g. PS 86.1).


                        What this guide is about
                        RG 86.1           This guide explains how we will exercise our
                        powers under the beneficial ownership tracing provisions (Pt 6C.2) of
                        the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act).

                        RG 86.2           The policy sets out:

                        A   how we approach requests that we direct a person to provide
                            details about the beneficial ownership of securities
                                                                           see RG 86.3–RG 86.21

                        B   when we will grant relief from a direction to disclose beneficial
                            ownership information
                                                                       see RG 86.22–RG 86.30
                        C   when we will pass on information about beneficial ownership and
                            when we will grant relief from the requirements for registers of
                            beneficial ownership information
                                                                      see RG 86.31–RG 86.43


                                         © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                                               Page 1
                                REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



D   our approach to the enforcement of directions issued under
    Pt 6C.2
                                                              see RG 86.44–RG 86.66

                  Contents
                  What this guide is about .......................................................1
                  A     When ASIC will give a beneficial ownership
                  direction..................................................................................3
                        Our policy ......................................................................3
                        Underlying principles .....................................................5
                        Explanation....................................................................5
                  B        Relief from responding to a direction .......................7
                           Our policy ......................................................................7
                           Explanation....................................................................7
                  C        Information about beneficial ownership ...................9
                           Our policy ......................................................................9
                           Underlying principles .....................................................9
                           Explanation....................................................................10
                  D        Enforcement of beneficial ownership directions .....12
                           Our policy ......................................................................12
                           Underlying principles .....................................................13
                           Explanations ..................................................................14
                  Key terms................................................................................17
                  Related information ...............................................................18




Important note: The content of this guide is based on the law as at June
2007. Examples in the guide are purely for illustration; they are not
exhaustive and are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or
requirements. This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage
you to seek your own legal advice to find out how the Corporations Act
applies to you.




                      © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                            Page 2
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



A   When ASIC will give a beneficial
ownership direction

Our policy

Background
RG 86.3             ASIC, listed companies and the responsible entities
of listed managed investment schemes can obtain details of the
beneficial ownership of securities in those companies or schemes:
s672A. A person must provide details of the beneficial ownership of
securities they own, have a relevant interest in or have given
instructions about if they are directed to do so under s672A. Third
parties can request ASIC to give a direction requiring a person to
disclose these details.

RG 86.4            A direction may be given to:

(a) a person who is a member of the company or scheme—this is a
    ‘primary direction’; or
(b) a person who is named in a previous disclosure under s672B as
    having a relevant interest in, or having given instructions about,
    securities in the company or scheme—this is a ‘secondary
    direction’.

Requests by members of a company or scheme
RG 86.5       We will normally give a direction under s672A at the
request of a member if the request:

(a) demonstrates that the information sought will contribute to an
    informed market in securities in the company or scheme; and
(b) states that the member will take action to enforce the direction if
    it is not complied with.
RG 86.6       We will not give a direction at the request of a member
if we consider that it would be unreasonable to do so in all the
circumstances. In making this determination, we will consider the
information provided in the member’s request.

RG 86.7        Every request by a member to issue a direction in
relation to securities in a company or scheme should:

(a) identify the applicant and confirm that the applicant is a member
    of the company or scheme;


                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                        Page 3
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



(b) specify the company or the responsible entity and scheme;
(c) specify the person for whom a direction is requested and whether
    the person is a member of the company or scheme;
(d) identify the securities for which information is sought;
(e) state whether there are any current proceedings in relation to the
    information;
(f) show why the market in securities of the company or scheme
    would be better informed if the information was disclosed;
(g) state whether the applicant expects the person to whom the
    direction would be given to resist or obstruct disclosure; and
(h) state whether the applicant proposes to take action to enforce
    compliance with the direction if necessary.

Requests by non-members
RG 86.8       We can direct a person to provide information under
s672B without being requested to do so by a member: s672A(1). We
may exercise this power on our own initiative or following a request
by a person who is not a member.

RG 86.9        A submission by a person who is not a member should
include the following information:

(a) the identity of the applicant and the information referred to in sub-
    paragraphs (b) to (g) of RG 86.7;
(b) the interest of the applicant in the beneficial ownership
    information sought;
(c) whether the applicant has standing to enforce compliance with the
    direction under s1325A(3) and, if so, whether it proposes to take
    such action if necessary; and
(d) why the applicant does not become a member of the company or
    scheme and make a request to us as a member under s672A.
RG 86.10       It may be more difficult for a non-member to persuade
us to issue a direction than for a member. Where a non-member
requests a direction, our decision whether to give the direction will
depend on:

(a) submissions on the matters referred to in RG 86.9; and
(b) whether we are concerned that the market in securities will be
    uninformed without the information sought.



                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                        Page 4
                             REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



Underlying principles
RG 86.11       The purpose of the beneficial ownership tracing
provisions is to promote a fully informed market and to provide a
swift response to inquiries concerning the ultimate ownership of
securities. The identity of the beneficial owners may give insights
about the future of the entity or impact on its management. It also
informs the market about whether the securities were acquired legally:
see Brunswick NL v Blossomtree Pty Ltd (1992) 10 ACLC 658 at 667.


Explanation

Requests by members of a company or scheme
RG 86.12      If a member of a company or scheme requests us to give
a direction, we must do so unless we consider that it would be
unreasonable to do so in all the circumstances: s672A(2). For
example, it will be unreasonable to require a person to disclose
information if the request is unnecessary or vexatious.

RG 86.13      Given that the purpose of Pt 6C.2 is to promote a fully
informed market, we will normally issue a direction if the request
demonstrates that the information sought will contribute to this
purpose.

RG 86.14       Members of a company or a scheme have standing to
enforce a direction given by us: s1325A(3)(c). We will generally not
give a direction unless the member is willing to enforce the direction
or we would be prepared to do so.
       Note: We will not necessarily enforce directions issued at the request of another
       person. We may leave enforcement up to that person: see RG 86.45.

RG 86.15      A distinct request must be made for the dispatch of each
direction. A member making a request that we issue a direction under
s672A must pay a fee for that request: see item 23 of schedule 1 of the
Corporations (Fees) Regulations 2001. If a member wants us to
dispatch more than one direction, a separate fee is required for each
direction. We will accept multiple requests in the same letter.

RG 86.16      The quickest way for a member to make a request, and
our preferred method of lodgement, is for the member to email a
completed Form 6071A, together with any attachments, to
applications@asic.gov.au. The member should then send paper
copies, together with the fee to:




                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                           Page 5
                              REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



          Manager – Applications & Advice
          Australian Securities & Investments Commission
          GPO Box 9827 in your capital city

Alternatively, the member can simply lodge paper copies together
with the fee at the above address.
       Note: Although use of the Form 6071A is optional, it will assist us if it is used.


Requests by non-members
RG 86.17     Whether we give a direction following a request by a
person who is not a member will depend on:

(a) the submissions made by that person; and
(b) whether we are concerned that the market in the relevant
    securities will be uninformed without the information sought (e.g.
    if the applicant makes out a prima facie case that there has been a
    failure to lodge substantial holding information for the securities).
RG 86.18       The market’s need for information, and our readiness to
give a direction, will be greater if the company or scheme is involved
in an active takeover situation.

RG 86.19      We expect that a person seeking information about
beneficial ownership would generally become a member of the
relevant company or scheme. If a person has bona fide reasons for not
wishing to become a member of the company or scheme, that should
be disclosed in their application.

RG 86.20       We will generally not issue a direction at the request of
the relevant company or responsible entity because they can issue
directions on their own behalf: s672A(1).

RG 86.21      Although there is no ASIC form applicable to a request
by a non-member, a non-member who wishes to make a request that
we issue a direction should otherwise follow the procedure outlined in
RG 86.16.




                     © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                           Page 6
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



B    Relief from responding to a
direction

Our policy
RG 86.22       A person who is given a direction may ask us for a full
or partial exemption from compliance with the direction. A person
who considers they may have difficulties in complying with a
direction should approach us as early as possible, but no later than two
business days after receiving the direction.

RG 86.23       We will only grant relief from compliance with a
direction if we are satisfied that there are special reasons for particular
information to be withheld, taking into account the purposes of Ch 6.

RG 86.24       The ordinary confidentiality requirements of nominees
and their principals and the ordinary cost and inconvenience of
providing information are not special reasons. To be special, the
information or the cost or difficulty of providing it must be
extraordinary, unusual or atypical. We will refuse requests that appear
to be made simply to delay compliance.


Explanation
RG 86.25      We have discretionary powers of exemption and
modification in relation to Pt 6C.2: s673.

RG 86.26      Where a person requests that we provide an exemption
from the requirement to provide information under s672B, they do not
have to provide a statement in response to the direction within the
time period (two business days) in s672B(2)(a). This is provided that
they make this request no later than two business days after we give
the person a direction. Otherwise their request cannot be considered
and does not stop time running under s672B(2)(a).

RG 86.27      If we refuse the person’s request, the person must
respond to the direction within two business days after we notify the
person of our decision: s672B(2)(b).

RG 86.28     We must consider the purposes of Ch 6 set out in s602
when deciding whether to grant relief under s 673. These include the
purposes of:

(a) ensuring that the acquisition of control takes place in an informed
    market; and



                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                        Page 7
                        REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



(b) providing the holders of securities with knowledge of the identity
    of any person who proposes to acquire a substantial interest.
RG 86.29       Because of the importance of these purposes, we think
there must be special reasons present before we will grant relief from
the obligation to provide information under s672B.

RG 86.30        Difficulty in complying with a direction within the time
required is not a special reason, unless there are circumstances special
to the applicant’s holding in the company or scheme. Special reasons
for an exemption for a secondary direction may involve circumstances
special to the instructions in relation to the securities in question.
Given the importance of the purpose behind Pt 6C.2 of promoting a
fully informed market, we do not envisage that we will often grant an
exemption from the requirement to provide information under s672B.




                 © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                       Page 8
                        REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



C   Information about beneficial
ownership

Our policy

Our disclosure policy
RG 86.31        We will give the relevant company or responsible entity
all relevant information obtained in response to a direction given by
us. However, we will not disclose the identity of a person who
requests that we issue a direction.

RG 86.32 We will only pass on information obtained under a direction
to:

(a) the relevant company or responsible entity; or
(b) where the direction was given at the request of a member, that
    member.

Register of beneficial ownership information
RG 86.33       A company or responsible entity must keep information
provided to it under Pt 6C.2 in a register: s672DA. The register must
present the information in a certain form unless ASIC approves
otherwise: s672DA(6). We will provide this approval where the
applicant demonstrates that the alternative form of presentation does
not make the information less accessible.

RG 86.34      We may also extend the 21 day period that the company
or responsible entity has to comply with a request for a copy of the
register: s672DA(8). We will only extend this time period in
exceptional circumstances.


Underlying principles
RG 86.35        The register of beneficial ownership information
provides public access to information about the beneficial ownership
of securities. Information on the register must be accessible. The
company or responsible entity must ensure that separate entries can be
distinguished and are logically organised (e.g. in order of receipt).




                 © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                       Page 9
                        REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



Explanation

Our disclosure policy
RG 86.36     Where we receive information in response to a direction
under s672A:

(a) we may pass on the information to the relevant company or
    responsible entity; and
(b) if we gave the direction in response to a request by a member, we
    must pass on the information to that member unless we consider it
    would be unreasonable in all the circumstances to do so: s672C.
RG 86.37       We will only pass on information to a person referred to
in s672C (i.e. the company or responsible entity or a member who
requested we give a direction). However, other persons may obtain
beneficial ownership information by inspecting or obtaining a copy of
the register of information maintained by a company or responsible
entity under s672DA.

RG 86.38      We will generally pass on information to the relevant
company or responsible entity, since the company or responsible
entity must then include the information in a public register: s672DA.
Section 672C does not contemplate that we may disclose the identity
of a member who requested us to provide a direction and we will not
do so.

Register of beneficial ownership information
RG 86.39      When a company or responsible entity receives
information in response to a direction or provided by us under s672C,
the information must be recorded in a register within two business
days of receipt: s672DA(9).

RG 86.40       The register may be kept by means of a mechanical,
electronic or other device that meets the requirements of s1306. The
register may therefore be kept on computer or microfiche. However, it
must be available for inspection: s672DA(7). Providing a screen
viewer or microfiche reader would meet the inspection requirements
under s672DA(7). Copies must be provided in readable form (such as
a computer printout or photographic copy of a microfiche):
s672DA(8) and 1306(4).

RG 86.41       A company or responsible entity is not required to
include any analysis of information provided to it under Pt 6C.2 in the
register. Nor is the company or responsible entity required to reformat
the information within a register entry. However, a company or
responsible entity will not satisfy the requirements of s672DA unless a

                 © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                      Page 10
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



person searching the register can distinguish and locate separate
entries and those entries are logically organised. For example, the
company or responsible entity may maintain an index or search
function that identifies separate entries by their date and by the
persons to whom they relate.

RG 86.42       We may approve a different form of register from that
specified in s672DA(6). Any request for us to approve a different
form of register should set out the reasons for that request. We cannot
approve the inclusion of a particular item of information in a form
different from that of other items on the register. When considering a
request, we will take into account the purpose of s672DA of requiring
companies and responsible entities to maintain registers of
information that are publicly available.

RG 86.43       It is also important that the information in the register is
provided to the public in a timely manner. It will only be in
exceptional circumstances that we will allow a company or
responsible entity more than 21 days to provide a person with a copy
of the register under s672DA(8).




                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                       Page 11
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



D   Enforcement of beneficial
ownership directions

Our policy

When we will enforce breaches
RG 86.44       If we have issued a direction on our own initiative, we
will generally move swiftly to enforce compliance with the direction.
As soon as the time for compliance has expired, we may commence
enforcement proceedings without further notification to the recipient
of the direction or any other person.

RG 86.45       If we have issued a direction following a request made
by a member or another person, we may enforce the direction if it is
appropriate. In deciding whether to enforce the direction, we will
consider whether the market has insufficient information about control
over securities in the company or scheme. We will also consider
information that may have led to the direction being issued. However,
we will not necessarily enforce a direction issued at the request of
another person. We may leave enforcement up to that person.

RG 86.46      We may not immediately enforce a breach that appears
to have been technical and inadvertent. However, unless we have
decided to leave enforcement up to another person, if the breach is
material and no attempt is made to correct it, we will normally seek
orders under s1325A.

RG 86.47       If enforcement proceedings are taken by the party
seeking the relevant information, any request for intervention by us
will be dealt with in terms of our general policy on intervention,
Regulatory Guide 4 Intervention (RG 4).

Beneficial ownership directions to be promptly
enforced
RG 86.48      It is our policy that beneficial ownership directions
should be promptly enforced. If we intend to conduct enforcement
action, we will generally file an application with the court as soon as:

(a) the statutory period for compliance has expired; or
(b) a response in terms of s1325A(1)(c) has been received.
RG 86.49      We consider that, generally, the hearing of the principal
application should proceed as soon as possible. We also consider that


                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                       Page 12
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



court processes should not be used by a defaulting party to create
further delays in providing the relevant information.

Orders sought by us
RG 86.50       Orders sought by us will vary with the circumstances of
each case and according to whether the defaulting recipient of the
direction is within the jurisdiction.

RG 86.51       Concurrently with the filing of an application with the
court, an interlocutory application will be made. This application will
normally be made ex parte and will seek orders to preserve the status
quo.

RG 86.52      Once we have proven default, the onus is on the
respondent to show why:

(a) it should be excused from compliance; or
(b) the relevant securities should not be sold or vested in us.
RG 86.53      If, after consideration of issues raised in the litigation
process, we are of the view that vesting orders are not appropriate, we
may elect not to press for vesting orders. If the defaulting party has
not appeared on the hearing of the application, vesting orders will
generally be sought.

RG 86.54      Where appropriate, other remedies provided for in the
Corporations Act will be considered. We may also consider whether
there have been any misstatements in any prospectus, Product
Disclosure Statement, notice to the Australian Stock Exchange or
bidder’s statement that may have been issued relevant to the security
holding.

RG 86.55      As an alternative to taking enforcement proceedings
before the court, we or any other persons whose interests are affected
may be able to apply to the Takeovers Panel for a declaration of
unacceptable circumstances and appropriate orders (including
remedial orders): Subdiv B of Div 2 of Pt 6.10.


Underlying principles
RG 86.56     Public policy that underlies our regulation of beneficial
ownership directions includes:

(a) the protection of the general body of securityholders;
(b) compliance with our directions;



                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                       Page 13
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



(c) the promotion of an informed market in accordance with the
    Eggleston principles; and
(d) the efficient allocation of our resources.


Explanations

When we will enforce breaches
RG 86.57       Directions may be issued by us following a request by a
member or another person. However, many directions bear no relation
to our regulation or enforcement priorities. For that reason, we will
not necessarily enforce a direction issued at the request of another
person.

RG 86.58      Directions must be responded to within two business
days. For some recipients (e.g. nominee companies) this may involve
providing a wide range of information in a short time. However, in
many cases, the difficulties facing a nominee can be avoided if the
nominee agrees with the inquirer on the nature and extent of the
information to be provided in response to the direction. The purpose
of s672B will often be satisfied if the nominee provides:

(a) the identity and address of the person or persons on whose behalf
    the nominee holds the securities;
(b) the name and address of any other person who has a relevant
    interest in the securities, including the power to give instructions
    (this will include any person who is given the power by the
    nominee’s principal and who is notified to the nominee); and
(c) any current instructions that the principal or another authorised
    person has given about voting and dividend or distribution rights
    attached to the securities and to the holding and disposal of the
    securities. The date of these instructions should also be given. It
    would be necessary to supply the full name and address of the
    person who gave each instruction and full particulars, such as
    dates, and, where appropriate, times.
RG 86.59       Strictly speaking, a nominee does not discharge its
obligations under the Corporations Act by making limited disclosure
of this kind. While we would not take enforcement action over
incomplete compliance in circumstances such as these, an inquirer
who agrees with a nominee to accept limited or preliminary
information can subsequently seek full disclosure under Pt 6C.2.




                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                       Page 14
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



Beneficial ownership directions to be promptly
enforced
RG 86.60        The legislature has provided for a two day response
time. It is an offence not to comply with the provisions of Pt 6C.2.
There is a clear legislative intention of strict compliance with the spirit
of the legislation and the provision of relevant information within the
given time period: see Crosley Ltd v North Broken Hill Holdings Ltd
& Ors (1986) 4 ACLC 432. Accordingly, if we intend to take
enforcement action, we will generally do so promptly.

RG 86.61       The remedies for failing to comply with s672B indicate
that the requirements of the section are to be taken seriously:

   ‘The object of the legislature was to create and maintain an
   informed market for public company shares and it regards the
   object as so important that it provides for drastic consequences…

   The legislation deliberately chose a small and hair-pressure trigger
   for what is a very powerful and potentially destructive gun.’
   (Fullagar J in Re North Broken Hill Holdings Ltd (1986) 4 ACLC
   131 at 144 and 146.)

Orders sought by us
RG 86.62      Section 1325A empowers the court to deal with
breaches of Pt 6C.2. The court may make appropriate orders
(including remedial orders) if a person:

(a) contravenes a provision of Pt 6C.2; or
(b) states in a notice under s672B that they do not know particular
    information about the securities or about a person with a relevant
    interest in, or who has given instructions about, the securities.
RG 86.63        Where the defaulting recipient is an overseas person or
corporation, orders sought will usually deal with the relevant
securities, including the vesting of the securities in us: s1325A and
paragraph (g) of the definition of ‘remedial order’ in s9. The orders
may also include other remedial orders. We may seek orders under
s1325A even if a law of another jurisdiction prohibits a person from
complying with Pt 6C.2. It is important to note that the beneficial
ownership provisions operate extraterritorially so as to impose
obligations on foreign entities, even where performance of the
obligations would result in a breach of local law: see Australian
Securities Commission v Bank Leumi Le-Israel (Switzerland) & Ors
(1996) 14 ACLC 1576 at 1592.




                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                       Page 15
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



RG 86.64       Where the defaulting recipient is within the jurisdiction,
in addition to the orders referred to above, orders directing compliance
with a direction and orders directing that certain persons (e.g.
directors) provide the information on behalf of a company may be
appropriate. It may often be important to seek the information as of a
certain date.

RG 86.65       Ex parte interim orders are appropriate for enforcement
of Pt 6C.2 because timely compliance with the provisions is required
and once we have made out the prerequisite matters referred to in
s1325A(1), we have a prima facie case for relief. It is our policy that
no dealings with the relevant securities should be permitted while the
breach continues. At the same time as we make an interlocutory
application, we will generally also file an application seeking orders
that the securities be sold or vested in us.

RG 86.66     Where appropriate, other remedies provided for in the
Corporations Act will be considered, for example:

(a) s672F: a person who fails to comply with s672B may be liable for
    damages;
(b) s1041H: where the behaviour amounts to misleading or deceptive
    conduct, the provisions of s1041H may be used;
(c) s1041E, 1308, 1309 etc: if false information is provided in
    circumstances dealt with in those sections then proceedings may
    be commenced in respect of that false information;
(d) s1310: a person who obstructs or hinders us in the exercise of our
    powers or functions is guilty of an offence; and
(e) s1311: a failure to comply with a direction is an offence and
    criminal proceedings may be commenced.




                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                       Page 16
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



Key terms
RG 86.67       In this guide, these terms have the following meaning:

ASIC        Australian Securities and Investments Commission

company        A listed company

Corporations Act       Corporations Act 2001, including regulations
made for the purposes of the Corporations Act

direction      A primary direction or a secondary direction

member         Has the meaning given in s9

primary direction       A direction given under s672A(1)(a)

responsible entity      The responsible entity of a listed managed
investment scheme

scheme         A listed managed investment scheme

secondary direction     A direction given under s672A(1)(b)




                  © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                       Page 17
                        REGULATORY GUIDE 86: Tracing beneficial ownership



Related information
RG 86.68

Headnotes
Tracing beneficial ownership, beneficial ownership directions,
primary directions, secondary directions, requests for directions,
responding to directions, disclosure of beneficial ownership
information, register of beneficial ownership information, relief,
enforcement of directions

Regulatory guides
RG 4 Intervention

Legislation
Corporations Act 2001, Chapter 6, Pt 6.10, Div 2, Subdiv B, Pt 6C.2,
Pt 6C.3, s602, 672A, 672B, 672C, 672DA, 672F, 673, 1041E, 1041H,
1306, 1308, 1309, 1310, 1311, 1325A; Corporations (Fees)
Regulations 2001, schedule 1, item 23

Cases
Australian Securities Commission v Bank Leumi Le-Israel
(Switzerland) & Ors (1996) 14 ACLC 1576
Brunswick NL v Blossomtree Pty Ltd (1992) 10 ACLC 658
Crosley Ltd v North Broken Hill Holdings Ltd & Ors (1986) 4 ACLC
432
Re North Broken Hill Holdings Ltd (1986) 4 ACLC 131

Information releases
[IR 00/3] CLERP update: New rules for listed managed investments (7
February 2000)

[IR 05/50] ASIC revises practice in relation to beneficial tracing
notices (5 September 2005)




                 © Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2007
                                                                      Page 18
