REGULATORY GUIDE 62

Better disclosure for
investors

August 2000
                                                             ASIC
                                                             Australian Securities & Investments Commission




Better disclosure for investors
These guidance principles suggest practical steps that a listed company can take to ensure
that it meets both the letter and the spirit of the continuous disclosure requirements in the
Corporations Law and the stock exchange listing rules. The principles are intended to assist
company directors and executives to manage their disclosure obligations and minimise the
risk of breaching the law. The principles also aim to ensure that the widest audience of
investors have access to company information released under the continuous disclosure
rules. The objective of these principles is to outline what ASIC considers to be good
disclosure practice, not to impose regulatory requirements.
ASIC encourages companies to adopt the measures suggested below, but they should be
implemented flexibly and sensibly to fit the situation of individual companies. Each listed
company needs to exercise its own judgement and develop a disclosure regime that meets
legal requirements and its own needs and circumstances.


Preventing selective disclosure
Establishing policies and procedures for better disclosure
1. Establish written policies and procedures on information disclosure. Focus on continuous
   disclosure and improving access to information for all investors.
Using current technology
2. Use current technology to give investors better access to your information. In particular,
   post price sensitive information on your company’s web site as soon as it is disclosed to
   the market.
                                                 ASIC: B ETTER DISCLOSURE FOR INVESTORS — GUIDANCE RULES




Developing disclosure procedures
Overseeing and coordinating disclosure
3. Nominate a senior officer to have responsibility for:
     •   making sure that your company complies with continuous disclosure requirements;
     •   overseeing and coordinating disclosure of information to the stock exchange, analysts,
         brokers, shareholders, the media and the public; and
     •   educating directors and staff on the company’s disclosure policies and procedures and
         raising awareness of the principles underlying continuous disclosure.
     In smaller companies, this person is likely to be the company secretary.
Authorising company spokespersons
4. Keep to a minimum the number of directors and staff authorised to speak on your
   company’s behalf. Make sure that these persons know they can clarify information that the
   company has released publicly through the stock exchange, but they should avoid
   commenting on other price sensitive matters. The senior officer responsible for disclosure
   should outline the company’s disclosure history to these persons before they brief anyone
   outside the company. This will safeguard against inadvertent disclosure of price sensitive
   information.
Monitoring disclosures
5. The senior officer responsible for disclosure should be aware of information disclosures in advance,
   including information to be presented at private briefings. This will minimise the risk of breaching the
   continuous disclosure requirements.
Releasing company information
6.   Price sensitive information must be publicly released through the stock exchange before disclosing it to
     analysts or others outside the company. Further dissemination to investors is desirable following release
     through the stock exchange. Posting information on your company’s web site immediately after the stock
     exchange confirms an announcement has been made is one method of making it accessible to the widest
     audience. Investor information should be posted in a separate area of your web site from promotional
     material about the company or its products.
Handling rumours, leaks and inadvertent disclosures
7.   Develop procedures for responding to market rumours, leaks and inadvertent disclosures.
     Even if leaked or inadvertently disclosed information is not considered price sensitive,
     give investors equal access by posting it on the company web site.




                                                                                                              2
                                                 ASIC: B ETTER DISCLOSURE FOR INVESTORS — GUIDANCE RULES




Briefing analysts

Reviewing discussions
8.   Have a procedure for reviewing briefings and discussions with analysts afterwards to
     check whether any price sensitive information has been inadvertently disclosed. If so, give
     investors access to it by announcing it immediately through the stock exchange, then posting
     it on the company web site. Slides and presentations used in briefings should be given to
     the stock exchange for immediate release to the market and posted on the company web
     site.
Handling unanticipated questions
9.   Be particularly careful when dealing with analysts’ questions that raise issues outside the intended scope
     of discussion. Some useful ground rules are:
   • only discuss information that has been publicly released through the stock exchange;
   • if a question can only be answered by disclosing price sensitive information, decline to
     answer or take it on notice. Then announce the information through the stock exchange
     before responding.
Responding on financial projections and reports
10. Confine your comments on market analysts’ financial projections to errors in factual
    information and underlying assumptions. Seek to avoid any response which may suggest
    that the company’s, or the market’s, current projections are incorrect. The way to manage
    earnings expectations is by using the continuous disclosure regime to establish a range
    within which earnings are likely to fall. Publicly announce any change in expectations
    before commenting to anyone outside the company.


*In this Guidance, references to listed companies are to be read as including other listed entities.




                                                                                                             3
