REGULATORY GUIDE 67

Real estate companies

November 2015




About this guide
This guide is for vendors, real estate agents and valuers.

It sets out our policy on relief from certain provisions of the Corporations Act
2001 (Cwlth) (Corporations Act) for the sale and valuation of shares in a real
estate company.
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in November 2015 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 67, issued October 1993, reissued
                                     December 1994, July 1996, December 2006, rebadged as a regulatory
                                     guide 7 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                            Page 2
                                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Our approach to real estate companies ..................................................4
                                    Our general policy on relief for real estate companies ............................5
                                    Fundraising relief .....................................................................................5
                                    Licensing relief .........................................................................................5
                             B      Our approach to real estate companies ..............................................6
                             C      Fundraising relief ...................................................................................8
                                    Disclosure ................................................................................................8
                                    Unsolicited meetings and telephone calls (s736) ..................................11
                             D      Licensing relief ....................................................................................12
                                    Real estate agents .................................................................................12
                                    Valuers ...................................................................................................13
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................15
                             Related information .....................................................................................17




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                                                        Page 3
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              A real estate company is used for the purpose of owning and managing
                              land and buildings with common areas and is considered an alternative to
                              strata title.

                              We have provided relief from certain provisions of the Corporations Act
                              2001 (Cwlth) (Corporations Act) for the sale and valuation of shares in a
                              real estate company.

                              Our relief recognises that shares in real estate companies are commercially
                              regarded as real estate interests and there is adequate consumer
                              protection if these interests are treated like real estate interests.




Our approach to real estate companies
              RG 67.1        Real estate companies were developed to enable their shareholders to enjoy
                             the occupation or use of particular premises and are generally associated
                             with the ownership of real estate.

              RG 67.2        The Corporations Act regulates interests in real estate companies. This is
                             because they involve ownership of shares in a company. Two main
                             requirements apply to real estate companies:
                             (a)   The offer for sale of shares must be disclosed to investors in certain
                                   circumstances (s707 of the Corporations Act). Without relief from s707,
                                   vendors of shares in real estate companies may have to issue a
                                   prospectus or other disclosure document that complies with Ch 6D.
                             (b)   A person carrying on a financial services business must hold an
                                   Australian financial services (AFS) licence (s911A(1)). Real estate
                                   agents or others who regularly sell or provide valuations of shares in
                                   real estate companies may be carrying on a financial services business,
                                   and would need to hold an AFS licence unless an exemption applies.

              RG 67.3        Offers for purchase or invitations to buy shares in real estate companies,
                             transfers of shares in such companies and valuations of the shares are
                             generally incidental to the transfer of the right to occupy real estate, and
                             should not be subject to full regulation under the Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                        Page 4
                                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




Our general policy on relief for real estate companies
              RG 67.4        Shares in real estate companies are usually marketed in the same way as real
                             estate, and sold through real estate agents who are licensed under state or
                             territory law.

              RG 67.5        Valuations of shares in real estate companies are primarily valuations of the
                             real estate that ownership of the shares enables the holder to use.

              RG 67.6        Without relief, vendors involved in secondary sales of shares in these
                             companies may need to meet the full disclosure requirements of the
                             Corporations Act that apply to securities. Agents involved in arranging for
                             and advising on the purchase of the shares and valuers engaged to value the
                             shares would need to hold an AFS licence.

              RG 67.7        We consider there is insufficient regulatory benefit to justify requiring
                             licensed real estate agents or valuers who provide financial services for the
                             sale or valuation of shares in real estate companies to meet the initial and
                             ongoing costs associated with holding an AFS licence.

              RG 67.8        We have given relief (in ASIC Corporations (Real Estate Companies)
                             Instrument 2015/1049) from:
                             (a)   the disclosure and licensing requirements of the Corporations Act for
                                   persons who are involved in selling shares in a real estate company; and
                             (b)   the licensing requirements of the Corporations Act for persons who are
                                   providing valuations of shares in a real estate company.

                                   Note: To be eligible for relief, you may need to meet certain conditions set out in the
                                   instrument. See Section C for the conditions for fundraising relief and Section D for the
                                   conditions for licensing relief.




Fundraising relief
              RG 67.9        We consider that disclosure for offers of shares in real estate companies
                             should be regulated like offers of real estate, and have provided conditional
                             relief from the disclosure requirements of s707 on this basis: see Section C.



Licensing relief
              RG 67.10       We have provided relief, in certain circumstances, from the requirement to
                             hold an AFS licence for real estate agents involved in arranging for and
                             advising on the sale of the shares and valuers engaged to value the shares:
                             see Section D.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                                     Page 5
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




B          Our approach to real estate companies

                              Key points

                              There are a number of different categories of real estate company.

                              Shares in real estate companies are commercially regarded as real estate
                              interests.

                              State or territory conveyancing laws generally regulate real estate
                              transactions between vendors and purchasers.



              RG 67.11       In this guide, a ‘real estate company’ means a company that fits into one of
                             the categories in Table 1. Real estate companies have become less common
                             since the development of strata title and methods of converting real estate
                             company title to strata title. However, they are still used where owners wish
                             to exercise control over occupiers or where conversion to strata title is not
                             practicable.

              RG 67.12       Purchasers buy shares in a real estate company that may have an occupancy
                             right to a particular area conferred by the company’s constitution (or by a
                             licence or a lease), or usage rights to any common areas. Like a title to real
                             estate, each bundle of shares to occupy a particular area is unique.

              RG 67.13       This is the case regardless of whether the premises are used for residential or
                             commercial purposes. However, it is not the case:
                             (a)   if the principal purpose of adopting the company structure is not
                                   facilitating possession of a particular area and the use and maintenance
                                   of any common areas by the owner of the shares (e.g. if the company
                                   manages or leases premises on behalf of the owners or provides
                                   business services to the owner); or
                             (b)   for interests in a managed investment scheme.

              RG 67.14       Given the existence of real estate companies, secondary sales for some
                             properties will involve an offer for purchase or invitation to buy shares in a
                             real estate company followed by a transfer of shares in that company. In
                             many cases, persons involved in these sales will provide financial services,
                             such as dealing and giving general advice. For example, a bank or other
                             financial institution may issue a share valuation (i.e. financial product
                             advice) when shares are used as security on a mortgage for a company title
                             property.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                       Page 6
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




Table 1:       Categories of ‘real estate company’

 Company title                A company:
                               that is not listed on a prescribed financial market as defined in reg 7.1.01 of the
                                Corporations Regulations 2001;
                               that is either the proprietor or the lessee under a crown lease granted for a
                                period of not less than 99 years of land on which a building (or buildings) divided
                                into individual areas is erected; and
                               whose shareholders, by holding their shares, have rights to exclusive occupancy
                                of a particular area or areas within a building and the right to the use of any
                                common areas.

                              The company must also either:
                               have a constitution that prohibits the payment of a dividend to its members other
                                than on the winding up of the company; or
                               operate principally for the purposes of:
                                − facilitating and enforcing the rights of shareholders in relation to the exclusive
                                  occupation of their particular areas; and
                                − maintaining any common areas.
                              Many older residential apartments in Sydney and Melbourne are company title
                              buildings.

 Stratum title                A company associated with stratum title in Victoria that is a service company as
                              defined in the Transfer of Land Act 1958 (Vic) for a building subdivision as defined
                              in that Act.
                              Under stratum title (or stratum estate), a share or shares in a service company are
                              associated with a fee-simple interest in land and cannot be transferred separately.
                              The service company owns the property and performs services such as external
                              repairs.

 Lake title                   A company of the type associated with lake title in Queensland that is a company
                              described in s5.10(4) of the repealed Local Government (Planning and
                              Environment) Act 1990 (Qld).

                              In a lake property development, a company owns common property. The owners
                              of associated residential properties hold the shares in the company.

 Court title                  A company that owns common area access ways of the type associated with court
                              property developments in Queensland. Court property developments provide for
                              the acquisition of fee-simple estates in lots on which dwellings are erected
                              together with a shareholding in the company. The lots on which the dwellings are
                              built have easement rights over the common area lot owned by the company.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                                Page 7
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




C          Fundraising relief

                              Key points

                              In the absence of a disclosure document, the on-sale provisions in s707
                              may apply to the offer for sale of shares in a real estate company.

                              These anti-avoidance provisions may not be warranted in relation to a real
                              estate company, because traditionally it is the underlying property rights
                              attaching to the shares in a real estate company that have been the sole
                              focus of the market.

                              We consider that disclosure for offers of shares in real estate companies
                              should be regulated like offers of real estate and have provided conditional
                              relief from the disclosure requirements of s707 on this basis.




Disclosure

                             Disclosure requirements under the Corporations Act

              RG 67.15       The Corporations Act regulates interests in real estate companies. This is
                             because they involve ownership of shares in a company. Under s707, the
                             offer for sale of shares must be disclosed to investors (unless an exclusion in
                             s708 applies) if:
                             (a)   the person making the offer controls the body and the securities are not
                                   quoted (s707(2));
                             (b)   the offer of shares is made within 12 months after their issue without
                                   disclosure to investors and the purpose for the issue was on-sale
                                   (s707(3)); or
                             (c)   the offer of shares is made within 12 months after being sold by the
                                   controller of the body without disclosure to investors, the shares are not
                                   quoted and the purpose for the issue was on-sale (s707(5)).

              RG 67.16       Without relief from s707, vendors of shares in real estate companies may
                             have to issue a prospectus or other disclosure document that complies with
                             Ch 6D.


                             Relief from the disclosure requirements

              RG 67.17       If you offer for sale shares in a real estate company, you will be exempt from
                             the disclosure requirements in s707 for this transaction if you meet the
                             conditions in ASIC Corporations (Real Estate Companies) Instrument
                             2015/1049: see Table 2.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                        Page 8
                                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




               RG 67.18        This relief applies to secondary sales of shares in real estate companies,
                               regardless of the use of the premises. The relief does not apply to:
                               (a)   companies engaging in business activities such as property development
                                     or management. It is our policy not to provide relief to property
                                     development or management companies (in general, such companies
                                     will not fall within the definition of real estate companies and,
                                     therefore, will not be covered by the relief);
                               (b)   the primary issue of shares; or
                               (c)   the prohibition against engaging in conduct that is misleading or
                                     deceptive (s1041H).

Table 2:     Summary of conditions in the relief relating to disclosure

 Property and                    The contract must set out:
 occupancy                        particulars of the areas to which the shares relate, title particulars of the property
                                   to which the shares relate and any interests affecting that property; and
                                  all occupancy and any usage rights to the areas to which the shares relate.

 Title                           The contract must specify that on completion:
                                  the vendor will be, or will be entitled to be, the registered holder of the shares;
                                   and
                                  the title of the real estate company to the land will be unencumbered, except for
                                   any matter affecting the title disclosed in the contract.

 Requisitions                    The contract must entitle the purchaser to make requisitions on the vendor’s title to
                                 the shares and the real estate company’s title to the property other than as clearly
                                 accepted by the purchaser in the contract.

 Warranty                        The contract must include a warranty that, as far as the vendor is aware after
                                 making reasonable inquiries of the directors and except as disclosed in the
                                 contract:
                                  the real estate company has no actual or contingent liabilities (except for normal
                                   operating expenses for its current financial year);
                                  there are no defects (whether ‘latent’ or ‘patent’) in any common areas requiring
                                   repair or replacement (other than ordinary wear and tear);
                                  the real estate company is not subject to external administration or in the
                                   process of being wound up; and
                                  there are no court proceedings pending against the real estate company that
                                   might prejudice or detrimentally affect it or its assets.

 Annexures                       The contract must include current copies of:
                                  the title documents for the property to which the shares relate; and
                                  the constitution and any other charter documents of the real estate company.

Note: For full details of the conditions, see ASIC Corporations (Real Estate Companies) Instrument 2015/1049.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                                    Page 9
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




                             Why we are giving relief

              RG 67.19       Interests in real estate companies are regulated under the Corporations Act
                             because they involve ownership of shares in a company. However, such
                             interests are commercially regarded and marketed as real estate interests.

              RG 67.20       Real estate conveyancing laws, which vary depending on the state or
                             territory, regulate real estate transactions between vendors and purchasers.
                             However, in some cases, only the Corporations Act imposes disclosure
                             requirements for transactions relating to shares in real estate companies.

              RG 67.21       This is because state conveyancing laws relate to dealings in land, and real
                             estate company transactions do not in general confer an interest in the land
                             owned by the company: see Macaura v Northern Assurance Co Ltd [1925]
                             AC 619. For example, New South Wales conveyancing laws do not apply to
                             sales of company title units, while sales of shares associated with stratum
                             title premises in Victoria are regulated by that state’s conveyancing laws.

              RG 67.22       We consider that disclosure for offers of shares in real estate companies
                             should be regulated like offers of real estate. It would be too onerous to
                             apply the disclosure requirements under the Corporations Act and we
                             consider that there is adequate consumer protection if these interests are
                             treated like real estate interests in terms of contractual disclosure, rather than
                             as shares.

                             Why we are giving conditional relief

              RG 67.23       In many cases, granting an unconditional exemption for offers of shares in
                             real estate companies would mean that no disclosure requirements apply to
                             those transactions. The conditions of our relief ensure that the vendor
                             includes certain information in the relevant contract for sale, so that the
                             purchaser has contractual remedies.

              RG 67.24       The conditions of relief also take into account state or territory conveyancing
                             laws that give a purchaser various rights to ensure the purchaser obtains
                             clear title to the property. If clear title cannot be provided, the purchaser may
                             rescind the contract. A purchaser of shares in a real estate company needs to
                             obtain clear title to the shares and also needs to ensure that the real estate
                             company has clear title to the land on which the building is located. The
                             absence of either may effectively prevent a purchaser from being able to
                             occupy the land as they expect.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                        Page 10
                                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




Unsolicited meetings and telephone calls (s736)
              RG 67.25       We have not given any relief from the hawking prohibition in s736 for offers
                             of shares in real estate companies. Under s736, a person may not offer
                             securities for sale in the course of, or because of, an unsolicited meeting with
                             or telephone call to another person.

              RG 67.26       This prohibition applies to offers of shares in real estate companies. It does
                             not apply:
                             (a)   to offers made to certain sophisticated or professional investors;
                             (b)   to existing clients of a licensed securities dealer; or
                             (c)   where the shares are listed and the offer is made by a licensed securities
                                   dealer (s736(2)).

              RG 67.27       We consider the prevention of pressure selling of shares in real estate
                             companies provides an important protection for retail clients.

                                   Note: For more guidance, see Regulatory Guide 38 The hawking prohibitions (RG 38).

              RG 67.28       We do not consider that the prohibition would prevent ordinary marketing of
                             shares in real estate companies as real estate interests, provided the marketing
                             does not involve an unsolicited meeting with or a telephone call to another
                             person.

                                   Note: Examples of ordinary marketing of real estate interests include advertising in
                                   newspapers and online.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                                    Page 11
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




D          Licensing relief

                              Key points

                              The Corporations Act requires a person carrying on a financial services
                              business to hold an AFS licence.

                              Real estate agents or others who regularly sell or provide valuations of
                              shares in real estate companies may be carrying on a financial services
                              business, and would need to hold an AFS licence.

                              We have provided relief, in certain circumstances, from the requirement to
                              hold an AFS licence for real estate agents involved in arranging for and
                              advising on the sale of the shares and valuers engaged to value the
                              shares.




Real estate agents

                             Licensing requirements under the Corporations Act

              RG 67.29       Under s911A(1), a person carrying on a financial services business must
                             hold an AFS licence. This requirement is intended to control who can
                             operate within the financial services industry and requires those who are
                             licensed to behave with honesty, integrity, fairness and competence.

              RG 67.30       Generally, owners who engage in occasional real estate company share
                             transactions are not carrying on a financial services business, and would not
                             need to hold an AFS licence.

              RG 67.31       Real estate agents or others who regularly market or sell shares in real estate
                             companies may need to hold an AFS licence because they are dealing in or
                             providing advice in relation to shares and shares are a financial product.


                             Relief from the licensing requirements

              RG 67.32       If you are a licensed real estate agent providing financial services (e.g.
                             dealing or giving general advice) for an offer of shares in a real estate
                             company, you will be exempt from the requirement to hold an AFS licence
                             for these services if you meet the conditions in ASIC Corporations (Real
                             Estate Companies) Instrument 2015/1049: see Table 3.

              RG 67.33       Our relief applies only to services you provide as a licensed real estate agent
                             for offers of shares in real estate companies. If you carry on any other type
                             of financial service, you may need to hold an AFS licence. This applies, for
                             example, to time-sharing schemes, rental pools and property trusts or
                             syndicates.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                      Page 12
                                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




Table 3:     Summary of conditions in our relief relating to licensing

 Disclosure in writing           You must advise the client in writing that:
                                  you do not hold an AFS licence; and
                                  the relationship between the you and the client will be governed by the real
                                   estate licensing requirements in the relevant state or territory.

 Contract                        The contract for the sale of the shares must comply with the conditions in Table 2.

Note: For full details of the conditions, see ASIC Corporations (Real Estate Companies) Instrument 2015/1049.



                               Why we are giving relief

               RG 67.34        Residential company title properties are usually marketed and sold like other
                               residential properties by the vendor offering the property (i.e. the shares)
                               privately or appointing a real estate agent.

               RG 67.35        Shares in companies associated with stratum, lake and court title properties
                               are also attached to a real estate interest and are marketed and sold only with
                               the associated real estate.

               RG 67.36        Regardless of how the property is used, vendors and purchasers usually
                               expect to deal with a licensed real estate agent in the sale of the shares,
                               rather than an AFS licensee.

               RG 67.37        Real estate agents are licensed under state or territory law. They must meet
                               requirements relating to their qualifications and experience and how they
                               conduct their business, including proper conduct in operating trust accounts
                               and fidelity funds.

               RG 67.38        In some cases, these requirements specifically apply to conduct for company
                               title properties. In other cases, if a person is a licensed real estate agent, these
                               requirements may incidentally apply (even though the law does not require a
                               person acting as agent for the sale of company title property to be a licensed
                               real estate agent).



Valuers

                               Licensing requirements under the Corporations Act

               RG 67.39        Valuers of shares in real estate companies may also need to hold an AFS
                               licence because they are providing advice in relation to shares and shares are
                               a financial product.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                                Page 13
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




                             Relief from the licensing requirements

              RG 67.40       If you are a person providing a valuation of shares in a real estate company,
                             you may be exempt from the requirement to hold an AFS licence to provide
                             general advice when valuing the shares: see ASIC Corporations (Real Estate
                             Companies) Instrument 2015/1049.

              RG 67.41       In general, to rely on our relief, the real estate company being valued must
                             not:
                             (a)   be on the official list of a financial market; or
                             (b)   operate a time-sharing scheme.

                                   Note: For full details of the relief, see ASIC Corporations (Real Estate Companies)
                                   Instrument 2015/1049.


                             Why we are giving relief

              RG 67.42       We consider that valuing shares in real estate companies is similar to valuing
                             the real estate to which the shares are attached. This is because:
                             (a)   shares attached to a real estate interest can only be sold with the
                                   associated real estate;
                             (b)   valuers are engaged to value those shares in the same way as for
                                   commercial or residential property;
                             (c)   the real property underlying the shares is usually the primary
                                   determinant of valuation;
                             (d)   in many cases, the valuations are provided to banks or other financial
                                   institutions and not to third parties; and
                             (e)   persons arranging for valuations of shares in real estate companies
                                   would not expect the valuer to have an AFS licence.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                                   Page 14
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




Key terms

                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                        the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                        on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                        services
                                                             Note: This is a definition contains in s761A.

                              AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                        Corporations Act
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                              ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                              Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001 (Cwlth), including regulations
                                                        made for the purposes of that Act

                              dealing                   Has the meaning set out in s766C

                              financial product         A facility through which, or through the acquisition of
                                                        which, a person does one or more of the following:
                                                         makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                         manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                         makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s763A of the
                                                             Corporations Act: see also s763B–765A.

                              financial product         A recommendation or a statement of opinion, or a report
                              advice                    of either of these things, that:
                                                         is intended to influence a person or persons in making
                                                          a decision about a particular financial product or class
                                                          of financial product, or an interest in a particular
                                                          financial product or class of financial product; or
                                                         could reasonably be regarded as being intended to
                                                          have such an influence.

                                                        This does not include anything in an exempt document
                                                             Note: This is the definition contained in s766B of the
                                                             Corporations Act.

                              financial service         Has the meaning given in Div 4 of Pt 7.1 of the
                                                        Corporations Act

                              general advice            Financial product advice that is not personal advice
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s766B(4) of the
                                                             Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                                      Page 15
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              personal advice           Financial product advice given or directed to a person
                                                        (including by electronic means) in circumstances where:
                                                         the person giving the advice has considered one or more
                                                          of the client’s objectives, financial situation and needs; or
                                                         a reasonable person might expect the person giving the
                                                          advice to have considered one or more of these
                                                          matters
                                                             Note: This is a definition contained in s766B(3) of the
                                                             Corporations Act.

                              real estate agent         A person who holds a real estate licence obtained from
                                                        an Australian state or territory licensing authority.

                              real estate company       A company that meets the definition of real estate
                                                        company in ASIC Corporations (Real Estate Companies)
                                                        Instrument 2015/1049

                              real estate interest      A share in a real estate company

                              reg 7.1.01 (for           A regulation of the Corporations Regulations 2001 (in this
                              example)                  example numbered 7.1.01)

                              s707 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                        numbered 707)

                              valuer                    A person who undertakes the business of providing
                                                        valuations of shares in real estate companies

                              vendor                    A person who owns shares in a real estate company and
                                                        proposes to sell the shares




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                                   Page 16
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 67: Real estate companies




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             AFS licensing relief, company title, conditions of relief, court title,
                             disclosure, lake title, real estate agents, real estate interests, real estate
                             companies, secondary sales, stratum title, stratum estate, valuers, vendors


                             Legislative instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Real Estate Companies) Instrument 2015/1049


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 38 The hawking prohibitions


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Ch 6D, s707, 708, 736, 911A(1), 1041H

                             Local Government (Planning and Environment) Act 1990 (Qld), s5.10(4)

                             Transfer of Land Act 1958 (Vic)


                             Cases

                             Macaura v Northern Assurance Co Ltd [1925] AC 619




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2015                                       Page 17
