REGULATORY GUIDE 53

The use of past performance
in promotional material

July 2003
Important notice

This Guide is a summary designed to provide the basic information you need.
It does not cover all legal issues and is not a substitute for professional legal
advice.

Guides inevitably involve some generalisations about the application of the
law. Some matters considered have important exceptions or qualifications.
The particular circumstances of any conduct (including its context) need to be
taken into account when determining exactly how the law applies to that
conduct.
                  REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




Contents

What this Guide is about ................................................... 1
Preamble
1.    Status of the Guide .................................................... 2
2.    Scope of application .................................................. 2
3.    Guidelines and commentary ...................................... 4
4.    Definitions ................................................................. 4
The Guidelines
5.    Good disclosure principles ........................................ 5
6.    General considerations .............................................. 5
7.    Imbalanced information............................................. 7
8.    Implications about future returns............................... 8
9.    Time periods ............................................................ 10
10.   Out of date figures ................................................... 11
11.   “Non-actual” past performance figures ................... 13
12.   Treatment of fees ..................................................... 16
13.   Information on risk .................................................. 17
14.   Calculations ............................................................. 18
15.   Presentation issues ................................................... 19
16.   Comparisons ............................................................ 20




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                          page iii
                        REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




What this Guide is about
                  This publication provides general guidance to the financial services
                  industry on the appropriate use of past performance information in
                  promotional material.

                  The standards set out in the Guide will:
                  (a)   assist industry to comply with legal requirements;
                  (b) encourage fair and efficient competition within industry;
                  (c)   facilitate consumer comparisons between financial services and
                        products; and
                  (d) enhance consumers’ understanding of sound investment
                      principles.

                  Past performance information is used frequently in investment-related
                  promotional material and it is therefore important that it is used
                  appropriately. This Guide covers a wide range of issues, reflecting the
                  diversity of examples ASIC has encountered in reviewing promotional
                  material over recent years.

                  On many issues, the Guide reflects documented industry standards
                  from both Australia (especially those of the Investment & Financial
                  Services Association)1 and overseas jurisdictions. ASIC would
                  encourage industry bodies to refer to these guidelines and adopt them
                  as appropriate.




      1
          For example, IFSA Standard No 6 “Fund Performance – Calculation and Presentation of
          Returns”; IFSA Standard No 10 “Promotional Statements & Advertising”. References are to
          the versions as at June 2002.



      © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                        page 1
                             REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




Preamble
1. Status of the Guide
           1.1         This Guide provides general guidance to the financial services
                       industry for promotions which use past performance information. The
                       Guide covers both issues of legal compliance and issues of good
                       practice.

           1.2         The main legal requirements come from the ASIC Act and the
                       Corporations Act. Key obligations include:
                       (a)   ensuring that promotions are not likely to mislead potential
                             investors,2 and
                       (b) for holders of an Australian financial services licence, doing all
                           things necessary to ensure that the financial services are provided
                           efficiently, honestly and fairly.3

                       The sections of these guidelines dealing with legal standards
                       (wherever “misleading” is mentioned) reflect some of the factors
                       ASIC may take into account when considering enforcement action.

           1.3         In addition, the Guide sets out standards of good practice. ASIC
                       encourages industry bodies to refer to these standards and, where
                       appropriate, to mirror them in their own standards or adopt them by
                       cross-reference.

           1.4         ASIC will review the Guide periodically.


2. Scope of application
           2.1         This Guide applies where past performance information is used in the
                       promotion of a financial product or service (see section 4.3 for the
                       meaning of ‘promotion’).

           2.2         This Guide covers promotions which use specific information about
                       past performance or which make more general representations about
                       good or superior performance.



           2
               ASIC Act, ss12DA, 12DF(1); Corporations Act, ss1041E, 1041F, 1041H,
           3
               Corporations Act, s912A(1)(a).



           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                      page 2
                REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




2.3        Financial products and services that are sometimes promoted with past
           performance information include:
           •   managed funds (including superannuation funds);
           •   margin loans;
           •   stockmarket tip sheets and investment research software; and
           •   investment advice services.
2.4        The Guide covers promotions to potential retail clients.4 Care
           needs to be taken where retail clients are accessing wholesale funds
           indirectly (eg via master trusts). Industry will need to assess the
           extent to which the same principles apply to promotions aimed at
           wholesale clients or financial advisers.

           2.4.1    A wholesale fund will be covered by these guidelines if its promotion
                    is aimed (wholly or partially) at retail clients who can invest in it via a
                    master trust or wrap account.

2.5        The Guide does not cover instances of personal investment advice.

2.6        The Guide does not cover the contents of formal offer documents
           (notably “Product Disclosure Statements”). Formal disclosure
           documents are subject to very specific legal requirements. However,
           we recognise that many of the same principles apply to these
           documents.5

2.7        The Guide does not apply to the aspects of other communications that
           have conflicting legal requirements, (eg aspects of superannuation
           fund annual reports, quarterly statements).6

           2.7.1    If an annual report contains promotional material with past
                    performance information in addition to the legal requirements, the
                    Guide applies to the promotional material.




4
  Corporations Act, s761G
5
  Comparable principles from ASIC Policy Statement 168 are discussed at para 5.1
6
  see, for example Corporation Act s1017DA(2) and Regulation 7.9.37(1) (j)



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                           page 3
                             REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




3. Guidelines and commentary
           3.1         The function of each section in the Guide is indicated by the font
                       style.

           3.2         Guidelines are in plain font, like this. They may relate to compliance
                       with legal requirements (wherever “misleading” is discussed) or to
                       good practice standards.

                       3.2.1     Commentary is in indented grey font, like this. It may be used to
                                 explain the implications of requirements, to give examples or to
                                 indicate possible means of compliance. Commentary is designed to
                                 expand on a particular subject, not to necessarily cover all possible
                                 situations.


4. Definitions
           4.1         “Misleading” is used to include “likely to be misleading”. In many
                       instances the law makes no distinction between material which
                       actually misleads and material which is likely to mislead.

           4.2         “Promoter” is used to refer to the entity responsible for the promotion
                       of a financial product or service. The relevant entity can be a natural
                       person, a body corporate, a partnership or a trust (including the trustee
                       of the trust).7 It should be remembered that a licensed entity is
                       responsible for financial promotions communicated by its appointed
                       representatives.

           4.3         “Promotion”, in the context of these guidelines:
                       (a)     is restricted to a communication which uses past performance
                               information to promote a financial product or service;
                       (b) means any statement (including advertising) intended, or which
                           would reasonably give the impression that it was intended, to
                           induce a person to acquire, hold or vary a financial product or
                           service;
                       (c)     covers a communication by any medium, for example:
                                  •   advertising via magazines, newspapers, radio, television
                                      or websites;
                                  •   product brochures and promotional fact sheets;
                                  •   direct mail (eg by post, facsimile or email);


           7
               See Corporations Act, s64A



           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                        page 4
                            REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




                                 •    telemarketing activities (eg telephone calls made by call
                                      centres);
                                 •    written correspondence, emails and telephone calls;
                                 •    client newsletters;
                                 •    sales aids;
                                 •    presentations to groups of individuals; and
                                 •    tip-sheets;
                      (d) does not include personal advice to individuals. This is covered
                          by more specific legal obligations.

                      4.3.1     The Guidelines do not apply to material that is not promotional, such
                                as a factual quarterly member statement (see also sections 2.6 &
                                2.7).



The Guidelines
5. Good disclosure principles
           5.1        To aid audience understanding and reduce the chance of information
                      being misleading:
                      (a)     information should be relevant;
                      (b) information should be clear, concise and effective;
                      (c)     important information should catch the consumer’s attention; and
                      (d) information should be in a format that makes it easy for
                          consumers to compare financial products and services.

                      5.1.1     These are some of the “Good Disclosure Principles” from ASIC
                                Policy Statement 168. Although PS168 is about mandatory
                                disclosure documents (Product Disclosure Statements), these
                                particular principles are also applicable to promotional material.

                      5.1.2     If there is doubt about whether promotional material will be suitable
                                for its audience, promoters are encouraged to conduct consumer
                                testing or use a format that has already been consumer tested.


6. General considerations
           6.1        Compliance with these specific guidelines does not preclude all
                      potential liability for misleading conduct. It may be necessary to
                      disclose information beyond what is suggested by the guidelines (or
                      stop the promotion) in order to avoid misleading potential investors.




           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                            page 5
                 REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




           6.1.1     For example, it may be necessary to disclose any special
                     circumstances that substantially reduce the relevance of past
                     performance information to likely future performance.
                     eg The past performance of a Ruritanian bond fund may be
                     misleading if it was not disclosed that the Ruritanian government had
                     just stopped all debt repayments.
                     eg The past performance of a standard equity fund may be
                     misleading if it was not disclosed that the fund had changed to be a
                     geared or hedge fund.

           6.1.2     Compliance with industry standards or common practice, while
                     generally desirable, does not, of itself, necessarily guarantee legal
                     compliance.

6.2        The use of past performance information in promotions may be
           misleading unless it:
           (a)     takes account of the limitations of the particular communication
                   medium; and
           (b) is provided in a manner that is suitable for the full range of its
               audience.

           6.2.1     The communication medium can affect both the opportunity to
                     present information in detail and the audience’s ability to
                     comprehend information. For example, broadcast media (such as
                     TV or radio) do not allow material to be to viewed at the audience’s
                     own pace or to be reviewed. Material that is acceptable in one
                     medium may be misleading in another.

           6.2.2     Close attention needs to be given to the variety within the audience.
                     Information suitable for an industry audience or sophisticated
                     investors may be unsuitable for an average retail audience.
                     Promotions need to consider the least sophisticated audience
                     segment that will view the promotion.
                     A promotion may contain material that is only understood by part of
                     the audience, so long as the simpler parts of the material, taken
                     alone, do not mislead the less sophisticated part of the audience.

           6.2.3     In determining whether a promotion is misleading, the promoter’s
                     intent may not be a relevant factor. A promotion that is not intended
                     to be misleading may still be “misleading” or “likely to mislead” as an
                     objective fact. Such conduct may give rise to a strict liability offence.

6.3        Omission of information may be misleading if it leads people to an
           incorrect conclusion, due to their existing specific knowledge (or lack
           of it) and general understanding.

           6.3.1     This applies to all guidelines.

6.4        A promotion can be misleading even if later information corrects a
           wrong impression created by the promotion.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                          page 6
                           REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




                     6.4.1     Each promotion needs to be judged on its own. The fact that a
                               consumer must receive a mandatory offer document (with more
                               detailed information) before investing does not prevent an earlier
                               promotion from being misleading. However, any actual subsequent
                               correction may reduce the actual loss suffered by a consumer.

                     6.4.2     Where a promotion contains an apparent statement of fact, it is good
                               practice for the promoter to have evidence in its possession that the
                               statement is true.

          6.5        A promotion can be misleading if it uses a methodology to calculate
                     performance information that is inconsistent with:
                     (a)     the method used in the formal offer document, or
                     (b) the actual performance of the product or service.

7. Imbalanced information
          7.1        It may be misleading to accentuate the potential benefits of a financial
                     product or service without also giving a fair indication of any
                     significant disadvantages that the audience would not be aware of.

                     7.1.1     This is a general principle. Other provisions in Section 7 give more
                               detail on common imbalance issues relating to the use of past
                               performance information.

          7.2        A promotion may be misleading if it highlights the potential for higher
                     returns without giving a fair indication of any significant additional
                     risk factors that the audience would not be aware of.

                     7.2.1     For example, if a fund differed from most peers because of a gearing
                               strategy, an unusual hedging arrangement or an unusual foreign
                               exchange exposure, it may be necessary to note this in the
                               promotion.

          7.3        Where past performance information is used to support a claim about
                     an entity’s skill or good performance (overall or in a particular sector),
                     it may be misleading to use past performance selectively so as to
                     exaggerate the entity’s success or disguise its lack of success.

                     7.3.1     The issue is whether the underlying facts support the broad
                               implication. For example:

                               “ABC is achieving excellent returns for its clients. For instance, the
                               ABC Australian Share Fund has five-year returns of 18% p.a., 3%
                               p.a. above the sector median.”

                               This promotion would be misleading if most of ABC’s funds had five-
                               year returns below sector medians.




          © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                         page 7
                            REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




           7.4        A promotion using past performance information has a greater risk of
                      being misleading if it does not identify the nature of the product or
                      service being promoted and the audience does not already know.

                      7.4.1     If some members of the audience do not know the nature of the
                                product or service, they cannot use prior knowledge about its
                                characteristics and may misinterpret information provided.

                      7.4.2     For example, an advertisement may say “Our 11% returns shows
                                you get great returns and low risk with Gumzoo!”. This may be
                                misleading if the audience does not know what type of investment
                                Gumzoo is (mortgage trust, term deposit, sharemarket fund, etc) and
                                the ad does not give any indication.

           7.5        Promoters are encouraged to not give disproportionate prominence to
                      past performance in promotions for a product or service.

                      7.5.1     The prominence of past performance information in a promotion can
                                be compared with the weight that might be given to past
                                performance by a knowledgeable investor when selecting a product
                                or service of that kind.

                      7.5.2     This good practice guideline is included because many people hold
                                unrealistic beliefs about the predictive power of past performance for
                                individual products or services. In addition, past performance should
                                never be the sole factor considered when selecting a product or
                                service.

                      7.5.3     The pertinent issue is the appropriate balance of prominence
                                between relevant factors. A disproportionate emphasis on past
                                performance may undermine public understanding about making
                                sound investment decisions.

                      7.5.4     Layout affects the prominence of material. In getting a balance in
                                prominence, promoters need to consider that pictures, graphs and
                                tables may have greater impact than text. The size and position of
                                text may also be relevant.


8. Implications about future returns
           8.1        A promotion with information about past performance has a greater
                      risk of being misleading if it is presented:
                      (a)     in a manner that implies it constitutes a projection illustrating the
                              likely future value of an investment; or
                      (b) in a way that creates the impression that substantially the same
                          returns will be achieved in the future.

                      8.1.1     For example, using a verb in the present continuous tense can imply
                                ongoing conduct and that past performance will continue (eg “we
                                outperform the share index”).




           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                       page 8
                REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




8.2        A promotion with information about past performance has a greater
           risk of being misleading unless it draws attention (unambiguously and
           without reservation) to the fact that past performance will not
           necessarily be repeated.

           8.2.1    A warning is necessary because people in the audience may hold an
                    unrealistic belief about the predictive power of past performance
                    information.

           8.2.2    This warning should be presented legibly or audibly (or both) in the
                    main part of the promotion and in close proximity to the past
                    performance information. It should:

                   • be on the same page;

                   • be in a font size that is easily read and/or in speech that is easily
                     understood; and

                   • not be buried amongst other text.

           8.2.3    Possible wording for a future performance warning includes:

                   • “Past performance is not a reliable indicator of future performance.”

                   • “Investments can go up and down. Past performance is not
                     necessarily indicative of future performance.”

           8.2.4    A warning is likely to be ineffective if it:

                   • might be interpreted as implying a likelihood (though no guarantee)
                     that past performance will be repeated (unless such an implication
                     can be substantiated); or

                   • does not adequately bring the audience’s attention to the issue.

           8.2.5    Examples that are less likely to be effective include:

                   • “Past performance is not a guarantee of future performance.”

                   • “Future returns may vary.”

8.3     It may be misleading to imply that reliance on simple past performance
figures would be a good way to select a financial product or service.

           8.3.1    Promotions have a higher risk of being misleading if they focus on
                    past performance as a sole or dominant method of selecting a
                    financial product or service.

           8.3.2    The issue here is an implication about the significance of simple past
                    performance figures, without any reference to how the returns were
                    achieved or their relevance to future circumstances.

           8.3.3    If a promotion implies that some aspect of past performance should
                    be the sole or dominant method of selecting a financial product or
                    service, the promoter should have evidence to substantiate the
                    implication.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                        page 9
                           REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




9. Time periods
          9.1        A promotion may be misleading if it uses past performance
                     information from:
                     (a)     an inappropriate or irrelevant investment period;
                     (b) an inappropriately short time period; or
                     (c)     inconsistent time periods which show better performance by the
                             selection of periods.

          9.2        If a promotion contains past performance information, it should
                     include information relating to a relevant and sufficient period (or
                     periods) of past performance to give a balanced indication of past
                     performance.

                     9.2.1     What is a “sufficient period” to give a balanced indication of past
                               performance will depend on a range of factors, such as:

                             • the usual holding period for such an investment;

                             • the volatility of performance in the asset class;

                             • the volatility of performance in the particular investment; and

                             • the sensitivity of the investment’s performance to different market
                               conditions.

          9.3        A promotion which refers to past performance should include past
                     performance information for standardised periods:
                     (a)     the single figure for the per annum return over the previous five
                             years; or
                     (b) the single figure for the per annum return for the whole period
                         the investment has been available (if less than five years).

                     9.3.1     Where a reference to past performance includes performance
                               rankings, the rankings should be disclosed over the same
                               standardised period(s).

                     9.3.2     In this context, “year” means 12 months, not a calendar year or a
                               financial year.

                     9.3.3     If the performance history is less than 5 years, the return for the
                               whole history should be shown and the period stated.

                             • e.g. the fund has returned 8.0% in the year to June 2003 and
                               5.9%p.a. over the life of the fund (50 months).

                     9.3.4     Note that the mere use of a return figure for the standardised period
                               does not provide immunity from being misleading (see especially
                               9.2). There may be other important performance or contextual
                               factors that mean:




          © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                         page 10
                             REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




                               • past returns are of less than usual relevance to future prospects,
                                 and

                               •     the audience would not be aware of these factors.

                                   The promoter has the option of not mentioning performance or giving
                                   enough information to avoid being misleading.

            9.4        Performance information for standardised periods should be at least as
                       prominent as other performance information.

                       9.4.1       Non-misleading past performance information can be given for other
                                   periods, as long as the figures for standardised periods are also
                                   given, and are at least as prominent.

            9.5        Information for standardised periods is not relevant for cash-type
                       investments, where it is adequate to give performance information for
                       the most recent period.

                       9.5.1       For cash-type investments with a fluctuating rate, the “current rate” is
                                   an annualised return based on a minimum seven-day average.

                       9.5.2       A cash management trust is an example of a cash-type investment.

            9.6        For investments that have been in existence for less than one year,
                       using such a short performance period to promote the investment
                       would usually be inappropriate and may be misleading (cash-type
                       investments excluded). An exception is reports aimed at existing
                       clients of the product or service (and/or their advisers) that are clearly
                       for information purposes and not promotional purposes.

            9.7        Regular publications such as a periodic fact sheet may contain the
                       latest month, quarter or year-to-date figure, provided such figures are
                       clearly for information purposes and are not displayed more
                       prominently than other figures.

                       9.7.1       See para 4.3 on the scope of these guidelines. Publications that are
                                   not considered promotions are outside the scope of these
                                   guidelines.


10. Out of date figures
            10.1       Promotional material has a greater risk of being misleading if:
                       (a)     it does not use the most recent information available; and
                       (b) subsequent available information is inconsistent with the
                           information used or means it has reduced relevance.




            © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                         page 11
                 REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




           10.1.1 For example, relevance may be reduced if a fund’s performance has
                  deteriorated compared to similar products and services or relevant
                  benchmarks.

10.2       Promotional material should use up to date performance data.

           10.2.1 “Up to date” means the most recent data that is available at the last
                  practical opportunity to update the material in the verification and
                  publication process.

           10.2.2 Using up to date data:

                  • reduces the risk of a promotion being misleading, and

                  • assists comparison by consumers.

10.3       When an investment sector commonly uses a particular performance
           reporting period, past performance information should be current to
           the most recent end date for which information is available.

           10.3.1 The end of the calendar month is the usual end date for retail
                  managed funds.

10.4       In easily updated media (such as daily, weekly or monthly print
           media, the internet, broadcast media and direct mail advertisements)
           performance data would not be considered ‘up to date’ if more than
           three months had elapsed since the end date being used.

           10.4.1 For example, if performance was calculated monthly, 30 December
                  figures would not be ‘up to date’ in a newspaper advertisement in
                  April. The latest available figures should be used.

           10.4.2 For funds which only calculate returns annually or bi-annually (such
                  as some superannuation funds), the most recent end date may be
                  many months ago. It is good practice to only use performance data
                  in promotions when it is ‘up to date’ (ie no more than 3 months old).

           10.4.3 The verification and production process for promotional material
                  should be designed so that performance figures can be easily
                  updated (either before the first publication or during repeated
                  publication).

10.5       Promotions should not contain any statement of fact that the promoter
           has reason to believe is likely to become untrue while the promotion is
           still in use.

10.6       Where past performance information is used in a publication with a
           long circulation period (e.g. an advertisement in an investor annual
           magazine), the promotion should:
           (a)   prominently display the end date for the performance figures,
                 and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                     page 12
                           REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




                      (b) show how current performance information can be obtained,
                          where relevant (e.g. from a web site address).

           10.7       Promotions should show the dates or period that the past performance
                      information relates to.

                      10.7.1 The following are examples of how performance information may be
                             related to a period or time:

                             • % pa for five years to 30 September 2003

                             • % pa for life of fund (12 years to 30 September 2003)

                             • % pa for life of fund (1 January 2002 to 30 September 2003)


11. “Non-actual” past performance figures
           11.1       To the extent that actual past performance information for a product or
                      service does not exist, promotions can only contain “non-actual”
                      information where the result will not be misleading.

                      11.1.1 “Non-actual” performance covers a broad range of data. Terms
                             used include “hypothetical”, “indicative”, “simulated” or “modelled”
                             past performance.

                      11.1.2 This has been a major problem area for misleading promotional
                             material. Promoters are warned to exercise extreme care on this
                             issue.

                      11.1.3 Whether the use of non-actual performance is misleading will
                             depend on all the circumstances, including how it is presented, the
                             assumptions behind the data and the audience. Other paragraphs in
                             section 11 deal with some specific aspects.

                      11.1.4 Overall, the following are the only scenarios where it is clear that
                             non-actual performance may be able to be used in a non-misleading
                             way (given appropriate presentation):

                             • where a new fund is identical to an existing fund, except for
                               different fees (eg a new retail fund will invest in an existing
                               wholesale fund);

                             • where the new fund will mirror an index.

           11.2       “Non-actual” performance information will be misleading if its true
                      status is not clearly disclosed.

                      11.2.1 Terms used include “hypothetical”, “indicative”, “simulated” or
                             “modelled” past performance. These terms and concepts will be
                             unfamiliar to many people outside the industry. For a consumer
                             audience, care would be needed to ensure people are not misled
                             about the significance of the figures.




           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                        page 13
                 REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




           11.2.2 In particular, the term “indicative” is not recommended, as some
                  people may assume it means indicative of future returns.

11.3       Where the non-actual performance information relies on another
           existing product or service, there is a greater risk of it being
           misleading unless the same entity (or entities) are responsible for
           achieving the performance in both the promoted product or service
           and the existing product or service.

           11.3.1 Where achieving performance requires skill, it may be misleading to
                  make an implicit assumption that the entity could have achieved the
                  same performance as another entity has actually achieved in the
                  past.

           11.3.2 Where the intent is to show the historical performance of an asset
                  class or category of investments, this may be best shown by an
                  index or the median returns for all managers in the category
                  (labelled as such).

11.4       “Non-actual” performance information may be misleading if:
           (a)   it does not accurately represent how the investment would have
                 performed if it had existed in the past; or
           (b) the calculation involves selections, adjustments or assumptions
               where a favourable result may have been achieved by using the
               benefit of hindsight; or
           (c)   the calculation involves significant assumptions that do not
                 necessarily reflect how the investment would have performed if
                 it had existed; or
           (d) the calculation involves significant selections, adjustments or
               assumptions that may not apply in the future, or
           (e)   the assumptions and adjustments used to produce the information
                 are not readily available to the audience or unlikely to be
                 understood by the audience.

           11.4.1 Many people in a target audience are likely to assume that non-
                  actual past performance information is an accurate reflection of how
                  the investment would have performed if it had existed in the past. If
                  this assumption is wrong, the promotion is likely to be misleading.

           11.4.2 Depending on the investment, the following factors may involve
                  selection with the benefit of hindsight:

                  • selection of external investment manager(s) (where discretionary);

                  • asset allocation; or

                  • adjustments to the mandate that was actually in place during the
                    relevant period.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                    page 14
                REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




           11.4.3 If a mathematical model has been created with the benefit of
                  hindsight, “back-tested” data may give a misleading impression of
                  the fund manager’s ability to choose a strategy that will succeed in
                  the future.

           11.4.4 The methodology for calculating the past performance should be
                  readily available (eg in a Product Disclosure Statement and
                  website). However, where people may be misled without this
                  information, it should be sufficiently summarised in the promotional
                  material itself.

11.5       Non-actual past performance that is not based entirely on other
           existing investments has an even greater risk of being misleading and
           should not be used in promotional material for a retail audience.

           The exception is where a modelled investment strategy follows a rigid
           and predetermined mathematical process (such as index matching),
           and where prices on the relevant markets are unlikely to have been
           influenced by the operation of such an investment.

           11.5.1 The data covered by this section are usually referred to as
                  “hypothetical”, “simulated”, “modelled” or “back-tested” past
                  performance.

           11.5.2 The only scenario where it is clear that the exception may apply is
                  where the new fund will mirror an index (see 11.1.4).

11.6       When presenting past performance information, actual fund returns
           should not be blurred with non-actual returns. Once an investment has
           an actual history, any non-actual returns should be clearly separated
           from the actual returns and adequately explained.

           11.6.1 Merely attaching footnotes or similar to distinguish non-actual from
                  actual returns within a table is unlikely to be effective in alerting the
                  audience to the distinction. The following is one acceptable method
                  to distinguish between actual and non-actual performance.

                    Example:
                    The XYZ Retail Fund has been operating since January 2001.
                    To give a longer term view of our performance in this asset class,
                    we have shown longer returns for the XYZ Wholesale Fund. The
                    Wholesale Fund has identical investments, and we have adjusted
                    returns to reflect fee differences.

                                           1 year      3 year      5 year    10 year
              XYZ Retail Fund                9%           -           -         -
            XYZ Wholesale Fund                 -       11.5%         7%       12%
                                     Figures are % pa up to 30 September 2003




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                       page 15
                           REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




12. Treatment of fees
           12.1       The use of gross returns may be misleading.

                      12.1.1 Potential investors are interested in the true returns they receive, ie
                             returns after fees (‘net returns’). Many potential investors would
                             assume that returns quoted in promotions are net returns. Also, the
                             use of figures calculated in different ways restricts comparison
                             between products and services from different entities.

                      12.1.2 In the past, gross returns have sometimes been used to compare
                             investment performance to an index. This practice is discouraged
                             as:

                             • it may mislead some members of the audience about real returns;

                             • it reduces comparability between performance information from
                               different sources; and

                             • it distorts the comparison between active and passive managers by
                               ignoring the higher investment management fees on actively
                               managed funds.

           12.2       Returns should be net of fees to the greatest extent practicable.

           12.3       Where the fee level is variable, the maximum fee should be deducted.

           12.4       Where it would be misleading or impracticable to deduct some fees,
                      the existence of undeducted fees should be prominently disclosed.

           12.5       Where practicable, the size of undeducted fees should also be
                      disclosed.

                      12.5.1 Disclosure of key undeducted fees (in $ or % terms) can be concise:

                             • the actual fee (eg “These returns are after deduction of ongoing
                               fees. A 4% fee also applies on the initial investment.”)

                             • the range of fees (eg “Quoted returns do not take account of the
                               entry fee of 2–4%.”)

                             • the maximum fee (eg “These returns are after deduction of ongoing
                               fees. A fee of up to 4% also applies on all contributions.”)

           12.6       Where a product or service is offered with multiple fee options, it may
                      be misleading to only give returns for the option that shows the
                      highest net returns.

                      12.6.1 For example, a fund’s five-year net returns may be 10% pa for the
                             entry fee option and 9.6% pa for the nil-entry fee option. Acceptable
                             alternatives for quoting net returns are:

                             • give returns for both options;




           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                     page 16
                           REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




                             • only give returns for the option with the lower net returns; or

                             • give returns for the option with the lower net returns, and disclose
                               the returns for the other option in a footnote.

           12.7       Where a scenario is given for a specific investment period, it may be
                      misleading to not deduct entry and exit fees.

                      12.7.1 The following is an example of this special case:

                             “If you had placed $10,000 in the XYZ Fund in 1985, it would be worth
                             $740,000 today.”

                             Such a scenario should be calculated on the basis that the
                             hypothetical investor had bought the investment at the start date and
                             sold it at the end date. The appropriate methodology would include:

                             • all relevant fees should be deducted, including entry, annual, exit
                               and performance fees;

                             • returns should be calculated on an “offer to bid” or “entry price to
                               exit price” basis; and

                             • current fees should be applied, even if different fees existed over
                               the relevant period.


13. Information on risk
           13.1       It is good practice to inform potential investors about the level of risk
                      in various investments, where practical.

                      13.1.1 It is recognised that communicating information about volatility and
                             other risks is not an easy task. There are many possible methods,
                             including:

                             • a qualitative comparison with other investments (eg “returns are
                               likely to vary up and down more than the average sharemarket
                               fund”);

                             • a graph of returns from the investment over a substantial period
                               (preferably also showing the relevant benchmark);

                             • a bar chart or table showing separate figures for each calendar
                               year (this gives an indication of the range of historical returns);

                             • a scatter graph showing return and standard deviation of
                               comparable investments (preferably also showing the sector mean
                               or index); or

                             • graphic presentation showing the location of different investment
                               types on a risk/return continuum.

                      13.1.2 Whether a technique (or any technique) is appropriate will depend
                             on the communication medium and the audience that may view the
                             promotion. It may be possible to use a two tier approach. A short,
                             simple message on risk should be widely understood. Additional,




           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                        page 17
                            REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




                               more complex information on risk may be used to benefit the more
                               sophisticated part of the audience, so long as it does not mislead
                               any other part of the audience.

                      13.1.3 ASIC encourages industry associations to develop standardised
                             ways to communicate the risk of an investment. Risk may be
                             relative to other investments in the asset class or relative to other
                             forms of investment (such as cash).

           13.2       A promotion has a greater risk of being misleading if it compares the
                      returns of an investment or asset class with those of a significantly
                      lower risk investment or asset class without disclosing the difference
                      in risk.

                      14.4.1 Overall returns are only one aspect of an investment’s performance.
                             Risk and volatility may also be important relevant considerations
                             when making comparisons. For example, it may be misleading to
                             compare returns of a mortgage trust with a bank deposit without
                             noting the difference in risk.

           13.3       A promotion has a greater likelihood of being misleading if:
                      (a)   it does not disclose the product or service’s risk level; and
                      (b) the product or service has an unusually high risk level, or special
                          risk factors that would not be apparent to the audience.

14. Calculations
           14.1       Figures should be calculated in accordance with industry standards
                      and common industry practices (unless inconsistent with these
                      guidelines). To aid comparison and avoid misleading the audience,
                      divergent methodologies should be avoided.

                      14.1.1 At the time of writing, relevant standards included:

                             • IFSA Standard No 6.00 Fund Performance – Calculation and
                               Presentation of Returns (for retail clients)

                             • IFSA Guidance Note No 1.00 Australian Investment Performance
                               Standards (for wholesale clients).

           14.2       Returns for periods of one year or more should be annualised.

           14.3       Returns for periods less than one year should not be annualised. An
                      exception is cash-type investments.

                      14.3.1 Investment values and distributions can vary considerably, so
                             annualising short-term returns may give a misleading impression.




           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                     page 18
                            REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




           14.4       A promotion has a greater risk of being misleading if it uses a non-
                      standard methodology without clearly disclosing the deviations and
                      their implications.

15. Presentation issues
           15.1       A promotion using past performance information may be misleading
                      if necessary qualifications, warnings or conditions are not given
                      sufficient prominence or legibility.

                      15.1.1 Information is unlikely to be received by the audience if it is in small
                             print, within a dense text block, only shown on TV for a brief period
                             or where there is distracting simultaneous content.

                      15.1.2 It is the promoter’s responsibility to ensure essential information
                             comes to the audience’s attention. It is not the audience’s
                             responsibility to seek it out.

           15.2       Complicated or ambiguous graphical presentations have a greater risk
                      of being misleading if some members of the audience are likely to
                      draw incorrect impressions from the material.

           15.3       Graphs and other diagrams should be to scale, and what is being
                      depicted should be a fair representation of the position with all
                      relevant information provided.

           15.4       A linear scale should be used for each axis of bar charts and line
                      graphs. Graphs rotated on an angle or using a logarithmic scale are
                      likely to be misleading (unless directed at an audience that is familiar
                      with them).

           15.5       Where a graph of past performance is presented, it is good practice to:
                      (a)   use a hypothetical $10,000 investment (unless the minimum
                            investment amount is higher, where $100,000 would be more
                            appropriate);
                      (b) show the comparative performance of the assumed investment
                          amount in a relevant market sector index (if one exists) or the
                          median for the investment category (if one exists); and
                      (c)   set out key assumptions, such as where the graph:
                            (i)     does not take account of entry and exit fees;
                            (ii)    assumes distributions are reinvested; and
                            (iii) does not take into account any taxes payable by the
                                  investor.




           © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                      page 19
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




          15.6       If returns are calculated in a foreign currency, the promotion has a
                     high risk of being misleading unless this is prominently drawn to the
                     reader’s attention.

          15.7       If returns are calculated in a foreign currency and returns in Australian
                     dollars would be significantly different, it may be misleading to
                     neither:
                     •   show the impact of exchange rate variations, nor
                     •   show returns in Australian dollars.

16. Comparisons
          16.1       Where promoters use past performance information, they are
                     encouraged to use comparisons with a benchmark or the average for a
                     class of similar products or services.

                     16.1.1 If a comparison is with an index for a dissimilar class of products or
                            services as a contrast, this point should be clearly communicated if
                            some members of the audience may misunderstand the intent of the
                            comparison.

                     16.1.2 Where a benchmark is administered by an organisation that is
                            affiliated with the promoted product or service, this benchmark
                            should not be used unless it is widely recognised.

          16.2       A comparison of returns has a greater risk of being misleading if it is
                     not shown on a current, complete and accurate basis.

                     16.2.1 Where the past performance of an investment is compared to only a
                            sub-set of comparable investments, the selection of other
                            investments should have a fair and objective basis. For example, it
                            is likely to be misleading to exclude investments that had a better
                            past performance record in terms of return and/or risk.

                     16.2.2 Some comparisons are produced by external third parties (eg
                            research houses) and only produced at infrequent intervals (e.g.
                            annually). Care should be taken to ensure the comparison is not
                            outdated and therefore potentially misleading (see section 9).

                     16.2.3 A third party source for comparisons, while generally desirable, is no
                            guarantee of legitimacy. There may be limitations in the original
                            comparison. The way it is used in a promotion may make it
                            misleading.

          16.3       Comparisons of returns should clearly explain all factors necessary to
                     ensure the comparison is not misleading.




          © Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                   page 20
                 REGULATORY GUIDE 53: The use of past performance in promotional material




16.4       A promoter should take reasonable steps to ensure that:
           (a)   the facts on which any comparison or contrast is made are
                 verified, and
           (b) any relevant assumptions are disclosed.

16.5       A promotion has a greater risk of being misleading if it compares the
           performance of an investment with any benchmark or investment
           which is different in terms of:
           (a)   investment objectives,
           (b) types of investments made, or
           (c)   countries or markets covered,

           unless the differences are clearly disclosed.

           16.5.1 Where the implications of the differences may not be obvious to the
                  audience, these should also be presented in terms the audience
                  would understand.

16.6       Where a comparison is made for a short period, the limitations of such
           a comparison should be clearly disclosed.

           16.6.1 For equity linked investments, a period under three years would be
                  considered short.
23




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission — July 2003                    page 21
