REGULATORY GUIDE 81

External administration:
Early destruction of books

July 2023




About this guide
This guide is for external administrators making applications under s70-35 of
Sch 2 to the Corporations Act.

It deals with applications for the early destruction of books of companies that
have been subject to external administration.
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 81: External administration: Early destruction of books




                                  About ASIC regulatory documents

                                  In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                  documents.
                                  Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                  is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                  Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                  Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                  compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                  Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                  research project.



                              Document history
                              This guide was issued in July 2023 and is based on legislation and
                              regulations as at the date of issue.

                              Previous versions:
                                     Superseded Policy Statement 81, issued 5 April 1994, reissued 3 May
                                      2000, rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                              Disclaimer
                              This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                              own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                              applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                              obligations.

                              Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                              are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2023                                                    Page 2
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 81: External administration: Early destruction of books




Process for the early destruction of books


                               Key points

                               Companies and external administrators have statutory obligations to keep
                               books and records.

                               The last external administrator of a company must keep all books of the
                               company, and of its external administration, for five years from the end of
                               the external administration (retention period). After the retention period,
                               these books may be destroyed.

                               To destroy the books within the retention period, you (as the last external
                               administrator) must apply to ASIC for our consent to the early destruction.
                               We can only provide consent where the company is (or was) in liquidation
                               or provisional liquidation.

                               We will take into consideration a number of matters when deciding whether
                               to consent to your application. You must also pay an application fee.

                               We will generally not give our consent to early destruction of the books of
                               the external administration within the retention period.




Requirements to keep written financial records
               RG 81.1        A company must keep written financial records that:
                              (a)   correctly record and explain its transactions, financial position and
                                    performance; and
                              (b)   would enable true and fair financial statements to be prepared and
                                    audited.

                              This obligation extends to transactions undertaken as trustee: see s286 of the
                              Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act).

               RG 81.2        You, as an external administrator of a company, must keep proper books that
                              include:
                              (a)   entries or minutes of proceedings at meetings relating to the external
                                    administration of the company; and
                              (b)   such other entries as are necessary to give a complete and correct record
                                    of the external administrator’s administration of the company’s affairs
                                    (see s70-10(1) of Sch 2 to the Corporations Act).

               RG 81.3        If a company is in external administration, all the books of the company, and
                              of the external administration of the company, that are relevant to the affairs




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2023                                                    Page 3
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 81: External administration: Early destruction of books




                              of the company are prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters purported
                              to be recorded in those books: see s70-36 of Sch 2.

               RG 81.4        If you are the last external administrator of a company, you must retain all
                              books of the company, and of its external administration, that are:
                              (a)   relevant to the affairs of the company; and
                              (b)   in the possession or control of the external administrator at the end of
                                    the external administration.
                              You must retain the books for five years from the end of the external
                              administration (the retention period): see s70-35(1) of Sch 2.

                                    Note: For the definition of ‘end of external administration’, see s5-5 of Sch 2. For the
                                    definition of ‘books’, see s9 of the Corporations Act.

               RG 81.5        You will commit an offence if you intentionally or recklessly fail to comply
                              with s70-35(1): see s70-35(5) of Sch 2.

               RG 81.6        The requirement to retain books set out in s70-35(1) does not apply if you
                              have a reasonable excuse: s70-35(2) of Sch 2. For further information on
                              what is a ‘reasonable excuse’, see RG 81.8–RG 81.11.

               RG 81.7        Subject to compliance with other provisions of the Corporations Act or
                              under other law, the books referred to in s70-35(1) may be destroyed:
                              (a)   at the end of the retention period; or
                              (b)   within the retention period (with ASIC consent):
                                    (i)     in the case of a members’ voluntary winding up—as the company
                                            by resolution directs;
                                    (ii)    in the case of a creditors’ voluntary winding up or a court winding
                                            up—as the committee of inspection directs (if there is a
                                            committee), or otherwise as the creditors direct; or
                                    (iii)   if the external administrator is appointed as provisional
                                            liquidator—as the court directs.

                                    Note: See s70-35(3) of Sch 2.




Reasonable excuse for the early destruction of books
               RG 81.8        A reasonable excuse is one that an ordinary member of the community
                              would accept as reasonable in the circumstances. It might include that the
                              records were destroyed by factors outside the external administrator’s
                              control—for example, by a natural disaster.

               RG 81.9        We do not consider that you have a reasonable excuse to destroy the books
                              of the company, and of the external administration of the company, within




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2023                                                            Page 4
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 81: External administration: Early destruction of books




                              the retention period only because the external administration does not have
                              enough funds to meet the cost of future storage.

               RG 81.10       If you consent to act as an external administrator of a company, you must be
                              aware of the possibility that the external administration will be without
                              sufficient funds to pay all your remuneration and costs.

               RG 81.11       Unless there is a reasonable excuse, you must apply to ASIC for consent if
                              you are seeking the early destruction of records. This will ensure that we can
                              make an appropriate assessment about whether the books are likely to be
                              needed, taking into account the matters we consider: see RG 81.19.



How to apply for consent to the early destruction of books
               RG 81.12       You should only apply for ASIC consent to the early destruction of books of
                              a company when the affairs of the company are fully wound up, except for
                              outstanding matters that you cannot progress until we make a decision on the
                              application for early destruction of books. Such matters may include:
                              (a)    calculation of final dividend to creditors; or
                              (b)    lodgement of Form 5603 End of administration return under s70-6 of
                                     Sch 2.

                                    Note: For guidance on ASIC’s consent to the early destruction of the books of the external
                                    administration, see RG 81.2 and RG 81.23–RG 81.24.

               RG 81.13       The application should be submitted through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.

               RG 81.14       It must include:
                              (a)    information on the decision to destroy the books:
                                     (i)     for a members’ voluntary winding up—a minute recording the
                                             company’s resolution directing the destruction of the books;
                                     (ii)    for a creditors’ voluntary winding up or court-ordered winding
                                             up—a minute recording the committee of inspection’s direction (or
                                             the creditors’ resolution, if no committee of inspection was
                                             appointed) to destroy the books; and
                                     (iii)   if the external administrator is appointed as a provisional
                                             liquidator—a court order directing the destruction of the books;
                              (b)    the following amounts:
                                     (i)     funds remaining in the external administration (including the
                                             estimated value of any assets yet to be realised);
                                     (ii)    total outstanding costs of the winding up, estimated to the date of
                                             the end of the external administration of the company (excluding
                                             storage costs of books);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2023                                                           Page 5
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 81: External administration: Early destruction of books




                                    (iii)   estimated cost of storage of books (hard copy and electronic) based
                                            on a five-year retention period;
                                    (iv)    the figure reached once the outstanding costs of winding up and the
                                            estimated cost of storage have been subtracted from the funds
                                            remaining; and
                                    (v)     the amount owing to remaining creditors;
                              (c)   for a members’ voluntary liquidation—information on who will cover
                                    any deficiency of funds;
                              (d)   for a creditors’ voluntary liquidation or a court liquidation—a
                                    statement as to whether the company was able to pay more than
                                    50 cents in $1 for each dollar owed to creditors;
                              (e)   a statement as to whether you have received any requests for access to
                                    the books or the information contained in them. The statement should
                                    include information about these requests, including why you consider
                                    that access is no longer required;
                              (f)   a statement as to whether, to the best of your knowledge, any
                                    circumstances exist in relation to the company or an associate of the
                                    company (as defined in s11 of the Corporations Act) that may result in
                                    the books being required by any person during the retention period—for
                                    example, if the company is a party to or, to your knowledge, is likely to
                                    become a party to court proceedings;
                              (g)   a statement setting out why we should exercise our discretion to consent
                                    (see RG 81.19);
                              (h)   a statement that all lodging and reporting requirements applicable at the
                                    date of the application have been met. This includes a statement that
                                    you have lodged, or do not need to lodge, a report under s533 of the
                                    Corporations Act or reg 5.5.05 of the Corporations Regulations 2001
                                    (Corporations Regulations); and
                              (i)   a statement that you do not propose to take legal action in the name of
                                    or on behalf of the company.

               RG 81.15       If you make the application before the affairs of the company are fully
                              wound up (see RG 81.12), you must also include information about the
                              remaining steps left to finalise the external administration.


                              Application fee

               RG 81.16       The application fee is prescribed by item 13 of Sch 2 to the Corporations
                              (Fees) Regulations 2001 (because it is an application for which a fee is not
                              provided by any other item).

               RG 81.17       We have provided details about payment options in the ASIC Regulatory
                              Portal.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2023                                                     Page 6
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 81: External administration: Early destruction of books




What we will consider when processing applications
               RG 81.18       When we are deciding whether to exercise our discretion to consent to an
                              early destruction of books, our paramount consideration is whether the books
                              are likely to be needed for any investigation, prosecution or other litigation.
                              If we do not think this is likely, we will balance the anticipated cost of
                              storage against the likelihood that the books will be required.

               RG 81.19       Matters we will consider include:
                              (a)   whether an investigation, prosecution or other litigation is pending or in
                                    progress in relation to the company or an associate of the company;
                              (b)   whether we have received any complaints about the company or its
                                    associates;
                              (c)   whether any reports have been lodged about the company or its
                                    associates under s422, 533 or 438D of the Corporations Act or
                                    reg 5.5.05 of the Corporations Regulations;
                              (d)   whether we or you have received any requests for access to the books,
                                    or the information contained in them;
                              (e)   the funds remaining in the administration;
                              (f)   the estimated cost of storage of books;
                              (g)   any unfinalised matters of the external administration;
                              (h)   the surplus or deficiency of funds in the administration;
                              (i)   the time between the date, or anticipated date, of the end of the external
                                    administration of the company and the date the books would be
                                    destroyed; and
                              (j)   if the applicant is appointed as provisional liquidator, the terms of the
                                    court’s directions.

               RG 81.20       If you make your application before the affairs of the company are fully
                              wound up, we will not provide our consent until we are satisfied that the
                              affairs of the company are fully wound up. The exception to this is when
                              there are outstanding matters that you cannot progress until we make a
                              decision on the application for early destruction of books.

               RG 81.21       If we give consent to the early destruction of books before the affairs of the
                              company are fully wound up, our consent is conditional on you lodging
                              Form 5603 within 12 months after the date of the consent letter. We consider
                              that 12 months is a sufficient time for you to finalise the outstanding matters,
                              such as calculating and distributing the final dividend, and lodging
                              Form 5603.

               RG 81.22       If you fail to lodge Form 5603 within the 12 month period, our consent
                              lapses. You will be required to seek a new consent from ASIC to destroy the
                              books within the retention period.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2023                                                    Page 7
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 81: External administration: Early destruction of books




ASIC’s consent to early destruction of the books of the external
administration
               RG 81.23       We expect you to retain the books that give a complete and correct record of
                              your administration of the company’s affairs: see s70-10 of Sch 2. We will
                              generally not consent to the destruction of these books within the retention
                              period.

               RG 81.24       We consider that the books of the company’s external administration should
                              be retained for the duration of the retention period. This is because you may
                              need the books to help you respond to questions about the affairs of the
                              company, or the conduct of the external administration, that arise after the
                              affairs of the company have been fully wound up and the company
                              deregistered.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2023                                                    Page 8
