REGULATORY GUIDE 34

Auditor obligations:
Reporting to ASIC
September 2025



About this guide
This guide is for auditors, including individual auditors, audit companies,
members of audit firms and lead auditors.

It gives guidance on auditors’ obligations to report to ASIC:
    contraventions and suspected contraventions under s311, 601HG, 990K
     and 1226H of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) and s104 of
     the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 (National Credit Act);
    attempts to unduly influence, interfere, or mislead the auditor under
     s311, 601HG, 990K and 1226H of the Corporations Act and s104 of the
     National Credit Act;
    conflict of interest situations and circumstances involving relevant
     relationships as part of an auditor’s independence obligations under
     s324CA–CC and s324CE–CG of the Corporations Act; and
    the auditor’s own contraventions and suspected contraventions under
     s311, 601HG and 1226H of the Corporations Act.

This guide also provides guidance about lodging auditor notifications under
these reporting obligations, how qualified privilege operates, and what
happens when auditors do not meet their reporting obligations.
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in September 2025 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 34, updated 20 December 2007, and
                                     reissued May 2013 and March 2020;
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 34, issued 21 December 2004, and
                                     rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007; and
                                    Superseded Practice Note 34, issued 5 July 1993 and updated 6
                                     December 2004.


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                            Page 2
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




Contents


                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Auditor reporting obligations .............................................................. 4
                                    Lodging auditor notifications .............................................................. 7
                             B      Reporting obligations for suspected contraventions by
                                    companies, disclosing entities, registered schemes and CCIVs 8
                                    What must an auditor report to ASIC? ............................................... 8
                                    What are ‘reasonable grounds to suspect’ a contravention? ............ 9
                                    What is a ‘significant’ suspected contravention? ............................. 10
                                    Adequately dealing with a suspected contravention ....................... 12
                                    When must an auditor report to ASIC? ............................................ 12
                             C      Reporting obligations for suspected contraventions by RSEs 13
                                    What must an RSE auditor report to ASIC? .................................... 13
                                    When must an auditor report to ASIC? ............................................ 13
                             D      Reporting obligations for suspected contraventions by AFS and
                                    credit licensees .............................................................................. 14
                                    What must an AFS and credit licensee auditor report to ASIC? ..... 14
                                    When must an auditor report to ASIC? ............................................ 16
                             E      Other reporting obligations .......................................................... 17
                                    Attempts to unduly influence, interfere and mislead ........................ 17
                                    Auditor independence and conflicts of interest obligations ............. 18
                                    Obligation to report the auditor’s own contraventions and suspected
                                    contraventions of the Corporations Act ........................................... 19
                             F      Lodging auditor notifications ....................................................... 21
                                    Information to include in auditor notifications .................................. 21
                                    How qualified privilege protects auditors ......................................... 22
                                    How to lodge auditor notifications .................................................... 22
                                    What happens when an auditor fails to report or notify ASIC?........ 22
                             Appendix: Contravention examples—companies, disclosing entities,
                                registered schemes and CCIVs .................................................... 23
                                Important information about examples ............................................ 23
                                Examples of significant suspected contraventions .......................... 23
                                Examples of insignificant contraventions ......................................... 26
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 28
                             Related information ............................................................................... 30




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                                     Page 3
                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




A          Overview


                              Key points

                              This guide is intended to help auditors to comply with their obligations to
                              report certain matters to ASIC.

                              Auditors have reporting obligations to notify ASIC of suspected
                              contraventions when conducting audits of:
                              • companies, disclosing entities, registered managed investment
                                schemes (registered schemes) and corporate collective investment
                                vehicles (CCIVs), and compliance plans of registered schemes and
                                retail CCIVs: see Section B;
                              • registrable superannuation entities (RSEs): see Section C; and
                              • Australian financial services (AFS) and credit licensees: see Section D.

                              Auditors also have reporting obligations to notify ASIC about:
                              • attempts to unduly influence, interfere, or mislead the auditor;
                              • conflict of interest situations and circumstances involving relevant
                                relationships; and
                              • the auditor’s own contraventions and suspected contraventions under
                                s311, 601HG and 1226H of the Corporations Act: see Section E.

                              We also provide guidance about lodging auditor notifications under the
                              reporting obligations, how qualified privilege operates, and what happens
                              when auditors do not meet their reporting obligations: see Section F.




Auditor reporting obligations
              RG 34.1        Auditor reporting obligations have been part of Australian company law for
                             many years. These obligations require timely auditor reporting of certain
                             contraventions and other matters to ASIC when conducting audits, including
                             audits conducted at ASIC’s direction.

                                   Note 1: In this guide, we refer to the obligations to report a contravention or suspected
                                   contraventions and other matters to ASIC under s311, 324CA–CC, 324CE–CG, 601HG,
                                   990K or 1226H of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) and s104 of the
                                   National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 (National Credit Act) as the ‘auditor
                                   reporting obligations’.

                                   Note 2: The auditor reporting obligations apply to individual auditors, audit companies,
                                   members of audit firms and lead auditors (as defined in s324AF of the Corporations Act).

                                   Note 3: In this guide, references to chapters (Chs), parts (Pts), divisions (Divs) and
                                   sections (s) are to the Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                      Page 4
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




              RG 34.2        We believe that auditor reporting obligations are a key aspect of the
                             auditor’s role in conducting an audit and should be included in the audit plan
                             and program for each entity subject to audit. Staff reporting to an auditor
                             should be made aware of these obligations.


                             Auditor reporting obligations to notify suspected
                             contraventions

              RG 34.3        Auditors have obligations to notify ASIC of suspected contraventions when
                             undertaking audits of:
                             (a)   a company, disclosing entity, registered scheme or CCIV under s311 or
                                   a compliance plan of a registered scheme or retail CCIV under s601HG
                                   and 1226H: see Section B;

                                   Note: A retail CCIV has the meaning given by s1222J(1): see s9.

                             (b)   an RSE under s311: see Section C; and
                             (c)   an AFS licensee under s990K of the Corporations Act or a credit
                                   licensee under s104 of the National Credit Act: see Section D.

              RG 34.4        While we do not expect auditors to engage in a systemic search for all
                             possible contraventions that may require reporting to ASIC, auditors should
                             be alert to matters that come to their attention that may indicate a suspected
                             contravention, and make an appropriate assessment.

              RG 34.5        Auditors may have multiple reporting obligations to notify ASIC of
                             suspected contraventions. If more than one obligation applies, all obligations
                             should be met (i.e. by lodging a separate auditor notification for each entity),
                             noting that the requirements (including reporting thresholds and timing
                             requirements for notifying ASIC) for each obligation can vary. For example,
                             an auditor may conduct separate audits for:
                             (a)   the RSE (s311) and the licensee operating the RSE (s990K); or
                             (b)   the registered scheme (s311), the registered scheme’s compliance plan
                                   (s601HG) and the responsible entity for the scheme (s990K).

                                   Note: For the purposes of this guide, an ‘auditor notification’ refers to a notification to
                                   ASIC by the auditor of a breach, contravention or other matter required under the
                                   Corporations Act or National Credit Act.

              RG 34.6        If an auditor notifies ASIC of a suspected contravention under its reporting
                             obligations and then becomes aware of further contraventions—including
                             new contraventions of the same provision (e.g. a failure to lodge a specific
                             document the following year)—the auditor must lodge a further auditor
                             notification with ASIC. However, the continued failure to address a specific
                             instance (e.g. the continued failure to lodge a specific document that was due
                             for lodgement in an earlier period) only needs to be reported once.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                        Page 5
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




              RG 34.7        Although AFS and credit licensees have an obligation to report significant
                             breaches of specific obligations to ASIC under Div 3 of Pt 7.6 of the
                             Corporations Act and Div 5 of Pt 2–2 of the National Credit Act
                             respectively, self-reporting to ASIC by the licensee does not exempt an
                             auditor from reporting the same matter under their auditor reporting
                             obligations.

              RG 34.8        Auditors must also notify us about contraventions or suspected
                             contraventions that come to the auditor’s attention, even if:
                             (a)   they have come to the auditor’s attention other than during the audit or
                                   review; or
                             (b)   ASIC may already be aware of the conduct (e.g. through media
                                   coverage or self-reporting by the company).


                             Other reporting obligations

              RG 34.9        Auditors also have obligations to report to ASIC:
                             (a)   attempts to unduly influence, interfere, coerce, manipulate or mislead
                                   the auditor during an audit under s311, 601HG, 990K and 1226H of the
                                   Corporations Act and s104 of the National Credit Act; and
                             (b)   conflict of interest situations or circumstances involving a relevant
                                   relationship as part of an auditor’s independence obligations under
                                   s324CA–CC and s324CE–CG of the Corporations Act; and
                             (c)   the auditor’s own contraventions and suspected contraventions under
                                   s311, 601HG and 1226H of the Corporations Act: see Section E.


                             Reporting obligations to other regulators

              RG 34.10       This guide does not provide guidance about auditors’ reporting obligations
                             to other regulators under legislation administered by other regulators,
                             including:
                             (a)    the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) under s88 of
                                   the Life Insurance Act 1995; or
                             (b)   APRA or the Australian Taxation Office under the Superannuation
                                   Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 (SIS Act).

                                   Note: Reporting to another regulator will generally not relieve the auditor from its
                                   obligations to notify ASIC of a breach, contravention or other matter required under the
                                   Corporations Act or National Credit Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                   Page 6
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




Lodging auditor notifications
              RG 34.11       Section F provides guidance about lodging auditor notifications, how
                             qualified privilege protects auditors, and what happens when an auditor fails
                             to report or notify ASIC.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                            Page 7
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




B          Reporting obligations for suspected
           contraventions by companies, disclosing
           entities, registered schemes and CCIVs


                              Key points

                              An auditor of a company, disclosing entity, registered scheme or CCIV
                              must notify ASIC if they have reasonable grounds to suspect that there has
                              been a contravention of the Corporations Act that is:
                              • significant; or
                              • not significant, but the auditor believes that the contravention has not
                                been or will not be adequately dealt with by commenting on it in the
                                auditor’s report or bringing it to the attention of the directors.
                              This obligation applies to the auditor when they are conducting audits or
                              reviews of a financial or sustainability report or a compliance plan for a
                              registered scheme or retail CCIV.

                              This section gives guidance for auditors on complying with these
                              obligations, including:
                              • what are ‘reasonable grounds to suspect’ a contravention;
                              • what is a ‘significant’ contravention; and
                              • what an auditor should do when a suspected contravention is not
                                ‘significant’ but is not likely to be ‘adequately dealt with’.

                              Auditor notifications must be lodged with ASIC as soon as practicable or
                              within 28 days of the auditor becoming aware of it.




What must an auditor report to ASIC?
              RG 34.12       An auditor of a company, disclosing entity, registered scheme or CCIV, or
                             the compliance plan of a registered scheme or retail CCIV must notify ASIC
                             if they become aware of circumstances that give them reasonable grounds to
                             suspect that there has been a contravention of the Corporations Act: see
                             s311, 601HG and 1226H.

                                   Note 1: These reporting obligations apply to individual auditors (s311(1), 601HG(4)
                                   and 1226H(1)), audit companies (s311(2), 601HG(4A) and 1226H(2)), and lead auditors
                                   (s311(3), 601HG(4B) and 1226H(3)).

                                   Note 2: For ASIC guidance about what are ‘reasonable grounds to suspect’ a
                                   contravention, see RG 34.18–RG 34.21.

              RG 34.13       This reporting obligation applies if the suspected contravention is:
                             (a)   significant; or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                               Page 8
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                                   Note: Subsection 311(4), 601HG(10) and 1226H(4) set out the matters to have regard to
                                   when determining whether a contravention is significant for the purposes of s311,
                                   601HG and 1226H.

                             (b)   not significant, but the auditor believes that the contravention has not
                                   been (or will not be) adequately dealt with by commenting on it in the
                                   auditor’s report or by bringing it to the attention of the directors.


                             Reporting obligations under s311

              RG 34.14       The obligations under s311 apply to reporting suspected contraventions that
                             come to the attention of the auditor of an annual financial report,
                             sustainability report or half-year financial report.


                             Reporting obligations under s601HG and 1226H

              RG 34.15       All registered schemes and retail CCIVs are required to have a compliance
                             plan that meets the requirements of Pt 5C.4 and Div 4 of Pt 8B.3
                             respectively. The Corporations Act also requires certain compliance plan
                             audit work to be carried out by a registered company auditor.

              RG 34.16       A compliance plan’s auditor must provide a report to the responsible entity
                             for the scheme or the corporate director of the retail CCIV within three
                             months after the end of the financial year. Their report must state whether, in
                             the auditor’s opinion, the responsible entity or corporate director complied
                             with the compliance plan and if the plan continues to meet the requirements
                             under Pt 5C.4 or Div 4 of Pt 8B.3: see s601HG and s1226G.

              RG 34.17       The obligations to report suspected contraventions under s601HG and 1226H
                             apply to any suspected contraventions of the Corporations Act that come to the
                             attention of the compliance plan auditor.



What are ‘reasonable grounds to suspect’ a contravention?
              RG 34.18       Under s311, 601HG and s1226H, an auditor is required to notify ASIC if
                             they have ‘reasonable grounds to suspect’ there has been a significant
                             contravention of the Corporations Act. Establishing ‘reasonable grounds to
                             suspect’ requires both a suspicion and a just cause for that suspicion.

              RG 34.19       The test is satisfied by the existence of facts or circumstances that would
                             create in the mind of a reasonable auditor an honest and reasonable suspicion
                             that a contravention has occurred. A single allegation by an employee or
                             customer that is unsupported by any evidence is unlikely to amount, by itself,
                             to a reasonable suspicion.

              RG 34.20       In ASIC’s view, a reasonable suspicion can exist without the auditor having
                             conducted exhaustive and conclusive investigations into the matter. Grounds



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                Page 9
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                             for suspicion may be based on the auditor’s professional judgment,
                             experience, knowledge of a particular industry and information collected, or
                             matters that have come to the auditor’s attention during the audit. The auditor
                             does not need evidence to satisfy themselves that a contravention of the
                             Corporations Act has occurred, and any evidence does not have to be evidence
                             that would be admissible in judicial proceedings.

              RG 34.21       The auditor should document the grounds for suspicion in their working papers.



What is a ‘significant’ suspected contravention?
              RG 34.22       The factors that an auditor must consider in determining whether a suspected
                             contravention is significant for the purposes of s311, 601HG and s1226H
                             are:
                             (a)   the level of penalty for the contravention;
                             (b)   the effect that the contravention has, or may have on:
                                   (i)    the overall financial position of the entity; or
                                   (ii)   the adequacy of the information available about the overall
                                          financial position of the entity; and
                             (c)   any other relevant matter: see s311(4), 601HG(10) and 1226H(4).

                                   Note: The reportable situation obligation for AFS and credit licensees are separate
                                   obligations from the reporting obligations for auditors. Auditors should use their own
                                   judgement to consider whether a contravention meets the ‘significant’ threshold in s311,
                                   601HG and 1226H. Auditors should not rely on the licensee’s assessment of whether a
                                   contravention is ‘significant’ under s912D of the Corporations Act and 50A of the
                                   National Credit Act.


                             Level of penalty

              RG 34.23       Contraventions attracting five years’ imprisonment or more, or any civil
                             penalty provision under the Corporations Act, are likely to be significant
                             contraventions.


                             Any other relevant matter

              RG 34.24       ASIC considers that other factors an auditor may consider when determining
                             whether a suspected contravention is significant include:
                             (a)   whether contraventions of the same or similar nature are suspected to
                                   have occurred in more than one area of the audited body;
                             (b)   whether the suspected contraventions are systemic, multiple or
                                   continuing;
                             (c)   the seniority of the people involved in the suspected contravening
                                   conduct;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                  Page 10
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                             (d)   whether there is any apparent dishonesty involved in the conduct;
                             (e)   the potential impact of the contravention on other parties (e.g. clients,
                                   fund members, or existing or potential investors or creditors); and
                             (f)   whether the audited body or any of its officers or senior managers have
                                   previously contravened the Corporations Act by engaging in similar
                                   conduct.

              RG 34.25       This list of factors is not exhaustive or a checklist. The auditor reporting
                             obligations require the auditor to consider all the facts and circumstances of
                             the situation and make their own reasonable judgement about whether a
                             suspected contravention is significant and must be reported.


                             Examples of significant suspected contraventions

              RG 34.26       ASIC considers suspected contraventions that will be, or are likely to be,
                             significant include:
                             (a)   insolvent trading and the inability to continue as a going concern;
                             (b)   a breach of the accounting or sustainability standards;
                             (c)   a breach of the true and fair view requirement;
                             (d)   a breach of the unconscionable conduct and consumer protection
                                   provisions in relation to financial services outlined in Div 2 of Pt 2 of
                                   the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001;
                             (e)   fraud or a breach of the general duties by officers or employees;
                             (f)   a breach that may cause a significant loss to any person or class of
                                   persons;
                             (g)   breaches associated with related party transactions;
                             (h)   a breach of the requirement to have the minimum number of directors;
                             (i)   a breach of the requirement to keep books and records, including
                                   financial and sustainability records;
                             (j)   a breach of the requirement to lodge financial or sustainability reports;
                                   and
                             (k)   ongoing breaches of the requirement to comply with a compliance plan.

                                   Note: See the Explanatory Memorandum to the Corporate Law Economic Reform
                                   Program (Audit Reform and Corporate Disclosure) Bill 2004 (CLERP 9 Bill EM) at
                                   paragraph 5.245.

              RG 34.27       For examples of suspected contraventions and discussion about whether we
                             consider they would be significant, see Table 1 and Table 2 in the Appendix
                             to this guide.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                            Page 11
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




Adequately dealing with a suspected contravention
              RG 34.28       If the suspected contravention is not significant, s311, 601HG and 1226H
                             require an auditor to form a belief about whether the matter will be
                             adequately dealt with by commenting on it in the auditor’s report or by
                             bringing the matter to the attention of the directors.

              RG 34.29       If an auditor notes suspected contraventions in their report to members and
                             as part of their feedback to directors, this will not necessarily mean that the
                             suspected contravention has been adequately addressed. The auditor must
                             report the suspected breach to ASIC if they believe a suspected
                             contravention will not be dealt with adequately by simply noting these
                             matters in the auditor’s report or by bringing the matter to the attention of
                             the directors.

              RG 34.30       It is a matter of opinion, based on the facts as known to an auditor, whether
                             the contravention will be adequately addressed by commenting on it in an
                             auditor’s report or by bringing the matter to the attention of the directors.

              RG 34.31       The auditor should not delay reporting the suspected breach to ASIC to
                             allow further consultation with the directors if the auditor believes that this
                             consultation may not adequately deal with the matter.

              RG 34.32       For examples of suspected contraventions that are unlikely to be significant
                             but that may be adequately dealt with by commenting on it in the auditor’s
                             report or by bringing the matter to the attention of the directors, see Table 2
                             in the Appendix to this guide.



When must an auditor report to ASIC?
              RG 34.33       After an auditor becomes aware of a contravention or suspected
                             contravention under s311, s601HG and s1226H, they must lodge an auditor
                             notification with ASIC as soon as practicable, and in any case within
                             28 days, even if the matter has been rectified during this period. An auditor
                             should not wait until the conclusion of an audit to notify us.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                           Page 12
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




C          Reporting obligations for suspected
           contraventions by RSEs

                              Key points

                              An auditor of an RSE must notify ASIC if they have reasonable grounds to
                              suspect that there are circumstances that amount to a contravention of the
                              Corporations Act.

                              This obligation applies to all suspected contraventions, irrespective of
                              materiality or significance, or whether the contravention has been
                              adequately dealt with.

                              Auditor notifications must be lodged with ASIC as soon as practicable or
                              within 28 days of the auditor becoming aware of it.


What must an RSE auditor report to ASIC?
              RG 34.34       An auditor of an RSE’s financial or sustainability report must notify ASIC if
                             they have reasonable grounds to suspect that there are circumstances that
                             amount to a contravention of the Corporations Act. All matters must be
                             reported to ASIC, irrespective of materiality or significance, or whether the
                             contravention has been adequately dealt with: see s311.

                                   Note 1: For the purposes of s311, an RSE is a registrable superannuation entity within
                                   the meaning of the SIS Act but does not include an exempt public sector superannuation
                                   scheme, an excluded approved deposit fund (within the meaning of the SIS Act) or a
                                   small APRA fund (within the meaning of s1017BB of the Corporations Act).

                                   Note 2: This reporting obligation applies to individual auditors (s311(1A)–(1C)), audit
                                   companies (s311(2A)–(2C)), members of audit firms (s311(2D)–(2G)), and lead
                                   auditors (s311(3A)–(3C)).

              RG 34.35       For guidance about what are ‘reasonable grounds to suspect’ a
                             contravention, see RG 34.18–RG 34.21. For examples of suspected
                             contraventions, see Table 1 and Table 2 in the Appendix to this guide, noting
                             that an RSE auditor is required to notify ASIC about all suspected
                             contraventions relating to an RSE audit, irrespective of materiality or
                             significance, or whether the contravention has been adequately dealt with.



When must an auditor report to ASIC?
              RG 34.36       After an auditor becomes aware of a contravention or suspected
                             contravention under s311 they must lodge an auditor notification with ASIC
                             as soon as practicable and in any case, within 28 days, even if the matter has
                             been rectified during this period. An auditor should not wait until the
                             conclusion of an audit to notify us.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                  Page 13
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




D          Reporting obligations for suspected
           contraventions by AFS and credit licensees


                              Key points

                              An auditor of an AFS or credit licensee must report to ASIC matters
                              adversely affecting the ability of the licensee to meet their licensee
                              obligations.

                              Auditors must also report contraventions of specified provisions or licence
                              conditions. All contraventions of these provisions must be reported,
                              irrespective of materiality or significance, or whether the contravention has
                              been adequately dealt with.

                              Auditor notifications must be lodged with ASIC within seven days of
                              becoming aware of the matter.




What must an AFS and credit licensee auditor report to ASIC?
              RG 34.37       AFS and credit licensee auditors must report to ASIC matters that:
                             (a)   have adversely affected, are adversely affecting, or may adversely affect
                                   the ability of the licensee to meet their licence obligations: see
                                   s990K(2)(a) of the Corporations Act and s104(2)(a) of the National
                                   Credit Act; or
                             (b)   constitute, or may constitute, a contravention of specified provisions or
                                   a condition of the licensee’s AFS or credit licence: see s990K(2)(b) of
                                   the Corporations Act and s104(2)(b) of the National Credit Act.

                                   Note: Section 104 of the National Credit Act applies to auditors when they are
                                   performing their duties under s49(3) of the National Credit Act (where ASIC has given
                                   a written notice to the credit licensee directing it to obtain an audit report) and s100(2)
                                   of the National Credit Act (where the credit licensee must lodge an audit report with a
                                   trust account statement).


                             Contravention of specified provisions or licence conditions

              RG 34.38       Section 990K(2)(b) of the Corporations Act and s104(2)(b) of the National
                             Credit Act do not include a ‘significance’ test. All matters must be reported
                             to ASIC, irrespective of materiality or significance, or whether the
                             contravention has been adequately dealt with.

                                   Note: Matters that are not contraventions of specified provisions may still need to be
                                   reported to ASIC if the matter results in a breach of a condition of the licensee’s AFS or
                                   credit licence; has an ‘adverse effect’ on the licensee’s ability to meet its obligations; or
                                   must be reported under s311—if the auditor also audits the entity that holds the licence
                                   (see Section B).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                      Page 14
                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                             AFS licensee audits

              RG 34.39       Under s990K(2)(b), auditors must report to ASIC suspected breaches or
                             contraventions of:
                             (a)   conditions of a licensee’s AFS licence; and

                                   Note 1: Unless the context indicates otherwise, a reference to a condition in relation to
                                   an AFS licence includes a restriction: see the definition of ‘condition’ in s9.

                                   Note 2: The auditor should obtain a copy of the licensee’s AFS licence and consider reg
                                   7.6.04 of the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations) to determine
                                   what conditions ASIC has imposed on the licensee.

                             (b)   a provision of:
                                   (i)     Subdiv A or B of Div 2 of Pt 7.8: Dealing with client’s money—
                                           Money other than loans, and loan money;
                                   (ii)    Div 3 of Pt 7.8: Dealing with other property of clients; and
                                   (iii)   Subdiv B or C of Div 6 of Pt 7.8: Financial records, statements and
                                           audit—Financial records, and statements of financial services
                                           licensees.

                                   Note: The specified provisions of the Corporations Act include any regulations made
                                   under these provisions.

              RG 34.40       Examples of suspected contraventions of specified provisions include:
                             (a)   a failure to pay client money into a trust account in accordance with
                                   s981B or designate the account to be a trust account under reg 7.8.01 of
                                   the Corporations Regulations;
                             (b)   the withdrawal of money from a trust account other than in the
                                   circumstances permitted under reg 7.8.02 of the Corporations
                                   Regulations (s981C);
                             (c)   a failure to keep financial records in sufficient detail to clearly
                                   understand the assets and liabilities held on behalf of clients (s988A–
                                   s988B); and
                             (d)   a failure to keep financial records that enable the profit and loss and
                                   balance sheet to be prepared and audited (s988B).

                             Credit licensee audits

              RG 34.41       Under s104(2)(b) of the National Credit Act, auditors must report to ASIC
                             suspected breaches or contraventions of:
                             (a)   conditions of the licensee’s credit licence;

                                   Note: The auditor should obtain a copy of the licensee’s credit licence and consider regs
                                   9, 9AA and 9AB and 9A of the National Consumer Credit Protection Regulations 2010
                                   to determine what conditions are imposed on the licensee.

                             (b)   a provision of:



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                    Page 15
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                                   (i)    Div 2 of Pt 2–5 of the National Credit Act: Financial records, trust
                                          accounts and audit reports—Financial records of licensees; and
                                   (ii)   Div 3 of Pt 2–5 of the National Credit Act: Financial records, trust
                                          accounts and audit reports—Trust accounts of credit service
                                          licensees.

                                   Note: The specified provisions of the National Credit Act include any regulations made
                                   under these provisions.




When must an auditor report to ASIC?
              RG 34.42       Auditor notifications must be lodged with ASIC within seven days of
                             becoming aware of the matter, even if the matter has been rectified during
                             this period: see s990K(1) of the Corporations Act and s104(1) of the
                             National Credit Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                 Page 16
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




E          Other reporting obligations


                              Key points

                              Auditors also have obligations to report to ASIC attempts to unduly
                              influence, interfere or mislead when conducting an audit of:
                              • a company, disclosing entity, registered scheme, CCIV, or compliance
                                plan of a registered scheme or retail CCIV; and
                              • an AFS and credit licensee.

                              As part of their independence obligations, all auditors have obligations to
                              notify ASIC about conflict of interest situations and circumstances involving
                              relevant relationships.

                              Auditors also have obligations to notify ASIC about their own
                              contraventions and suspected contraventions of the Corporations Act.




Attempts to unduly influence, interfere and mislead
                             Audits of companies, disclosing entities, registered
                             schemes and CCIVs

              RG 34.43       An auditor of a company, disclosing entity, registered scheme or CCIV or a
                             compliance plan auditor for a registered scheme or retail CCIV must notify
                             ASIC if the auditor is aware of circumstances that amount to an attempt by
                             any person:
                             (a)   to unduly influence, coerce, manipulate or mislead a person involved in
                                   the conduct of an audit; or

                                   Note: A ‘person involved in the conduct of an audit’ includes the auditor, the lead
                                   auditor, review auditor, a professional member of the audit team or any other person
                                   involved in the conduct of the audit: s311(6), 601HG(12) and s1226H(7).

                             (b)   to otherwise interfere with the proper conduct of an audit: see s311,
                                   601HG and 1226H.

                                   Note: These reporting obligations apply to individual auditors (s311(1)(a),
                                   601HG(4)(a), and 1226H(1)(a)), audit companies (s311(2)(a), 601HG(4A)(a) and
                                   1226H(2)(a)), and lead auditors (s311(3)(b), 601HG(4B)(b) and 1226H(3)(b)).

              RG 34.44       Auditors must notify ASIC in writing as soon as practicable, and in any case
                             within 28 days of becoming aware of the attempt, even if the matter has been
                             rectified during this period.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                  Page 17
                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                             RSE audits

              RG 34.45       Auditors of RSEs are not required to report these matters to ASIC under
                             s311 but must report these matters to the relevant regulator: see s130BA and
                             130BAA of the SIS Act.


                             AFS and credit licensee audits

              RG 34.46       AFS and credit licensee auditors must notify ASIC if they become aware of
                             an attempt to unduly influence, coerce, manipulate or mislead the auditor in
                             the conduct of an audit: see s990K(2)(c) of the Corporations Act and
                             s104(2)(c) of the National Credit Act.

              RG 34.47       AFS and credit licensee auditors must notify ASIC in writing within seven
                             days of becoming aware of a breach: see s990K(1) of the Corporations Act
                             and s104(1) of the National Credit Act.



Auditor independence and conflicts of interest obligations
              RG 34.48       All auditors have reporting obligations connected with their auditor
                             independence obligations to report:
                             (a)   conflict of interest situations under s324CA–CC; and

                                   Note: This reporting obligation applies to individual auditors and audit companies
                                   (s324CA(1A)), members of audit firms (s324CB(1A)), and directors of audit companies
                                   (s324CC(1A)).

                             (b)   circumstances involving relevant relationships under s324CE–CG.

                                   Note: This reporting obligation applies to individual auditors (s324CE), audit firms
                                   (s324CF), and directors of audit companies (s324CG).

              RG 34.49       A conflict of interest situation exists in relation to an audited entity if:
                             (a)   the auditor (or a professional member of the audit team) cannot exercise
                                   objective and impartial judgement in the conduct of the audit; or
                             (b)   a reasonable person, with full knowledge of all relevant facts and
                                   circumstances, would conclude that the auditor (or a professional
                                   member of the audit team) cannot exercise objective and impartial
                                   judgement in the conduct of the audit: see s324CD(1).

                                   Note: For the purposes of determining whether a conflict of interest exists under
                                   s324CA-CC, you should have regard to the relationships set out in s324CD(2).

              RG 34.50       A circumstance involving a relevant relationship exists if the auditor (or one
                             of the people or entities in s324CE(5), 324CF(5) or 324CG(9)) has a
                             relationship with the audited entity described in s324CH.

                                   Note: For the purposes of s324CE-CG, a relevant relationship is a relationship set out in
                                   s324CH.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                      Page 18
                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                             When must an auditor report to ASIC?

              RG 34.51       If an auditor becomes aware of a conflict of interest situation or a
                             circumstance involving relevant relationships between the auditor (or its
                             team members) and the audited entity, the auditor must notify ASIC if the
                             situation or circumstance is ongoing after seven days. Failure to comply with
                             this obligation is an offence.

                                   Note 1: If the conflict of interest situation or circumstance is not resolved within 21
                                   days from notifying ASIC, the appointment of the auditor ceases automatically and our
                                   consent to the resignation or removal is not required. For more information see s327B,
                                   331AAA and 331AH and Regulatory Guide 26 Resignation, removal and replacement
                                   of auditors (RG 26).

                                   Note 2: ASIC will give a copy of the notice of the conflict of interest or circumstance
                                   involving a relevant relationship to the audited entity.

                                   Note 3: There are also rules for retiring partners of audit firms and retiring directors and
                                   professional members of audit companies: see s324CI–324CK.




Obligation to report the auditor’s own contraventions and
suspected contraventions of the Corporations Act
              RG 34.52       Under s311, 601HG and 1226H, auditors also have obligations to notify
                             ASIC of the auditor’s own contraventions and suspected contraventions of
                             the Corporations Act, including contraventions of:
                             (a)   the auditor independence and conflicts of interest obligations in Div 3
                                   of Pt 2M.4; and
                             (b)   the auditor rotation requirements in Div 5 of Pt 2M.4.

                                   Note 1: For further information about the reporting obligations that apply when
                                   undertaking audits of a company, disclosing entity, registered scheme or CCIV under
                                   s311 or a compliance plan of a registered scheme or retail CCIV under s601HG and
                                   1226H: see Section B.

                                   Note 2: For further information about the reporting obligations that apply when
                                   undertaking audits of an RSE under s311: see Section C.

                                   Note 3: For further information about the auditor rotation requirements, see Regulatory
                                   Guide 187 Auditor Rotation (RG 187).

              RG 34.53       ASIC considers that a breach of these auditor independence requirements is
                             likely to be significant and should be reported.

                                   Note 1: Each case must be considered on its merits, and auditors must apply
                                   professional judgement and consider the particular facts and circumstances of each case
                                   when deciding whether to notify ASIC.

                                   Note 2: An RSE auditor is required to notify ASIC about all suspected contraventions
                                   relating to an RSE audit, irrespective of materiality or significance, or whether the
                                   contravention has been adequately dealt with.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                      Page 19
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




              RG 34.54       After an auditor becomes aware of their own contravention or suspected
                             contravention under s311, s601HG and s1226H, they must lodge an auditor
                             notification with ASIC as soon as practicable, and in any case within
                             28 days, even if the matter has been rectified during this period. An auditor
                             should not wait until the conclusion of an audit to notify us.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                           Page 20
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




F          Lodging auditor notifications


                              Key points

                              This section explains:
                              • the information to include in auditor notifications;
                              • how qualified privilege protects auditors;
                              • how to lodge auditor notifications; and
                              • what happens when an auditor fails to report to or notify ASIC.




Information to include in auditor notifications
              RG 34.55       Auditors must notify ASIC in writing of the circumstances giving rise to
                             any:
                             (a)   suspected contraventions (see Sections B, C, D and Section E at
                                   RG 34.52—RG 34.54);
                             (b)   attempts to unduly influence, interfere or mislead the auditor (see
                                   Section E at RG 34.43—RG 34.47); or
                             (c)   conflict of interest situations and circumstances involving relevant
                                   relationships (see Section E at RG 34.48—RG 34.51).

              RG 34.56       Auditor notifications should provide sufficient detail to allow us to
                             understand and evaluate the issue being reported. Auditors should provide
                             information about:
                             (a)   the audited entity—including the name of the entity, and as applicable,
                                   the Australian Business Number (ABN), Australian Company Number
                                   (ACN), Australian Registered Scheme Number (ARSN), Unique
                                   Superannuation Identifier (USI) and licence number;
                             (b)   the circumstances alerting the auditor to the issue, including when the
                                   auditor became aware of it;
                             (c)   the nature and extent of the issue being reported, including the relevant
                                   legislative provision(s) that may have been contravened; and
                             (d)   actions being taken by the entity, directors, licensee or auditor in
                                   relation to the issue.

                                   Note 1: Auditor notifications about suspected contraventions under s311, 601HG, 990K
                                   and 1226H should be lodged using the ‘submit auditor breach report’ form on the ASIC
                                   Regulatory Portal (see Submitting breach reports on the portal). The information
                                   required by the form will depend on the circumstances of the suspected breach.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                              Page 21
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                                   Note 2: Auditor notifications about suspected contraventions under s104 of the National
                                   Credit Act should be lodged by emailing the report to feedback.breach@asic.gov.au.

                                   Note 3: An auditor notification about multiple suspected contraventions (e.g. a breach
                                   of the requirement to keep books and records and a breach of the requirement to lodge
                                   financial reports) may be lodged with ASIC under a single lodgement provided the
                                   notifications all relate to the same entity.




How qualified privilege protects auditors
              RG 34.57       An auditor lodging auditor notifications has qualified privilege under
                             s601HG(8), 990L, 1226G(5) and s1289 of the Corporations Act and s105 of
                             the National Credit Act.

                                   Note: ‘Qualified privilege’ is defined as protection from proceedings for defamation:
                                   see s89 of the Corporations Act and s16 of the National Credit Act.

              RG 34.58       In essence, qualified privilege is available if an auditor has acted in good
                             faith and solely for the purpose of discharging the statutory obligation to
                             notify or report to us. An auditor must not have acted maliciously or for any
                             other improper purpose.

              RG 34.59       Statutory privilege does not displace any privilege that the auditor may be
                             entitled to rely on under the common law: see s89(3) of the Corporations Act
                             and s16(3) of the National Credit Act.



How to lodge auditor notifications
              RG 34.60       Auditor notifications should be lodged online through the ASIC Regulatory
                             Portal (see Submitting breach reports on the portal).

                                   Note: Auditor notifications about suspected contraventions under s104 of the National
                                   Credit Act should be lodged by emailing the report to feedback.breach@asic.gov.au.




What happens when an auditor fails to report or notify ASIC?
              RG 34.61       An auditor who fails to comply with the auditor reporting obligations is
                             guilty of an offence. The relevant criminal penalties (fine and/or term of
                             imprisonment) are set out in Sch 3 of the Corporations Act and s104(3) of
                             the National Credit Act.

                                   Note: ASIC has a range of powers that enable us to respond flexibly and proportionately
                                   to a broad range of individual and corporate misconduct. For more information about
                                   ASIC’s approach to enforcement, including the factors ASIC may consider when
                                   deciding whether to apply to the Companies Auditors Disciplinary Board for
                                   disciplinary action of an auditor, see Information Sheet 151 ASIC’s approach to
                                   enforcement (INFO 151).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                  Page 22
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




Appendix: Contravention examples—companies,
disclosing entities, registered schemes and CCIVs



Important information about examples
              RG 34.62       The examples in this appendix are not a checklist and their inclusion in this
                             guide does not indicate that we will always consider the suggested treatment
                             to be appropriate in all cases. Each case must be considered on its merits,
                             and auditors must apply professional judgement and consider the particular
                             facts and circumstances of each case when deciding whether to notify ASIC.

              RG 34.63       Some of these examples may also be relevant to an RSE auditor’s obligation
                             to notify ASIC about suspected contraventions. However, under s311, an
                             RSE auditor is required to notify ASIC about all suspected contraventions
                             relating to an RSE audit, irrespective of materiality or significance, or
                             whether the contravention has been adequately dealt with.



Examples of significant suspected contraventions
              RG 34.64       Table 1 sets out examples of suspected contraventions that ASIC considers are
                             likely to be significant and require notification. This is not an exhaustive list.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                           Page 23
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




Table 1:    Suspected contraventions that are likely to be significant

 Suspected contravention             ASIC guidance

 Insolvent trading and               Insolvent trading
 inability to continue as a
                                     ASIC considers that insolvent trading is a significant contravention—
 going concern
                                     especially having regard to the possible detriment to creditors or
 See:                                employees—and should be reported to ASIC.
  s588G                             Suspected insolvent trading may become apparent at any time during the
  CLERP 9 Bill EM at                year, including during the conduct of audit or review procedures after
   paragraph 5.245                   balance date and before the signing of the financial report.
                                     Going concern issues
                                     Where a financial report has been prepared on a going concern basis and
                                     the auditor gives a modified audit report on the appropriateness of using
                                     the going concern basis, ASIC considers there is a significant
                                     contravention and should be reported to ASIC.
                                     With all other going concern issues, the auditor should consider the effect
                                     of the going concern issues identified on:
                                      the overall financial position of the entity; or
                                      the adequacy of the information available about the overall financial
                                       position of the entity: see s311(4)(b).
                                     An auditor that identifies going concern issues should perform sufficient
                                     work to establish whether there are reasonable grounds to suspect
                                     insolvent trading.
                                     The auditor should not delay notifying us of suspected insolvent trading
                                     until they have resolved going concern considerations, or in the hope that
                                     the company will obtain new financial support before signing the financial
                                     report.

 Breach of accounting or             ASIC considers that suspected non-compliance with an accounting or
 sustainability standards            sustainability standard would be significant in most circumstances and
                                     should be reported to ASIC.
 See:
                                     An auditor should notify ASIC if:
  s296, 296A(2), 296B, 296C
                                      an entity’s financial or sustainability report fails to comply with the
  CLERP 9 Bill EM at
                                       accounting or sustainability standards and was materially misstated; and
   paragraph 5.245
                                      a previously issued financial or sustainability report was materially
                                       misstated—even if the misstatement was unintentional or is revealed by
                                       new information that has come to light.

                                     Non-compliance with an accounting or sustainability standard could
                                     require the restatement of a previously issued financial or sustainability
                                     report or the issuance by the auditor of a modified audit or review report.

                                     However, we do not consider that an auditor would be required to notify
                                     ASIC if:
                                      an entity’s financial or sustainability report complied with the accounting
                                       or sustainability standards when that report was issued; and
                                      a restatement is required by the relevant accounting or sustainability
                                       standard due to the adoption of a new accounting or sustainability
                                       standard.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                               Page 24
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




 Suspected contravention             ASIC guidance

 Modified audit or review            ASIC considers that a breach of the ‘true and fair view’ requirement would
 reports                             be significant and should be reported to ASIC.

 See:                                An auditor should consider its reporting obligations if:
  s297, 308 and 309                  an auditor’s report is modified in relation to a scope limitation—with
  CLERP 9 Bill EM at                  consideration given to whether the circumstances that led to the scope
   paragraph 5.245                     limitation gives rise to reasonable grounds to suspect a contravention of
                                       the Corporations Act; and
                                      an emphasis of matter paragraph is included in an unmodified audit
                                       report—although this may not necessarily relate to a circumstance that
                                       amounts to a significant contravention of the Corporations Act, the
                                       auditor should consider the underlying basis for that emphasis of matter
                                       and whether it requires the auditor to notify us.

 Fraud by officers or                ASIC considers that suspected fraudulent conduct or financial reporting by
 employees of the entity             officers or employees of the audited body would be significant in most
                                     circumstances and should be reported to ASIC.
 See:
  CLERP 9 Bill EM at                If fraudulent conduct or financial reporting by officers or employees of the
   paragraph 5.245                   audited body is suspected, the auditor should perform sufficient work to
                                     establish whether there are reasonable grounds to suspect a significant
                                     contravention of the Corporations Act has occurred or is continuing to
                                     occur.

                                     In considering whether the contravention or suspected contravention is
                                     significant, the auditor should have regard to the actual or potential loss
                                     resulting from the alleged fraud, number or frequency of the fraudulent
                                     events and the seniority of the individual involved.

                                     In particular, ASIC should be notified if the scale of the alleged fraud is
                                     likely to adversely affect:
                                      the overall financial position of the entity; or
                                      the adequacy of the information available about the overall financial
                                       position of the entity: see s311(4)(b).

 Breach of general duties of         ASIC considers that a suspected breach by an officer or employee of the
 officers and employees              general duties in s180-184 would generally be significant as it effects the
                                     governance of the entity and should be reported to ASIC.
 See:
  s180-184

 Related party transactions          ASIC considers that a suspected contravention associated with related
                                     party transactions would generally be significant and should be reported to
 See:
                                     ASIC.
  Ch 2E
                                     This is because there is a risk that the interests of a related party may
  Regulatory Guide 76 Related
                                     influence the decision-making of directors to the detriment of the interests
   party transactions (RG 76)
                                     of members of the entity.

 Composition of the board of         ASIC considers that a suspected failure to have the minimum number of
 directors                           directors would generally be significant as it affects the governance of the
                                     company and should be reported to ASIC.
 See:
  s201A




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                  Page 25
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




 Suspected contravention             ASIC guidance

 Breach of the requirement to        ASIC considers that a suspected failure to maintain adequate books and
 keep books and records              records, including financial or sustainability records, would likely be
                                     significant and should be reported.
 See:
  s286 and 286A                     The auditor should notify ASIC about these breaches regardless of
                                     whether the matter has been reported in the audit report.

 Non-lodgement of financial          ASIC considers that a suspected failure to lodge a financial or
 and sustainability reports          sustainability report is significant and should be reported to ASIC:

 See:                                 for listed entities or disclosing entities—if the report has not been lodged
                                       by its due date; or
  s319 and 320
                                      for all other entities—if the report remains outstanding 28 days after its
                                       due date.
                                       Note 1: RSE auditors must notify ASIC if an RSE has failed to lodge a financial or
                                       sustainability report if the report has not been lodged by its due date.
                                       Note 2: For further information about sustainability reporting, see Regulatory
                                       Guide 280 Sustainability reporting (RG 280).

 Ongoing breaches of the             ASIC considers that suspected ongoing compliance failures identified in an
 requirement to comply with a        audit relating to a compliance plan are significant and should be reported.
 compliance plan
                                     In assessing the significance of instances of non-compliance and whether
 See:                                these should be reported, an auditor should consider matters including
  s601FC(1)(h) and                  whether:
   1224D(2)(g)                        there are any monetary or adverse impacts to investors or investor
                                       protection issues;
                                      the breaches identified indicate a systemic failure in the compliance
                                       processes of the audited body;
                                      the instances of non-compliance were the subject of previous audit
                                       findings that have not been addressed by the entity; and
                                      the break down in compliance processes may impact the ability of the
                                       entity to achieve any compliance plan objectives and/or statutory
                                       obligations.

                                     Notification of these matters to ASIC does not change the auditor’s
                                     obligation to issue a modified audit opinion if circumstances require it.




Examples of insignificant contraventions
              RG 34.65       Table 2 sets out examples of suspected contraventions that ASIC considers
                             unlikely to be significant. This is not an exhaustive list.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                                       Page 26
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




Table 2:    Suspected contraventions that are unlikely to be significant

 Suspected contravention        ASIC guidance

 Failure to assist the          An isolated and relatively minor incident of an officer of the audited body failing
 auditor                        to assist an auditor as required by s312 is unlikely to be a significant
                                contravention.
 See:
                                The auditor may be able to adequately deal with the contravention by bringing
  s312                         the matter to the attention of directors, provided the directors take appropriate
                                action. In this case, if the suspected contravention is not significant and has
                                been adequately dealt with, there is no requirement for the auditor to report the
                                matter to ASIC. However, the auditor should notify ASIC if the failure
                                continues.

 Failure to correct an          An entity’s isolated failure to correct an extract of particulars in contravention of
 extract of particulars         s346C is unlikely to be a significant contravention.
                                An auditor may be able to deal adequately with the contravention by notifying
 See:
                                the directors. In this case, if the suspected contravention is not significant and
  s346C                        has been adequately dealt with, there is no requirement for the auditor to
                                report the matter to ASIC. However, the auditor is then on notice of a possible
                                continuing breach, and should notify ASIC if the failure continues.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                               Page 27
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




Key terms


                            Term                      Meaning in this document

                            ABN                       Australian Business Number

                            ACN                       Australian Company Number

                            AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B that
                                                      authorises a person who carries on a financial services
                                                      business to provide financial services

                            AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence

                            APRA                      Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

                            ARSN                      Australian Registered Scheme Number

                            ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investment Commission

                            auditor                   An individual auditor, registered company auditor or the lead
                                                      auditor of an authorised audit company

                            auditor notification      A notification to ASIC by the auditor of a breach,
                                                      contravention or other matter required under the
                                                      Corporations Act or National Credit Act

                            auditor reporting         The obligations to report a contravention or suspected
                            obligations               contraventions and other matters to ASIC under s311,
                                                      324CA–CC, 324CE–CG, 601HG, 990K or 1226H of the
                                                      Corporations Act and s104 of the National Credit Act

                            CCIV                      A Corporate collective investment vehicle

                            Ch 2E (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                      2E), unless otherwise specified

                            CLERP 9 Bill EM           Explanatory Memorandum to the Corporate Law Economic
                                                      Reform Program (Audit Reform and Corporate Disclosure)
                                                      Bill 2004

                            Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                      purpose of that Act

                            Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                            Regulations

                            credit licence            An Australian credit licence under s35 of the National Credit
                                                      Act that authorises a licensee to engage in particular credit
                                                      activities

                            credit licensee           A person who holds an Australian credit licence under s35 of
                                                      the National Credit Act

                            Div 3 (for example)       A division of a part of a chapter of the Corporations Act (in
                                                      this example numbered 3), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                             Page 28
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




                            Term                      Meaning in this document

                            lead auditor              Has the meaning in s324AF

                            National Credit Act       National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009

                            Pt 7.6 (for example)      A part of a chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                      numbered 7.6), unless otherwise specified

                            Reg 7.6.04 (for           A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this example
                            example)                  numbered 7.6.04), unless otherwise specified

                            registered scheme         A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                      s601EB

                            retail CCIV               Has the meaning given by s1222J(1)
                                                        Note: This is a definition contained in s9.

                            RSE                       A registrable superannuation entity within the meaning of the
                                                      SIS Act but does not include the following:
                                                       an exempt public sector superannuation scheme;
                                                       an excluded approved deposit fund (within the meaning of
                                                        the SIS Act); and
                                                       a small APRA fund (within the meaning of s1017BB of the
                                                        Corporations Act)

                            SIS Act                   Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993



                            s311 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                      311), unless otherwise specified

                            USI                       Unique Superannuation Identifier




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                            Page 29
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 34: Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             AFS licence, auditor obligations, credit licence, contraventions, licence
                             conditions, qualified privilege, reasonable grounds, significant
                             contravention, suspected contravention

                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 26 Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors

                             RG 76 Related party transactions

                             RG 187 Auditor rotation

                             RG 280 Sustainability reporting


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement


                             Legislation
                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001, Pt 2, Div 2

                             Corporate Law Economic Reform Program (Audit Reform and Corporate
                             Disclosure) Bill 2004

                             Corporations Act 2001, Ch 2E; Pt 2M.4, Divs 3 and 5; Pt 5C.4; Pt 7.6, Div
                             3; Pt 7.8, Div 2, Subdivs A and B, Pt 7.8, Div 3, Pt 7.8, Div 6, Subdivs B
                             and C; Pt 8B.3, Div 4; s9, 89, 180–184, 201A, 286, 286A, 296, 296A(2),
                             296B, 296C, 297, 308, 309, 311, 312, 319, 320, 324AF, 324CA–CK, 327B,
                             331AAA, 331AH, 346C, 588G, 601FC, 601HG, 912D, 981B, 981C, 988A,
                             988B, 990K, 990L, 1017BB, 1222J(1), 1224D(2)(g), 1226G, 1226H, 1289
                             and Sch 3

                             Corporations Regulations 2001, reg 7.6.04, 7.8.01 and 7.8.02

                             Explanatory Memorandum to the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program
                             (Audit Reform and Corporate Disclosure) Bill 2004

                             Life Insurance Act 1995, s88

                             National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009, Pt 2–2, Div 5; Pt 2–5,
                             Divs 2 and 3; s16, 49(3), 50A, 100(2), 104 and 105

                             National Consumer Credit Protection Regulations 2010, regs 9, 9AA, 9AB
                             and 9A

                             Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993, s130BA and130BAA



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2025                                           Page 30
