REGULATORY GUIDE 26

Resignation, removal and
replacement of auditors

October 2024




About this guide
This is a guide for public companies, corporate directors of retail corporate
collective investment vehicles, responsible entities of registered schemes,
trustees of registrable superannuation entities, other AFS licensees, credit
licensees, and their appointed auditors.

It explains how we may exercise ASIC’s power to:
   give consent to the resignation or removal of auditors under certain
    provisions of the Corporations Act; and
   approve the resignation or replacement of auditors under certain
    provisions of the National Credit Regulations.
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This version was issued in October 2024 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. In January 2026, we updated the guide to
                             reflect the new AFS licence application process. We:
                                    removed references to Form FS07 in Table 1 and RG 26.101;
                                    removed references to Form FS09 in Table 1 and RG 26.102; and
                                    updated legislative references in the note to RG 26.34(a).

                             In February 2026, we made minor changes following the reissue of
                             Regulatory Guide 34 Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC (RG 34).

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 26, issued 18 June 2015
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 26, issued 22 June 1992, rebadged as a
                                     regulatory guide July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                              Page 2
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Purpose of this guide ......................................................................... 4
                                    Our general approach to change of auditor ....................................... 5
                                    The role of directors and audit committees ....................................... 6
                                    How the requirements apply .............................................................. 7
                                    How to apply to ASIC for consent ...................................................... 7
                             B      Our general approach to change of auditor................................ 11
                                    When we will give our consent ........................................................ 11
                                    Other circumstances that may result in change of auditor .............. 15
                             C      The role of directors and audit committees ................................ 18
                                    Auditor independence and audit quality .......................................... 18
                                    Timing of change in auditor and maintaining members’ rights ........ 19
                             D      How the requirements apply......................................................... 20
                                    Auditors of public companies ........................................................... 20
                                    Auditors of registered schemes or retail CCIVs (and their respective
                                    compliance plans) ............................................................................ 24
                                    Auditors of RSEs ............................................................................. 26
                                    Auditors of AFS licensees................................................................ 28
                                    Auditors of credit licensee trust accounts ........................................ 29
                             E      How to apply to ASIC for consent ................................................ 31
                                    When to lodge an application .......................................................... 31
                                    How we assess an application......................................................... 32
                                    What notification we will give of our decision .................................. 32
                                    How to apply for a review of our decision ........................................ 33
                             Appendix: Checklist of information to be provided with your
                                application ...................................................................................... 34
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 35
                             Related information ............................................................................... 38




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                                       Page 3
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               This guide explains the policies and principles that influence how we may
                               exercise ASIC’s powers to give consent or approval to the resignation,
                               removal or replacement of auditors.

                               It explains how these policies and principles apply to auditors of:
                               • public companies;
                               • registered schemes and their compliance plans;
                               • retail corporate collective investment vehicles (CCIVs) and their
                                 compliance plans;
                               • registrable superannuation entities (other than exempt public sector
                                 superannuation schemes, excluded approved deposit funds and small
                                 Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) funds) (RSEs);
                               • Australian financial services (AFS) licensees; and
                               • trust accounts of Australian credit licensees (credit licensee trust
                                 accounts).

                               We discuss considerations for directors and audit committees.

                               We also give guidance about how to apply to ASIC for consent, including
                               what information should be provided with the application.




Purpose of this guide
              RG 26.1        The Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) and the National Consumer
                             Credit Protection Regulations 2010 (National Credit Regulations) provide
                             for the resignation, removal and replacement of auditors for different entities.

              RG 26.2        This guide sets out the policies and principles that influence how we may
                             exercise ASIC’s powers to give consent or approval in these circumstances
                             under s329(6), 331AC(1)–(3) (including as they apply under s1232R(2)),
                             331AK(1)–(2), 601HH(1)(b), 601HH(3), 990F(b), 990G(2), 1226J(1)(b) and
                             1226J(4) of the Corporations Act, and regs 19(4)(d) and 19(4)(e) of the
                             National Credit Regulations.

                                   Note 1: In this guide, references to sections (s), chapters (Chs), divisions (Div),
                                   subdivisions (subdiv) and parts (Pts) are to the Corporations Act, unless otherwise
                                   specified. References to regulations (regs) are to the National Credit Regulations, unless
                                   otherwise specified.

                                   Note 2: In general, for the purposes of our guidance, ‘consent’ also includes ‘approval’
                                   in the context of the National Credit Regulations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                       Page 4
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                                   Note 3: Div 7 of Pt 2M.4 of the Corporations Act applies to a retail CCIV as if the
                                   CCIV were a registered scheme and the corporate director were the scheme’s
                                   responsible entity: see s1232R(2).

              RG 26.3        This guide does not deal with APRA’s regulatory decision making about
                             auditors. This includes decisions that APRA may make:
                             (a)   about audits of small APRA funds; and
                             (b)   under provisions it administers of the Superannuation Industry
                                   (Supervision) Act 1994 (SIS Act), Banking Act 1959 (Banking Act),
                                   Insurance Act 1973 (Insurance Act), Life Insurance Act 1995 (Life
                                   Insurance Act) and Retirement Savings Accounts Act 1997 (RSA Act).

                                   Note: For information about APRA’s oversight of small APRA fund audits, see
                                   Prudential Standard SPS 310 Audit and related matters.




Our general approach to change of auditor
              RG 26.4        Section B of this guide explains our general approach to a change of auditor,
                             including:
                             (a)   the matters we will consider in deciding whether to give our consent; and
                             (b)   other circumstances that may result in a change of auditor.


                             When we will give our consent

              RG 26.5        In general, we will consent to the resignation, removal or replacement of an
                             auditor at any time of the year if:
                             (a)   our criteria for consent are satisfied;
                             (b)   all relevant supporting information is provided with the application; and
                             (c)   where relevant, disclosure of the removal of the auditor is made to ASIC
                                   and the market or to members, as applicable.

              RG 26.6        However, we will generally not consent to the resignation, removal or
                             replacement of an auditor at any time of the year if:
                             (a)   concerns are raised by the outgoing auditor about a disagreement with
                                   management or directors; and/or
                             (b)   other evidence indicates that we should not provide our consent.

              RG 26.7        We expect an outgoing auditor to bring to our attention any matters
                             connected with their ceasing to hold office that may impact on the integrity
                             of the audit function. For example:
                             (a)   if the outgoing auditor is aware that their resignation, removal or
                                   replacement may be connected with ‘opinion shopping’;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                      Page 5
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             (b)   details of any disagreement with management or directors (including
                                   management or directors of a responsible entity, corporate director,
                                   superannuation trustee, AFS licensee or credit licensee); and
                             (c)   any other circumstances or matters connected with the auditor ceasing
                                   to hold office that should be brought to our attention.

              RG 26.8        We will decide whether to consent to a resignation, removal or replacement
                             on the merits of each case.

              RG 26.9        Where our consent to a removal, resignation or replacement is required, the
                             outgoing auditor appointment continues until we give our consent, and it
                             ends in accordance with the terms of our consent: see s329(5), 331AC(1)–
                             (2), 331AK(1)–(2), 601HH(1)(b), 601HH(2)(b), 990F(b), 990G(1) or
                             1232R(2), 1226J(1), 1226J(3), and regs 19(4)(d) or 19(4)(e).

              RG 26.10       In all cases, our consent should not be assumed and it is important that an
                             outgoing auditor continues to act as auditor until we have given our consent.
                             We will not give our consent merely because a proposed incoming auditor
                             has commenced work. Giving consent in such circumstances would
                             undermine the legislative requirement to obtain consent.


                             Other circumstances that may result in change of auditor

              RG 26.11       We also provide guidance on other circumstances that may result in a change
                             of auditor, including:
                             (a)   auditor ineligibility, incapacity or death;
                             (b)   loss of auditor independence due to a conflict of interest situation;
                             (c)   disqualification of an auditor by a court;
                             (d)   deliberate disqualification by an auditor; and
                             (e)   changes in the structure of an audit firm due to a merger, acquisition or
                                   dissolution.



The role of directors and audit committees
              RG 26.12       It is important that directors and audit committees support auditor
                             independence, audit quality, and the rights of members to decide on (or
                             scrutinise in the case of RSEs) the appointment of an incoming auditor.
                             Section C of this guide discusses considerations by directors and audit
                             committees relating to a change of auditor.

              RG 26.13       In particular, directors and audit committees of public companies should
                             consider whether a change of auditor should occur only at an annual general
                             meeting (AGM) of the company.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                              Page 6
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




How the requirements apply
              RG 26.14       Section D of this guide explains in more detail the requirements that apply to
                             different types of auditors under the relevant legislation. That is, auditors of:
                             (a)   public companies;
                             (b)   registered schemes, retail CCIVs and their respective compliance plans;
                             (c)   RSEs;
                             (d)   AFS licensees; and
                             (e)   credit licensee trust accounts.

              RG 26.15       It also gives guidance on what should be addressed in the application for
                             consent for each type of auditor and whether disclosure is required as a
                             condition of our consent.

              RG 26.16       Table 1 summarises the requirements and application processes for each type of
                             auditor. It also specifies that our consent is not required for:
                             (a)   the removal of an auditor of a company (other than the removal of an
                                   auditor of a retail CCIV or proprietary company that is an AFS licensee,
                                   or the replacement of an auditor of the trust account of a credit licensee
                                   that is a company);
                             (b)   the resignation of an auditor of a proprietary company or a small
                                   company limited by guarantee (except where the proprietary company
                                   is an AFS licensee or the company is a credit licensee); or
                             (c)   the resignation or removal of an auditor of a self-managed
                                   superannuation fund, exempt public sector superannuation scheme,
                                   excluded approved deposit fund or small APRA fund.

              RG 26.17       Applicants must lodge the forms listed in Table 1 with ASIC by mail at the
                             address listed on each form, as applicable, or use the ASIC Regulatory
                             Portal.



How to apply to ASIC for consent
              RG 26.18       Section E of this guide gives further guidance about the application process
                             and other procedural matters, including:
                             (a)   how and when to lodge an application;
                             (b)   how we assess an application;
                             (c)   what notification we will give of our decision;
                             (d)   when the resignation, removal or replacement takes effect; and
                             (e)   how to apply for a review of a decision if we refuse to give our consent.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                              Page 7
                                                                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




Table 1:     Overview of requirements and application process

 Type of auditor               ASIC consent                  Information to be provided         Disclosure of resignation or removal              Relevant forms*

 Public companies: see         Required for resignation      All the information in RG 26.34    No disclosure required if resignation at an       ASIC Regulatory Portal (‘Apply for
 RG 26.57–RG 26.80             of auditor                    and RG 26.36–RG 26.37 if           AGM                                               ASIC consent to resign as an
                                                             resignation is at an AGM           If resignation is other than at an AGM:           auditor of a public company or a
                               Not required for removal
                                                                                                                                                  registrable superannuation entity’)
                               of auditor                    All the information in RG 26.34–   • Depending on the circumstances, a
                                                             RG 26.37 if resignation is other     disclosing entity may be required to lodge a    Form 315
                                                             than at an AGM                       continuous disclosure notice with ASIC or
                                                                                                                                                  Form 1003
                                                                                                  the relevant market operator
                                                                                                • Even if a continuous disclosure notice is not
                                                                                                  required, ASIC considers it best practice to
                                                                                                  disclose to members (if the public company
                                                                                                  is not a disclosing entity or is a disclosing
                                                                                                  entity that does not need to lodge a
                                                                                                  continuous disclosure notice)

 Registered schemes and        Required for resignation      All the information in RG 26.34–   For resignation:                                  Form 1003
 their compliance plans:       or removal of auditor         RG 26.37                           • Depending on the circumstances, a               Form 5112
 see RG 26.81–RG 26.90                                                                            disclosing entity may be required to lodge a
                                                                                                  continuous disclosure notice with ASIC or       Form 5113
                                                                                                  the relevant market operator                    Form 5114
                                                                                                • Even if a continuous disclosure notice is not
                                                                                                                                                  Form 5132
                                                                                                  required, ASIC considers best practice to
                                                                                                  disclose to members (if the registered          Form 5133
                                                                                                  scheme is not a disclosing entity or is a
                                                                                                  disclosing entity that does not need to lodge
                                                                                                  a continuous disclosure notice)

                                                                                                For removal, disclosure to:
                                                                                                • any relevant market operator; or
                                                                                                • members




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                                                                             Page 8
                                                                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




 Type of auditor               ASIC consent                     Information to be provided         Disclosure of resignation or removal               Relevant forms*

 Retail CCIVs and their        Required for resignation         All the information in RG 26.34–   For resignation:                                   Form 1003
 compliance plans: see         or removal of auditor            RG 26.37                           • Depending on the circumstances, a                Form 5212
 RG 26.81–RG 26.90                                                                                   disclosing entity may be required to lodge a
                                                                                                     continuous disclosure notice with ASIC or        Form 5213
                                                                                                     the relevant market operator                     Form 5214
                                                                                                   • Even if a continuous disclosure notice is not
                                                                                                                                                      Form 5230
                                                                                                     required, ASIC considers it best practice to
                                                                                                     disclose to members (if the retail CCIV is not   Form 5232
                                                                                                     a disclosing entity or is a disclosing entity
                                                                                                                                                      Form 5233
                                                                                                     that does not need to lodge a continuous
                                                                                                     disclosure notice)

                                                                                                   For removal, disclosure to:
                                                                                                   • Any relevant market operator; or members

 RSEs: see RG 26.91–           Required for resignation         All the information in RG 26.34–   For resignation:                                   ASIC Regulatory Portal (‘Apply for
 RG 26.98                      or removal of auditor            RG 26.37                           • No disclosure is required but ASIC considers     ASIC consent to resign as an
                                                                                                     it best practice to make disclosure to members   auditor of a public company or a
                                                                                                     of the RSE                                       registrable superannuation entity’,
                                                                                                                                                      ‘Apply for ASIC consent to remove
                                                                                                   For removal:                                       a registrable superannuation
                                                                                                   • Disclosure to members of the RSE                 entity auditor’ and ‘Notify ASIC of
                                                                                                                                                      removal, resignation or cessation
                                                                                                                                                      of a registrable superannuation
                                                                                                                                                      entity auditor’)

 AFS licensees: see            Required for resignation         All the information in RG 26.34–   No disclosure required                             ASIC Regulatory Portal (‘Notify
 RG 26.99–RG 26.107            or removal of auditor            RG 26.37                                                                              ASIC or apply to ASIC about
                                 Note: If the AFS licensee is                                                                                         Australian financial services
                                 a public company, see also                                                                                           licensee auditor appointments’)
                                 the requirements for
                                 auditors of public                                                                                                   Form FS08
                                 companies above.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                                                                                 Page 9
                                                                                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




 Type of auditor                   ASIC consent                      Information to be provided                 Disclosure of resignation or removal               Relevant forms*

 Credit licensee trust             Required for resignation          All the information in RG 26.34–           No disclosure required                             Form CL17
 accounts: see                     or replacement of auditor         RG 26.37
                                                                                                                                                                   Form CL18
 RG 26.108–RG 26.113                  Note: In this guide,
                                      ‘consent’ includes
                                      ‘approval’ in the context of
                                      the National Credit
                                      Regulations.

 Proprietary companies or          Not required (unless the          —                                          —                                                  —
 small companies limited           company is an AFS
 by guarantee                      licensee (proprietary
                                   company) or a credit
                                   licensee: see above)

 Exempt public sector              Not required                      —                                          —                                                  —
 superannuation schemes

 Excluded approved                 Not required                      —                                          —                                                  —
 deposit funds

 Self-managed                      Not required                      —                                          —                                                  —
 superannuation funds

 Small APRA funds                  Not required                      —                                          —                                                  —


* For the full titles of forms, including forms relating to the appointment of auditors, see ‘Related information’ at the end of this guide.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                                                                                             Page 10
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




B          Our general approach to change of auditor

                               Key points

                               This section explains our general approach when considering whether to
                               give consent to the resignation, removal or replacement of an auditor.

                               It gives guidance on:
                               • when we will give our consent (see RG 26.19–RG 26.37); and
                               • other circumstances that may result in a change of auditor (see
                                 RG 26.38–RG 26.47).




When we will give our consent

                             Matters considered for all applications

              RG 26.19       In exercising ASIC’s powers to consent to the resignation, removal or
                             replacement of an auditor, our overriding concerns are to ensure that the
                             quality and independence of the audit function are preserved.

              RG 26.20       In particular, when deciding whether to consent to the resignation, removal
                             or replacement of an auditor, we will consider:
                             (a)   any threats to the independence of the auditor (see RG 26.48–RG 26.51);
                             (b)   whether the timing of any change in auditor may have an impact on the
                                   effective completion of an audit by the incoming auditor (see RG 26.53–
                                   RG 26.56); and
                             (c)   the statutory right of members of a public company to decide on the
                                   appointment of new auditor at an AGM (see RG 26.53–RG 26.54).

              RG 26.21       In general, we will give our consent to the resignation, removal or
                             replacement of an auditor of a public company, registered scheme or retail
                             CCIV (and their respective compliance plans), RSE, AFS licensee or credit
                             licensee trust account if:
                             (a)   we consider that there is no evidence of an actual or perceived
                                   compromise of the auditor’s independence;
                             (b)   there is no evidence of ‘opinion shopping’ (see RG 26.22–RG 26.25);
                             (c)   we are not concerned by the nature and extent of any disagreements with
                                   management or directors of the company, registered scheme’s responsible
                                   entity, retail CCIV’s corporate director, superannuation trustee, AFS
                                   licensee or credit licensee (see RG 26.26–RG 26.31);
                             (d)   there is an inability by the auditor to fulfil all of their obligations under
                                   relevant legislation and standards due to a genuine incapacity of the



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 11
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                                    auditor to complete the audit engagement that is beyond their control
                                    (e.g. relocation of the audited entity to another state in which the auditor
                                    has no office), as opposed to a disagreement with management or directors;
                             (e)    given the timing of the proposed change in auditors, there is no reason
                                    to suggest that the proposed incoming auditor could not conduct an
                                    effective audit;
                             (f)    all the information and documents have been provided with the
                                    application, as applicable; and
                             (g)    there are no other circumstances or matters connected with the auditor
                                    ceasing to hold office that should be brought to our attention (see
                                    RG 26.32–RG 26.37).


                             Opinion shopping

              RG 26.22       ‘Opinion shopping’ is the practice of searching for an auditor willing to
                             support a particular accounting treatment. It involves an entity
                             communicating with an auditor about their views on specific or proposed
                             accounting treatments before a new appointment.

              RG 26.23       We are unlikely to consent to the resignation, removal or replacement of an
                             auditor that appears to be connected to opinion shopping.

              RG 26.24       An auditor approached by an entity’s directors to be appointed as auditor
                             should not in any way respond to requests from the entity to confirm whether
                             any accounting treatments or proposed treatments are acceptable.

                                   Note: This generally does not preclude an entity from obtaining accounting advice from
                                   an independent source that is in no way connected with a possible future change in
                                   auditors—see also Information Sheet 183 Directors and financial reporting (INFO 183).

              RG 26.25       We will consider any modified audit opinion provided within the two most
                             recent financial years (and any subsequent interim period) as part of our
                             assessment of any application for the resignation, removal or replacement of
                             an auditor.


                             Disagreements

              RG 26.26       For the purposes of RG 26.21(c), ‘disagreement’ includes any difference of
                             opinion that (if not resolved to the satisfaction of the outgoing auditor)
                             would have caused the auditor to refer to the subject matter of the
                             disagreement in their audit report or in contravention notifications to ASIC
                             (e.g. under s311).

              RG 26.27       ‘Disagreement’, therefore, does not include a situation where:
                             (a)    there is an initial difference of opinion based on incomplete facts or
                                    preliminary information; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                   Page 12
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             (b)   that difference of opinion is later resolved to the outgoing auditor’s
                                   satisfaction due to additional relevant facts or information.

              RG 26.28       Examples of disagreements that we would expect the outgoing auditor to tell
                             ASIC about include:
                             (a)   disagreements concerning a choice of accounting policies, principles or
                                   practices;
                             (b)   disagreements concerning accounting estimates or financial report
                                   disclosure;
                             (c)   officers not providing information or explanations to the auditor or
                                   other difficulties obtaining information for the audit, including from
                                   audited entity associates and/or advisers;
                             (d)   limitations on the scope of the audit in the two most recent financial
                                   years and any subsequent interim period;
                             (e)   disagreements concerning whether a breach exists that needs to be
                                   reported;
                             (f)   disagreements about the auditor’s audit scope or procedures; or
                             (g)   the auditor not being able to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence
                                   about a component in the financial statements, which could result in
                                   them modifying their audit opinion.

                             This is not an exhaustive list. We encourage auditors to contact ASIC if they
                             have doubt as to whether or not there is a disagreement.

              RG 26.29       Matters notified to ASIC should include those that have been covered in the
                             most recent audit or review report.

              RG 26.30       Disagreements do not include disputes of a commercial nature between the
                             auditor and the client (e.g. non-payment of audit fees).

              RG 26.31       We are unlikely to consent to the resignation, removal or replacement of an
                             auditor if the auditor is unable to fulfil all of their obligations under relevant
                             legislation and standards due to a disagreement of the type referred to in
                             RG 26.28.


                             Information to be provided with applications
              RG 26.32       An application for our consent to a resignation must be lodged by or on behalf
                             of the appointed auditor. An application for our consent to a removal must be
                             lodged by or on behalf of the audited entity.

              RG 26.33       For the purposes of RG 26.21(f), the following information should be provided
                             with any applications, as applicable:
                             (a)   a statement from the outgoing auditor addressing key considerations
                                   (see RG 26.34);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 13
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             (b)   additional information from the outgoing auditor (except where the
                                   resignation of an auditor of a public company will take effect at an AGM)
                                   (see RG 26.35);
                             (c)   information from the entity (see RG 26.36); and
                             (d)   confirmation of the proposed incoming auditor (see RG 26.37).

                             Statement from the outgoing auditor

              RG 26.34       The applicant seeking our consent to any resignation, removal or
                             replacement of an auditor should provide a statement from the outgoing
                             auditor as to:
                             (a)   whether all matters that require reporting to ASIC and APRA under
                                   relevant legislation and standards have been reported at the date of the
                                   application, and that any further such matters that come to the outgoing
                                   auditor’s attention before the resignation, removal or replacement will
                                   be reported;
                                   Note: Under s311, 324CA-CC, 324CE-CG, 601HG, 990K and 1226H of the Corporations
                                   Act and s104 of the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 auditors must report
                                   certain matters to ASIC—see Regulatory Guide 34 Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC
                                   (RG 34). Auditors also have obligations to report matters to APRA under legislation—see,
                                   for example, s129–130AA, 130BA–130BAA and 130C–130CA of the SIS Act and s88 of
                                   the Life Insurance Act.

                             (b)   whether there are any disagreements with management or directors of
                                   the public company, registered scheme’s responsible entity, retail
                                   CCIV’s corporate director, superannuation trustee, AFS licensee or
                                   credit licensee (see RG 26.26–RG 26.31);
                             (c)   whether there is any evidence of opinion shopping (see RG 26.22–RG 26.25);
                             (d)   whether there are any other circumstances or matters connected with the
                                   auditor ceasing to hold office that should be brought to our attention
                                   (see RG 26.38–RG 26.47);
                             (e)   whether, for a resignation, the auditor has notified directors of the
                                   public company, responsible entity, corporate director, superannuation
                                   trustee, AFS licensee or credit licensee in writing of their application to
                                   ASIC for consent to resign;
                             (f)   whether the auditor is aware of any reasons the audit is unable to be
                                   completed under relevant legislation and standards, including any
                                   specific legislative requirements.

                             Additional information from the outgoing auditor

              RG 26.35       For resignations, other than for the resignation of the auditor of a public
                             company that will take effect at an AGM, the outgoing auditor should
                             provide the following additional information with their application:

                             (a)   details of the timing of the proposed resignation; and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                 Page 14
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             (b)   whether the auditor provided an adverse or disclaimer opinion or
                                   qualification within the two most recent financial years and any
                                   subsequent interim period.

                             Information from the entity

              RG 26.36       The directors of a public company, responsible entity, corporate director,
                             superannuation trustee, AFS licensee or credit licensee should also provide
                             the following information with the application:
                             (a)   evidence that the entity has approved the appointment of the proposed
                                   incoming auditor subject to our consent to the resignation, removal or
                                   replacement of the outgoing auditor, as follows:
                                   (i)     for a public company, a resolution of the directors which may
                                           also have reference to the appointment being subject to approval
                                           at an AGM;
                                   (ii)    for a registered scheme or retail CCIV (and their respective
                                           compliance plans), a resolution of the directors of the responsible
                                           entity or the directors of the corporate director, as applicable;
                                   (iii)   for an RSE, a resolution of the directors of the superannuation
                                           trustee (or the individual trustees if the trustee is not a body
                                           corporate); and
                                   (iv)    for an AFS licensee or credit licensee trust account, a resolution of
                                           the directors or members of a company, the partners of a
                                           partnership or the individual who is the licensee; and
                             (b)   whether there are any disagreements with the auditor.

                             Confirmation of the proposed incoming auditor

              RG 26.37       The application should be accompanied by a letter from the proposed
                             incoming auditor:
                             (a)   agreeing to be appointed, subject to our consent to the resignation,
                                   removal or replacement of the outgoing auditor;
                             (b)   confirming their ability to fulfil obligations they will have as auditor
                                   under relevant legislation and standards; and
                             (c)   if the change is close to the reporting deadline, confirming that they can
                                   reasonably expect to conduct an effective audit before the reporting
                                   deadline.



Other circumstances that may result in change of auditor
              RG 26.38       We have set out some other circumstances that may result in a change of
                             auditor: see RG 26.39–RG 26.47. This is not an exhaustive list. In general,




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                              Page 15
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             ASIC expects an entity to notify us within 14 days after an auditor ceases for
                             one of these reasons, although there is a variation of this expectation for
                             credit licensees: see Section D.


                             Auditor ineligibility, incapacity or death

              RG 26.39       An auditor’s appointment will automatically terminate as outlined in this
                             guide if an auditor:
                             (a)   ceases to meet the registration requirements under Division 2 of
                                   Pt 2M.4;
                             (b)   ceases to meet the eligibility requirements to perform an RSE audit
                                   under Div 2A of Pt 2M.4 or other relevant legislation and standards;
                             (c)   is an individual auditor and ceases to be eligible to play a significant
                                   role in the audit of an entity due to auditor rotation obligations under
                                   Div 5 of Pt 2M.4; or
                             (d)   is an individual auditor and dies.

                                   Note: There are obligations to notify APRA if an auditor ceases to meet eligibility
                                   requirements in APRA prudential standards: see Prudential Standard CPS 520 Fit and
                                   proper, Prudential Standard SPS 520 Fit and proper, Prudential Standard CPS 510
                                   Governance and Prudential Standard SPS 510 Governance.


                             Loss of independence

              RG 26.40       An auditor must take reasonable steps as soon as practicable after becoming
                             aware of a conflict of interest situation or circumstance, to bring that
                             situation or circumstance to an end: see the auditor independence
                             requirements in Div 3 of Pt 2M.4. If the situation or circumstance continues
                             for more than seven days, the auditor must notify ASIC: see s327B(2A)–
                             (2C), 331AAA(2A)–(2C) or 331AH(3)–(5). If the conflict of interest
                             situation or circumstance is not resolved within the relevant timeframe, the
                             appointment of the auditor ceases automatically and our consent to the
                             resignation or removal is not required. For further guidance about auditor
                             reporting obligations, see RG 34.

                             Disqualification by a court

              RG 26.41       An auditor may be disqualified from being, or acting as, an auditor of an
                             RSE by a court under s130D and 130EA of the SIS Act. If this happens,
                             section 35AC of the SIS Act requires the superannuation trustee to end the
                             appointment of the RSE auditor. As the auditor is ineligible, the appointment
                             of the auditor ceases and the trustee should notify ASIC within 14 days.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                 Page 16
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             Deliberate disqualification
              RG 26.42       The appointed auditor of a company, registered scheme or RSE must not
                             disqualify themselves deliberately from acting as auditor: see s324CM. That
                             is, in the course of their appointment, an auditor must not bring about a state
                             of affairs that would make the auditor contravene the registration and auditor
                             independence requirements in Divs 2 and 3 of Pt 2M.4.

              RG 26.43       An appointed auditor of an AFS licensee must not deliberately disqualify
                             themselves from acting as the auditor of the licensee: see s990D(2).

              RG 26.44       If it appears that the auditor may have deliberately disqualified themselves,
                             we may take action in relation to the contravention. Our consent to the
                             resignation or removal does not preclude ASIC from taking enforcement
                             action in relation to a contravention of the law.


                             Mergers, acquisitions and dissolutions of audit firms

              RG 26.45       Mergers or acquisitions of audit firms do not just involve a name change for
                             one of the firms: at least one firm will cease to exist. In this case, a change in
                             auditors should be effected as outlined in this guide.

              RG 26.46       An audit firm that is a partnership may be dissolved before our consent to
                             the auditor’s resignation or removal has been obtained. If this happens, the
                             audit appointment vests in each member of the firm who is a registered
                             company auditor: see s324AB(1)–(2) and regs 7.8.15(2)–(3) of the
                             Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations). The
                             appointment of such a member as auditor is not affected by the dissolution
                             (except in circumstances relating to reconstitution of the firm). We therefore
                             expect the provisions of the Corporations Act on the resignation and removal
                             of auditors to apply to each registered company auditor of the firm.

              RG 26.47       If a firm is reconstituted through the normal withdrawal of a member, our
                             consent to a resignation or removal is not required unless the withdrawing
                             member is the last remaining registered company auditor: see s324AC and
                             regs 7.8.15(4)–(5) of the Corporations Regulations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 17
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




C          The role of directors and audit committees

                               Key points

                               This section briefly discusses considerations for directors and audit
                               committees in:
                               • supporting auditor independence and audit quality (see RG 26.48–
                                 RG 26.52); and
                               • determining the timing of a change in auditor (see RG 26.53–RG 26.56),
                                 including supporting the right of members of public companies to decide
                                 on the appointment of a proposed incoming auditor.



Auditor independence and audit quality
              RG 26.48       Directors and audit committees can play an important role in:
                             (a)   ensuring the independence of auditors from undue influence by
                                   management and others; and
                             (b)   promoting audit quality.

              RG 26.49       Where there is good corporate governance, audit committees and directors
                             can provide a measure of protection for members, as well as over the audit
                             process. Auditor independence and audit quality are important to the quality
                             of financial reporting.


                             Auditor independence

              RG 26.50       Auditor independence is fundamental to the credibility and reliability of an
                             auditor’s report. An auditor must exercise objective and impartial judgement
                             in conducting an audit and must be able to report the audit findings free from
                             any pressure and undue influence from others. Auditors are also required to
                             report attempts to unduly influence, interfere or mislead. For further
                             guidance, see RG 34.

              RG 26.51       For example, the threat of removal from office by directors of a company,
                             responsible entity, corporate director or superannuation trustee, or other
                             officers, could be used to exert pressure or influence on the auditor. If there
                             is potential uncertainty about the continuation of an auditor at the time that a
                             financial report is completed, this may create a threat to independence.


                             Audit quality

              RG 26.52       We have provided the following guidance on audit quality:
                             (a)   Information Sheet 196 Audit quality: The role of directors and audit
                                   committees (INFO 196) (includes information on matters that directors



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 18
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                                   and audit committees may consider in connection with replacing
                                   auditors);
                             (b)   Information Sheet 222 Improving and maintaining audit quality
                                   (INFO 222); and
                             (c)   Information Sheet 223 Audit quality: The role of others (INFO 223).



Timing of change in auditor and maintaining members’ rights

                             Public companies

              RG 26.53       Directors and audit committees of public companies should consider whether
                             any resignation should take place at the next AGM to ensure that the rights
                             of the members to appoint auditors are maintained and the independence and
                             objectivity of auditors is protected.

              RG 26.54       Members of public companies have the right to appoint auditors at an AGM.
                             The resignation of an auditor during a financial year can lead to a new
                             auditor being appointed by the directors and undertaking an audit before the
                             appointment has been considered by the members at an AGM.


                             Registered schemes, retail CCIVs and RSEs

              RG 26.55       Registered schemes, retail CCIVs and RSEs do not have AGMs. The
                             appointment of an auditor of a registered scheme or retail CCIV (and their
                             respective compliance plans) or RSE is controlled by the applicable
                             responsible entity, corporate director or superannuation trustee, and not by
                             members.

                                   Note: Trustees of RSEs (other than pooled superannuation trusts) must hold an annual
                                   members’ meeting (AMM) for each year of income where members must be given
                                   reasonable opportunities to ask questions—see s29P of the SIS Act. Unlike an AGM,
                                   there is no formal voting on resolutions at AMMs.

              RG 26.56       This does not mean that the independence of auditors and audit quality are
                             less important. Directors of the responsible entity, corporate director or
                             superannuation trustee should consider whether the auditor of a registered
                             scheme or retail CCIV (and their respective compliance plans) or RSE as
                             applicable should change immediately after completion of the audit report.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                  Page 19
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




D          How the requirements apply

                               Key points

                               This section explains in more detail the requirements that apply and what
                               should be addressed in the application for:
                               • the resignation of an auditor of a public company under s329(5) and
                                 329(6) (see RG 26.57–RG 26.80);
                               • the resignation or removal of an auditor of a registered scheme or retail
                                 CCIV (and their respective compliance plans) under s331AC (including
                                 as it applies under s1232R(2)), 601HH and 1226J) (see RG 26.81–
                                 RG 26.90);
                               • the resignation or removal of an RSE auditor under s331AK(1) and
                                 331AK(2) (see RG 26.91–RG 26.98);
                               • the resignation or removal of an auditor of an AFS licensee under
                                 s990F(b) and 990G(1) (see RG 26.99–RG 26.107); and
                               • the resignation or replacement of an auditor of a credit licensee trust
                                 account (trust account auditor) under regs 19(4)(d) and 19(4)(e) of the
                                 National Credit Regulations (see RG 26.108–RG 26.113.


Auditors of public companies
              RG 26.57       The auditor of a public company may resign if the auditor has applied, in
                             writing, to ASIC for our consent to the resignation and we have granted our
                             consent: see s329(5) and 329(6).

                                   Note: Our consent is not required for the resignation of an auditor of a proprietary
                                   company or a small company limited by guarantee, except for an auditor of a
                                   proprietary company that is an AFS licensee (see RG 26.99–RG 26.107) or an auditor
                                   of a credit licensee trust account (see RG 26.108–RG 26.113).

              RG 26.58       An auditor of a public company should submit their resignation application
                             through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.

                                   Note: For more information about lodging a resignation application as a public
                                   company auditor, see Information Sheet 65 Resignation of an auditor of a public
                                   company (INFO 65).

              RG 26.59       In addition, the public company must:
                             (a)   notify ASIC of the resignation using Form 315 Notification of
                                   resignation, removal or cessation of auditor; and
                             (b)   if applicable, give a trustee for the holders of debentures in the company
                                   a copy of the Form 315 lodged with ASIC (see s329(11)).

                             The company must do this within 14 days of receiving the auditor’s notice of
                             resignation.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                  Page 20
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




              RG 26.60       The appointment of an auditor is primarily a matter for the members. While
                             the directors must fill any vacancy in the office of auditor that occurs other
                             than at an AGM (s327C(1)), the incoming auditor’s term will expire at the
                             next AGM. In this case, the members must appoint an auditor at the next
                             AGM: see s327B(1)(b).

                             Resignations that take effect at an AGM

              RG 26.61       The auditor of a public company can apply for our consent to the resignation
                             taking effect at the next AGM. The following information should be
                             provided with the application:
                             (a)   a statement by the outgoing auditor addressing key considerations (see
                                   RG 26.34);
                             (b)   information from the entity (see RG 26.36); and
                             (c)   confirmation of the proposed incoming auditor (see RG 26.37).

              RG 26.62       We would generally expect the auditor to lodge a resignation application
                             before the auditor’s report is signed. This will help to minimise any impact
                             an unresolved decision about the resignation might have on the
                             independence of the auditor during the completion of the audit process and
                             ensure that this decision and the appointment of an incoming auditor does
                             not interfere with this process.

              RG 26.63       In general, we will consent to the resignation of an auditor that takes effect at
                             the next AGM, subject to the matters in RG 26.21.

              RG 26.64       If a vacancy in the office of auditor of a public company occurs at the AGM,
                             the company must appoint a new auditor: see s327B(1)(b). Under s328B, the
                             nomination of an incoming auditor should be received by the company from
                             a member of the company before the meeting is convened, or not less than
                             21 days before the meeting.

                             Resignations that take effect other than at an AGM

              RG 26.65       If the auditor of a public company wishes to resign on a date other than at an
                             AGM, they should provide the following information with the application:
                             (a)   a statement by the outgoing auditor addressing key considerations (see
                                   RG 26.34);
                             (b)   additional information from the outgoing auditor (see RG 26.35);
                             (c)   information from the entity (see RG 26.36); and
                             (d)   confirmation of the proposed incoming auditor (see RG 26.37).

              RG 26.66       In general, we will consent to the resignation of an auditor of a public
                             company to take effect at any time of the year, subject to:
                             (a)   the considerations in RG 26.21; and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 21
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             (b)   the matters in RG 26.67–RG 26.69, as applicable.

                             Effective date of resignation of auditor

              RG 26.67       We may consent to the resignation of an auditor of a public company other
                             than at an AGM. If we do, the resignation will take effect at the later of:
                             (a)   the day of our consent;
                             (b)   the day (if any) specified in the notice of resignation given by the
                                   auditor to the company; or;
                             (c)   a day that we specify (if any).

              RG 26.68       If we consent to the resignation of an auditor of a public company that is a
                             disclosing entity other than at an AGM then, depending on the
                             circumstances, the public company may be required to lodge a continuous
                             disclosure notice with ASIC or the relevant market operator, containing:
                             (a)   details of the outgoing auditor;
                             (b)   details of the proposed incoming auditor; and
                             (c)   the reason for the change in auditor.
                                   Note: An unlisted disclosing entity may notify ASIC using Form 1003 Disclosure
                                   notice for unlisted disclosing entity.

              RG 26.69       If we consent to the resignation of an auditor, other than at an AGM, for a
                             public company that is not a disclosing entity or is a disclosing entity that
                             does not need to lodge a continuous disclosure notice (see RG 26.68), ASIC
                             considers it best practice to disclose the details in RG 26.68, at or around the
                             date when the resignation takes effect, by public notice displayed
                             prominently on the company’s website where the notice can reasonably be
                             readily located and accessed by members.


                             Single member public companies

              RG 26.70       A single member public company can elect not to hold an AGM under
                             s250N(4). However, our consent to the resignation of an auditor is still
                             required under s329(5) to ensure that the auditor’s independence is preserved
                             and the incoming auditor can conduct an effective audit.

              RG 26.71       The auditor should provide the following information with the application:
                             (a)   a statement by the outgoing auditor addressing key considerations (see
                                   RG 26.34);
                             (b)   additional information from the outgoing auditor (see RG 26.35);
                             (c)   information from the entity (see RG 26.36); and
                             (d)   confirmation of the proposed incoming auditor (see RG 26.37).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                Page 22
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




              RG 26.72       In general, we will consent to the resignation of an auditor of a single
                             member public company at any time of the year, subject to the matters in
                             RG 26.21.

                             Public companies registered with the Australian Charities
                             and Not-for-Profits Commission (ACNC)

              RG 26.73       The most common type of company structure used by charities that are
                             registered with the ACNC is ‘a public company limited by guarantee’.
                             Public companies limited by guarantee and registered with the ACNC, where
                             they have an appointed auditor, will require our consent to the resignation of
                             an auditor, under s329(5), and must follow the auditor removal process as set
                             out in s329(1)–(4), see: RG 26.76–RG 26.80.

                                   Note: For more information on companies limited by guarantee, including auditor
                                   appointment, resignation and removals, see Information Sheet 131 Obligations of
                                   companies limited by guarantee (INFO 131).

              RG 26.74       The auditor should provide the information outlined in RG 26.34–RG 26.37
                             with the resignation application.

              RG 26.75       In general, we will consent to the resignation of an auditor of an ACNC
                             public company limited by guarantee that takes effect at the next AGM or at
                             any time of the year, subject to the matters in RG 26.21.

                             Removal of an auditor

              RG 26.76       Our consent is not required for the removal of an auditor of a company.

                                   Note: Although a retail CCIV is a company, consent is required for the removal of a
                                   retail CCIV auditor—see RG 26.81.

              RG 26.77       Removal of an auditor of a company requires the approval of company
                             members at a general meeting. The removal process is set out in s329(1)–(4),
                             including the requirement to give the auditor the opportunity to provide
                             written representations to be sent to all members and read out at the general
                             meeting. The auditor also has the right to be heard at the general meeting.

                                   Note: For more information on the steps involved in the removal process, including an
                                   example notice of intention, see Information Sheet 62 Removal of an auditor of a
                                   company (INFO 62).

              RG 26.78       Directors or members of a company who want to remove the company’s
                             auditor must give the company a notice of intention to remove the auditor as
                             part of the removal process: see s329(1A). The company must also send a
                             copy of this notice to the auditor and lodge it with ASIC as soon as possible:
                             see s329(2). The address for lodgement is:
                                   Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                                   PO Box 4000
                                   Gippsland Mail Centre
                                   VIC 3841



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                   Page 23
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




              RG 26.79       If a resolution to remove an auditor is carried at a general meeting, the
                             company must:
                             (a)   notify ASIC of the removal using Form 315, and
                             (b)   if applicable, give a trustee for the holders of debentures in the company
                                   a copy of the Form 315 lodged with ASIC (see s329(11)).

                             The company must do this within 14 days of removing the auditor.

              RG 26.80       We may review the removal of an auditor where circumstances of the
                             removal suggest that there may have been contraventions of the
                             Corporations Act. If we find contraventions, we will take appropriate action.



Auditors of registered schemes or retail CCIVs (and their respective
compliance plans)
              RG 26.81       If an auditor of a registered scheme or retail CCIV (and their respective
                             compliance plans) wishes to resign, they must apply to ASIC in writing for
                             our consent. If the responsible entity or corporate director wishes to remove
                             an auditor of their entity or their compliance plan from office, they must also
                             apply to ASIC in writing.

                                   Note: See s331AC(1) and 331AC(2) (including as they apply under s1232R(2)),
                                   601HH(2) and 1226J(3).

              RG 26.82       A responsible entity or corporate director must notify ASIC within 14 days
                             of receiving a notice of resignation or removing an auditor: see s331AC(7),
                             including as it applies under s1232R(2). Responsible entities and corporate
                             directors must also notify ASIC within 14 days of appointing an auditor of a
                             registered scheme or retail CCIV to fill a vacancy: see reg 2M.4.01 of the
                             Corporations Regulations and notional s1232R(3) (as inserted by ASIC
                             Corporations (CCIV Auditors) Instrument 2024/668). In the case of the
                             appointment of a retail CCIV auditor, corporate directors must notify ASIC
                             within 14 days of the appointment.

                                   Note: For more information about the process to resign as or remove an auditor of a
                                   registered scheme or retail CCIV (and their respective compliance plans): see
                                   Information Sheet 64 Resignation and removal of auditors of registered schemes, retail
                                   CCIVs, compliance plans and registrable superannuation entities (INFO 64).

              RG 26.83       Table 2 lists forms that the auditor of a registered scheme or retail CCIV (or
                             their respective compliance plans), responsible entity or corporate director
                             should lodge and their respective purposes:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                   Page 24
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




Table 2:      List of ASIC forms

 Registered schemes                                                  Retail CCIVs

 Form 5132 Application for consent from ASIC for                     Form 5232 Application for consent from ASIC for
 resignation or removal of registered scheme auditor                 resignation or removal of auditor for CCIV

 Form 5112 Application for consent from ASIC to                      Form 5212 Application for consent from ASIC to
 remove compliance plan auditor                                      remove compliance plan auditor of a CCIV

 Form 5113 Application for consent from ASIC to                      Form 5213 Application for consent from ASIC to
 resign as compliance plan auditor                                   resign as compliance plan auditor of a CCIV

 Form 5114 Notification of request by responsible                    Form 5214 Notification of request by corporate
 entity to change compliance plan auditor                            director to change compliance plan auditor of a CCIV

 Form 5133 Notification of resignation, removal or                   Form 5230 Notification of appointment of auditor for a
 cessation of a registered scheme auditor                            CCIV

 Form 5137 Notification of appointment of scheme                     Form 5233 Notification of resignation, removal, or
 auditor                                                             cessation of retail CCIV auditor

Source: For the full titles of forms, see ‘Related information’ at the end of this guide.


                 RG 26.84         The following information should be provided with any resignation or
                                  removal application:
                                  (a)   a statement by the outgoing auditor addressing key considerations (see
                                        RG 26.34);
                                  (b)   additional information from the outgoing auditor (see RG 26.35);
                                  (c)   information from the entity (see RG 26.36); and
                                  (d)   confirmation of the proposed incoming auditor (see RG 26.37).

                 RG 26.85         In general, we will consent to the resignation or removal of an auditor of a
                                  registered scheme or retail CCIV (and their respective compliance plans) to
                                  take effect at any time of the year, subject to:
                                  (a)   the considerations in RG 26.21; and
                                  (b)   the matters in RG 26.87–RG 26.90, as applicable.

                 RG 26.86         The auditor of a registered scheme or retail CCIV compliance plan may
                                  become ineligible to act under s601HG(2) or 1226F(3). If this happens, the
                                  responsible entity or corporate director (as applicable) must remove the
                                  auditor: see s601HH(1)(a) and 1226J(1)(a). Our consent is not required in
                                  this case.
                                        Note: If the auditor of a registered scheme or retail CCIV has become ineligible to act
                                        under Divs 2 or 3 of Pt 2M.4, the auditor ceases to hold office under s331AAA(2)
                                        (including as it applies under s1232R(2)). The auditor of a registered scheme or a retail
                                        CCIV ceases to hold office if the scheme or retail CCIV is wound up: see s331AD
                                        (including as it applies under s1232R(2) and s1232S(2).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                           Page 25
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             Effective date of resignation or removal of an auditor

              RG 26.87       If we consent to the resignation of an auditor of a registered scheme or retail
                             CCIV (and their compliance plans), the resignation will take effect on the
                             later of:
                             (a)   the day of our consent; or
                             (b)   the day (if any) specified in the notice of resignation given by the
                                   auditor to the scheme or CCIV; or
                             (c)   a day that we specify (if any).

              RG 26.88       If we consent to the removal of an auditor of a registered scheme or retail
                             CCIV (and their compliance plans), the removal will take effect when all of
                             the consent conditions have been met. This will generally involve disclosure
                             of the following details to any relevant market operator, or to members of
                             the scheme or CCIV (as applicable), by a public notice displayed
                             prominently on the responsible entity’s or corporate director’s website where
                             the notice can reasonably be readily located and accessed by members:
                             (a)   details of the outgoing auditor;
                             (b)   details of the proposed incoming auditor, and
                             (c)   the reason for the change in auditor.

              RG 26.89       If we consent to the resignation of an auditor of a registered scheme or retail
                             CCIV (and their compliance plans) that is a disclosing entity, then,
                             depending on the circumstances, the responsible entity or corporate director
                             may be required to lodge a continuous disclosure notice with ASIC or the
                             relevant market operator containing the details listed at RG 26.88.
                                   Note: An unlisted disclosing entity may notify ASIC using Form 1003 Disclosure notice
                                   for unlisted disclosing entity.

              RG 26.90       If we consent to the resignation of an auditor of a registered scheme or retail
                             CCIV (and their compliance plans) that is not a disclosing entity, or is a
                             disclosing entity that does not need to lodge a continuous disclosure notice,
                             ASIC considers it best practice to disclose the details listed at RG 26.88, at
                             or around the date when the resignation takes effect, by public notice
                             displayed prominently on the responsible entity’s or corporate director’s
                             website where the notice can reasonably be readily located and accessed
                             by members.


Auditors of RSEs
              RG 26.91       On 1 July 2023, all RSE auditors that had been appointed under the SIS Act
                             were deemed to be the appointed RSE auditors for their respective RSEs
                             under Ch 2M of the Corporations Act: see s331AF(2). All such
                             appointments were individuals. From 1 July 2023, an audit firm or company
                             may be appointed as an RSE auditor when a vacancy arises.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                 Page 26
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




              RG 26.92       An RSE auditor who wishes to resign, or a superannuation trustee that
                             wishes to remove an RSE auditor from office, must apply to ASIC for our
                             consent: see s331AK(1) and 331AK(2). Both applications should be
                             submitted through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.

              RG 26.93       The applicant should provide the following information with their
                             resignation or removal application:
                             (a)   a statement by the outgoing RSE auditor addressing key considerations
                                   (see RG 26.34);
                             (b)   additional information from the outgoing RSE auditor (see RG 26.35);
                             (c)   information from the superannuation trustee (see RG 26.36); and
                             (d)   confirmation of the proposed incoming RSE auditor (see RG 26.37).

                                   Note: For more information about the process to resign as, or remove, an RSE auditor,
                                   see Information Sheet 288 Resignation and removal of auditors of registrable
                                   superannuation entities (INFO 288).

              RG 26.94       We may consult with APRA in relation to the resignation, removal or
                             appointment of an RSE auditor. We will also consider obligations on RSE
                             auditors in relevant APRA prudential standards.

              RG 26.95       In general, we will consent to the resignation or removal of an RSE auditor
                             to take effect at any time of the year, subject to:
                             (a)   the considerations in RG 26.21; and
                             (b)   the matters in RG 26.96–RG 26.98, as applicable.


                             Effective date of resignation or removal of an auditor

              RG 26.96       If we consent to the resignation of an RSE auditor, the resignation will take
                             effect on the later of:
                                   (i)     the day of our consent;
                                   (ii)    the day (if any) specified in the notice of resignation given by the
                                           auditor to the superannuation trustee; or;
                                   (iii)   a day that we specify (if any).

              RG 26.97       If we consent to the removal of an RSE auditor, the removal will take effect
                             when all of the consent conditions have been met. This will generally
                             involve disclosure of the following details to members of the RSE by a
                             public notice displayed prominently on the RSE’s website where the notice
                             can reasonably be readily located and accessed by members:
                             (a)   details of the outgoing auditor;
                             (b)   details of the proposed incoming auditor; and
                             (c)   the reason for the change in auditor.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                   Page 27
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




              RG 26.98       If we consent to the resignation of an RSE auditor, no disclosure is required,
                             however, ASIC considers it best practice to make disclosure of the details in
                             RG 26.97 to members of the RSE.



Auditors of AFS licensees
              RG 26.99       The audit of an AFS licensee involves conducting a financial audit and a
                             compliance audit as to whether the licensee is complying with certain
                             requirements of the Corporations Act and their AFS licence.

              RG 26.100      An auditor of an AFS licensee may resign if the auditor has applied, in
                             writing, to ASIC for our consent and we have granted our consent: see
                             s990G(1). Our consent must also be obtained if an AFS licensee wishes to
                             remove an auditor from office: see s990F.

                                   Note 1: If an AFS licensee is a public company, s990B–990H do not apply (s990A), and
                                   the resignation and removal of an auditor occurs under s329: see RG 26.57–RG 26.80.

                                   Note 2: Where the AFS licensee is a proprietary company and engages an auditor under
                                   s325 to audit its financial report, the resignation and removal of the auditor occurs under
                                   s329. In this case, our consent is not required and the company must lodge Form 315
                                   within 14 days after receiving the notice of resignation from the auditor or after the
                                   removal: see s329(11)(c).

              RG 26.101      An auditor of an AFS licensee can apply for ASIC consent to resign. The
                             auditor must use Form FS08 Application for consent from ASIC to resign as
                             an auditor of an Australian financial services licensee.

              RG 26.102      In addition, the AFS licensee can apply for ASIC consent to remove an
                             auditor from office. The AFS licensees must also notify ASIC as soon as
                             practicable after being advised that an auditor:
                             (a)   has died; or
                             (b)   is prohibited from acting under s990D(1) (see reg 7.8.15(9) of the
                                   Corporations Regulations).

                             Both the application and notification by the AFS licensee must be submitted
                             through the ASIC Regulatory Portal (‘Notify ASIC or apply to ASIC about
                             Australian financial services licensee auditor appointments’).
                                   Note: Once the position of auditor becomes vacant, a new auditor must be appointed
                                   within 14 days—see s990B(2) and reg 7.8.15(8) of the Corporations Regulations. The
                                   AFS licensee is then required to notify ASIC of the appointment, through the ASIC
                                   Regulatory Portal (‘Notify ASIC or apply to ASIC about Australian financial services
                                   licensee auditor appointments’) within 14 days of the appointment—see s990B(6)

              RG 26.103      The applicant should provide the following information with the application:
                             (a)   a statement by the outgoing auditor addressing key considerations (see
                                   RG 26.34);
                             (b)   additional information from the outgoing auditor (see RG 26.35);


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                      Page 28
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             (c)   information from the entity (see RG 26.36); and
                             (d)   confirmation of the proposed incoming auditor (see RG 26.37).

                                   Note: For more information about the process to resign as, or remove, an auditor of an
                                   AFS licensee, see Information Sheet 290 Resignation and removal of auditors of
                                   Australian financial services licensees (INFO 290).

              RG 26.104      In general, we will consent to the resignation or removal of an auditor of an
                             AFS licensee to take effect at any time of the year, subject to:
                             (a)   the considerations in RG 26.21; and
                             (b)   the matters in RG 26.105–RG 26.106, as applicable.


                             Effective date of resignation or removal of an auditor

              RG 26.105      If we consent to the resignation of an auditor of an AFS licensee, the
                             resignation will take effect on the later of:
                             (a)   the day of our consent;
                             (b)   the day (if any) specified in the notice of resignation given by the
                                   auditor to the AFS licensee; or
                             (c)   a day that we specify (if any).

              RG 26.106      If we consent to the removal of an auditor of an AFS licensee, the removal
                             will only take effect on the day we give consent.

              RG 26.107      If the auditor of an AFS licensee has become ineligible to act under s990C
                             and reg 7.8.16 of the Corporations Regulations, the licensee must remove the
                             auditor: see s990F(a). Our consent is not required in this case.



Auditors of credit licensee trust accounts
              RG 26.108      If a person is appointed as the auditor of a credit licensee to prepare a trust
                             account audit report, the appointment is continuous until the first of the
                             following events occurs:
                             (a)   the licensee is no longer required to keep a trust account;
                             (b)   the auditor dies or otherwise ceases to engage in the business of being
                                   an auditor;
                             (c)   the auditor is unable to perform their duties as the licensee’s auditor;
                             (d)   we approve the auditor’s resignation; or
                             (e)   we approve a request by the licensee to replace the person as auditor.

                                   Note: See reg 19(4) of the National Credit Regulations.

              RG 26.109      A credit licensee trust account auditor may resign if the auditor has applied,
                             in writing, to ASIC for our approval to the resignation, and we have granted



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                    Page 29
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             approval: see reg 19(4)(d). A credit licensee can also replace a trust account
                             auditor, subject to our approval of the auditor’s replacement: see
                             reg 19(4)(e).

              RG 26.110      Applications should be made using, as relevant:
                             (a)   Form CL17 Australian credit licence—Application for approval from
                                   ASIC to replace a trust account auditor; or
                             (b)   Form CL18 Australian credit licence—Application for approval from
                                   ASIC to resign as a trust account auditor.

              RG 26.111      In addition, credit licensees must notify ASIC within 14 days after
                             appointing a replacement for a trust account auditor whose appointment
                             ceased under reg 19(4)(b)–(e) of the National Credit Regulations: see reg
                             19(5)(b). The credit licensee must use Form CL16 Australian Credit
                             Licence—Notification of appointment of a trust account auditor.

                                   Note: A credit licensee must appoint a replacement trust account auditor who meets the
                                   requirements in reg 19(2) within 28 days of the cessation of the original auditor’s
                                   appointment—see reg 19(5)(a).

              RG 26.112      The auditor must make the resignation application and the credit licensee
                             must make the replacement application. The applicant should provide the
                             following information with the application:
                             (a)   a statement by the outgoing auditor addressing key considerations (see
                                   RG 26.34);
                             (b)   additional information from the outgoing auditor (see RG 26.35);
                             (c)   information from the entity (see RG 26.36); and
                             (d)   confirmation of the proposed incoming auditor (see RG 26.37).

              RG 26.113      In general, we will approve the resignation or replacement of a credit
                             licensee trust account auditor to take effect at any time of the year, subject to
                             the matters outlined in RG 26.21.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                   Page 30
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




E          How to apply to ASIC for consent

                               Key points

                               Applications for consent to the resignation, removal or replacement of an
                               auditor should be lodged at least four weeks before the intended date of
                               change: see RG 26.114–RG 26.116.

                               We will assess each application based on the information submitted with it:
                               see RG 26.117–RG 26.120.
                               We will form a view about whether to give our consent and provide
                               notification of our decision, including to APRA where required: see
                               RG 26.121–RG 26.123.
                               An outgoing auditor continues to act as auditor until we have granted
                               consent: see RG 26.9–RG 26.10.
                               Applicants may apply for a review of our decision if we refuse to give our
                               consent: see RG 26.124–RG 26.126.




When to lodge an application
              RG 26.114      An application to ASIC for consent to the resignation, removal or replacement
                             of an auditor may be lodged at any time of the year subject to the requirements
                             in this guide that apply to the particular situation. An auditor continues to
                             hold office until our consent to their resignation or removal has been
                             granted. For this reason, auditor arrangements should not be changed before
                             we have given our consent.

              RG 26.115      ASIC does not have the power to allow a resignation, removal or
                             replacement to take effect before the date on which we give consent, nor can
                             we backdate our consent. It is therefore important that applicants lodge their
                             applications within a reasonable time so we can give due consideration to the
                             information provided and arrive at a decision.

              RG 26.116      Generally, a reasonable time to apply for our consent is at least four weeks
                             before the intended date of change. If you are using the ASIC Regulatory
                             Portal for the first time to submit an application or notification, you should
                             allow sufficient preparation time.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 31
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




How we assess an application

                             Incomplete or deficient applications

              RG 26.117      If an applicant lodges an incomplete or deficient application with ASIC, we
                             will send it back to the applicant for further information or correction.
                             Examples of deficient applications include:
                             (a)   failing to pay the application fee on lodgement;
                             (b)   using an incorrect application form for the intended purpose; or
                             (c)   providing incorrect or incomplete information on the application form.

              RG 26.118      We will not assess applications that do not sufficiently address the matters
                             referred to in this guide, or that are incomplete or deficient, until all relevant
                             information is provided. In this case, we will seek correction of the
                             deficiencies and ask for further information to support the application.


                             Concerns about a change

              RG 26.119      If we have concerns about the resignation, removal or replacement of an
                             auditor—whether these are brought to our attention in the application or
                             otherwise—we will assess the nature of the concerns before determining
                             whether to consent to, or refuse, the application.

              RG 26.120      We may initiate further procedures, and these may include one or more of
                             the following:
                             (a)   asking the auditor or the entity to provide additional information; and/or
                             (b)   convening a hearing under s51 of the Australian Securities and
                                   Investments Commission Act 2001.



What notification we will give of our decision
              RG 26.121      For applications for the resignation of an auditor, we will notify both the
                             auditor and the entity in writing when our decision has been made.

              RG 26.122      For applications for the removal or replacement of an auditor (other than for
                             removal of the auditor of a public company under s329), we will notify the
                             entity in writing of our decision. The entity should give written notice of our
                             decision to the auditor. Such notice should not be given until after the entity
                             has received notification of our decision.

              RG 26.123      For applications for the removal or resignation of an RSE auditor, we must
                             notify APRA of our decision as soon as practicable after giving consent to
                             the removal or resignation: see s331AK(8).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 32
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




How to apply for a review of our decision
              RG 26.124      You can apply to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) for a review
                             under s1317B if you are not satisfied with our decision.

              RG 26.125      You may apply to ASIC under s28 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
                             Act 1975 (AAT Act) to obtain the reasons for our decision. An application
                             for a statement of reasons should be made in writing and should be lodged
                             with ASIC within 28 days after the date of our notice of refusal.

              RG 26.126      If you choose to apply for a review of our decision without seeking a formal
                             statement of reasons under s28 of the AAT Act, a written application should
                             be lodged with the AAT within 28 days after the date of our decision.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 33
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




Appendix: Checklist of information to be provided
with your application
Outgoing auditor statement: see RG 26.34

   For all applications, ensure that you have included a statement from the outgoing auditor as to:
    whether all matters that must be reported to ASIC under the relevant legislation have been reported at the
     date of the application, and any such further matters will be reported if they come to your attention before
     the resignation, removal or replacement;
    whether there are any disagreements with management or directors, trustee or the licensee;
    whether there is any evidence of opinion shopping;
    whether there are any other circumstances or matters connected with the outgoing auditor ceasing to hold
     office that should be brought to ASIC’s attention;
    whether the auditor is unable to complete the audit under relevant legislation;
    whether the auditor provided an adverse or disclaimer opinion or qualification within the two most recent
     financial years and any subsequent interim period;
    for resignations, whether the outgoing auditor has notified the directors or licensee in writing of the
     application to ASIC for consent; and
   For resignations that will take effect other than at an AGM,
    details of the timing of the proposed resignation.


Outgoing auditor additional information: see RG 26.35

   For applications for the resignation of an auditor, other than for the resignation of an auditor of a public
   company that takes effect at an AGM, ensure that you have included the following information from the
   outgoing auditor:
    details of the timing of the proposed resignation; and
    whether the auditor has provided an adverse or disclaimer opinion or qualification within the two most
     recent financial years and any subsequent interim period.


Entity information: see RG 26.36

   For all applications, ensure that you have included the following information from the entity:
    evidence of a resolution that the appointment of the proposed incoming auditor has been approved by the
     board of directors, superannuation trustee or the licensee, as relevant; and
    whether there are any disagreements with the auditor.


Proposed incoming auditor’s letter: see RG 26.37

   For all applications, a letter from the proposed incoming auditor must include:
    their agreement to the appointment subject to ASIC consent to the resignation, removal or replacement of
     the outgoing auditor;
    their ability to fulfil obligations as auditor under relevant legislation and standards; and
    if the change is close to the reporting deadline, a statement that the incoming auditor can reasonably
     expect to conduct an effective audit before the reporting deadline.


Application form and lodgement fee

   The required completed application form and relevant fee payment (other than in the case of the resignation or
   removal of an RSE auditor, or for the resignation of a public company auditor).
   Note: The ASIC Regulatory Portal provides details about payment options for applications submitted to it.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                   Page 34
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AAT                       Administrative Appeals Tribunal

                               AAT Act                   Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975

                               AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of the
                                                         Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries on
                                                         a financial services business to provide financial services
                                                            Note: This is a definition contained in s9.

                               AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913Bof the
                                                         Corporations Act

                               AGM                       Annual general meeting held by a public company

                               AMM                       Annual member meeting

                               APRA                      Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

                               APRA prudential           Standards relating to prudential matters that APRA has
                               standards                 determined under s34C of the SIS Act

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               auditor                   An individual who is a registered company auditor or the
                                                         lead auditor of an authorised audit company

                               Banking Act               Banking Act 1959

                               CCIV                      A corporate collective investment vehicle—a company
                                                         that is registered as a corporate collective investment
                                                         vehicle under the Corporations Act
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s9.

                               Ch 2M (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 2M)

                               compliance plan           A compliance plan of a registered scheme and/or a
                                                         compliance plan of a retail CCIV, unless otherwise
                                                         specified

                               conflict of interest      Has the meaning given in s324CD of the Corporations
                               situation                 Act
                                                            Note: Subsection 324CD(2) is amended in relation to a retail
                                                            CCIV by s1232N.

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                               Regulations




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                    Page 35
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               corporate director         The company named in ASIC’s record of the CCIV’s
                                                          registration as the corporate director or temporary
                                                          corporate director of the CCIV
                                                             Note: This is a definition in s1224(3).

                               credit licence             An Australian credit licence under s35 of the National
                                                          Credit Act that authorises a licensee to engage in
                                                          particular credit activities

                               credit licensee            A person who holds an Australian credit licence under
                                                          s35 of the National Credit Act

                               excluded approved          Has the meaning given in s10(1) of the SIS Act
                               deposit fund

                               exempt public sector       Has the meaning given in s10(1) of the SIS Act
                               superannuation
                               scheme

                               financial year             Has the meaning given in s9 (companies, registered
                                                          schemes, disclosing entities and AFS licensees) and in
                                                          s323DAAA of the Corporations Act (RSEs)

                               Insurance Act              Insurance Act 1973

                               lead auditor               Has the meaning given in s324AF(1) of the Corporations
                                                          Act

                               Life Insurance Act         Life Insurance Act 1995

                               National Credit            National Consumer Credit Protection Regulations 2010
                               Regulations

                               officer                    Has the meaning given in s9AD of the Corporations Act
                                                             Note: The meaning of ‘officer’ for auditor independence
                                                             purposes is modified in relation to RSEs by s324CLA of the
                                                             Corporations Act and for retail CCIVs by s1232Q.

                               pooled                     Has the meaning given in s10(1) of the SIS Act
                               superannuation trust

                               proprietary company        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               Pt 2M.4 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                          2M.4)

                               public company             Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               reg 19(4) (for             A regulation of the National Credit Regulations (in this
                               example)                   example numbered 19(4)), unless otherwise specified

                               registered scheme          A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                          s601EB of the Corporations Act

                               relevant legislation       Means the Corporations Act, National Credit Regulations
                               and standards              RSE licensee law and APRA prudential standards, as
                                                          applicable




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                    Page 36
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               retail CCIV               A CCIV that satisfies the retail CCIV test in s1222K of the
                                                         Corporations Act or is notified as a retail CCIV under
                                                         s1222L of the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: This is a definition in s1222J.

                               RG 34 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 34)

                               rights of review          The right to have ASIC’s decision reviewed by the AAT

                               RSA Act                   Retirement Savings Account Act 1997

                               RSE                       A registrable superannuation entity under s10(1) of the
                                                         SIS Act (other than an exempt public sector
                                                         superannuation scheme, excluded approved deposit fund
                                                         or small APRA fund)

                               RSE auditor               Has the meaning given in s10(1) of the SIS Act
                                                           Note: An RSE auditor must be the same for RSE licensee law
                                                           and Ch 2M purposes: see s35AC(8) of the SIS Act. An auditor
                                                           ceases to be an RSE auditor under Ch 2M if they cease to be
                                                           an RSE auditor under RSE licensee law, and vice versa: see
                                                           s35AC(9) of the SIS Act and s331AH(2).

                               RSE licensee law          Has the meaning given in s10(1) of the SIS Act

                               s310 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 310), unless otherwise specified

                               SIS Act                   Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993

                               small APRA fund           Has the meaning given in s1017BB(6) of the
                                                         Corporations Act

                               trust account auditor     Auditor of a credit licensee trust account




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                                 Page 37
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             AFS licensees, AGM, annual general meeting, application for consent,
                             appointment of auditor, audit report, auditor independence, cessation of
                             auditor, compliance plans, conflicts of interest, corporate director, credit
                             licensees, CCIV, deliberate disqualification, directors’ resolution, lodgement
                             of application, managed investment schemes, members’ resolution, opinion
                             shopping, registered schemes, registrable superannuation entity, relocation,
                             removal of auditor, replacement of auditor, resignation of auditor, rights of
                             review, RSE, superannuation trustee, trust account audit report, trust
                             account auditor


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 34 Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC


                             Legislation
                             Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975, s28

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001, s51

                             Banking Act 1959

                             Corporations Act 2001, Ch 2M; Divs 2, 2A, 3, 5 and 7 of Pt 2M.4;
                             s250N(4), 311, 324AB(1)–(2), 324AC, 324CA–CC, 324CE–CG, 324CM,
                             325, 327B, 327C(1), 328B, 329, 331AAA, 331AC, 331AD, 331AF(2),
                             331AH(2)–(5), 331AK, 601HG, 601HH, 990A, 990B, 990C, 990D, 990E,
                             990F, 990G, 990H, 990K, 1226F(3), 1226H, 1226J, 1232R, 1232S(2),
                             1317B

                             Corporations Regulations 2001, regs 2M.4.01, 7.8.15, 7.8.16

                             Insurance Act 1973

                             Life Insurance Act 1995, s88

                             National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009, s104

                             National Consumer Credit Protection Regulations 2010, reg 19

                             Retirement Savings Account Act 1997

                             Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993, s29P, 35AC, 129–130AA,
                             130BA–130BAA, 130C–130CA, 130D, 130EA




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 38
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             Information sheets

                             INFO 62 Removal of an auditor of a company

                             INFO 64 Resignation and removal of auditors of registered scheme financial
                             report of a compliance plan

                             INFO 65 Resignation of an auditor of a public company

                             INFO 131 Obligations of companies limited by guarantee

                             INFO 183 Directors and financial reporting

                             INFO 196 Audit quality—The role of directors and audit committees

                             INFO 222 Improving and maintaining audit quality

                             INFO 223 Audit quality—The role of others

                             INFO 288 Resignation and removal of auditors of registrable
                             superannuation entities

                             INFO 290 Resignation and removal of auditors of Australian financial
                             services licensees

                             ASIC forms

                             Form 315 Notification of resignation, removal or cessation of auditor

                             Form 1003 Disclosure notice for unlisted disclosing entity

                             Form 5112 Application for consent from ASIC to remove compliance plan
                             auditor

                             Form 5113 Application for consent from ASIC to resign as compliance plan
                             auditor

                             Form 5114 Notification of request by responsible entity to change
                             compliance plan auditor

                             Form 5131 Application for appointment of scheme auditor by member of a
                             registered scheme

                             Form 5132 Application for consent from ASIC for resignation or removal of
                             scheme auditor

                             Form 5133 Notification of resignation, removal or cessation of a registered
                             scheme auditor

                             Form 5137 Notification of appointment of scheme auditor




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 39
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 26: Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors




                             Form 5208 Notification of appointment of a temporary corporate director of
                             a corporate collective investment vehicle

                             Form 5212 Application for consent from ASIC to remove compliance plan
                             auditor of a corporate collective investment vehicle

                             Form 5213 Application for consent from ASIC to resign as compliance plan
                             auditor of a corporate collective investment vehicle

                             Form 5214 Notification of request by corporate director to change
                             compliance plan auditor of a corporate collective investment vehicle

                             Form 5230 Notification of appointment of auditor for a corporate collective
                             investment vehicle

                             Form 5231 Application for appointment of auditor by member of a corporate
                             collective investment vehicle

                             Form 5232 Application for consent from ASIC for resignation or removal of
                             auditor for corporate collective investment vehicle

                             Form 5233 Notification of resignation, removal, or cessation of auditor of a
                             corporate collective investment vehicle

                             Form CL16 Australian credit licence—Notification of appointment of a trust
                             account auditor

                             Form CL17 Australian credit licence—Application for approval from ASIC
                             to replace a trust account auditor

                             Form CL18 Australian credit licence—Application for approval from ASIC
                             to resign as a trust account auditor

                             Form FS08 Application for consent from ASIC to resign as an auditor of an
                             Australian financial services licensee

                             Other publications

                             SPS 310 Audit and related matters

                             CPS 510 Governance

                             SPS 510 Governance

                             CPS 520 Fit and proper

                             SPS 520 Fit and proper




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2024                                             Page 40
