REGULATORY GUIDE 10

Compulsory acquisitions and
buyouts

March 2024




About this guide
This guide is for persons who are undertaking, or are subject to, a
compulsory acquisition under Ch 6A of the Corporations Act. It is also for
persons who are required to give, or are entitled to, buyout rights.

This guide:
   discusses the purposes underlying compulsory acquisition and buyout
    rights and how we administer the provisions of Ch 6A;
   explains the exemptions we have provided and modifications we have
    made to the relevant requirements, and when we will consider case-by-
    case relief from the provisions; and
   outlines our process for nominating persons to prepare an expert’s
    report under s667AA.
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in March 2024 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:

                             •       Superseded Regulatory Guide 10, issued June 2013


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                              Page 2
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    The objectives of compulsory acquisition and buyout rights ............. 4
                                    The types of compulsory acquisition under Ch 6A ............................ 6
                                    When buyout rights arise ................................................................... 8
                                    ASIC’s role ......................................................................................... 9
                                    Purpose of this guide ....................................................................... 10
                                    Other guidance you may need to consider ...................................... 11
                             B      Post-bid compulsory acquisition ................................................. 12
                                    Principles underlying post-bid compulsory acquisition .................... 12
                                    The requirement to bid for all securities .......................................... 14
                                    The 90% relevant interest threshold ................................................ 15
                                    The 75% acquisition threshold......................................................... 16
                                    Compulsory acquisition of employee and other non-transferable
                                    securities .......................................................................................... 20
                             C      General compulsory acquisition .................................................. 24
                                    Principles underlying general compulsory acquisition ..................... 24
                                    Full beneficial interests .................................................................... 25
                                    The six-month time limit for general compulsory acquisition ........... 28
                                    Employee performance rights .......................................................... 30
                                    How you lodge an application for relief ............................................ 31
                             D      Buyout rights ................................................................................. 32
                                    Principles underlying the buyout provisions .................................... 32
                                    Concurrent post-bid compulsory acquisition and buyout rights
                                    relating to bid class securities .......................................................... 33
                                    General compulsory acquisition and post-bid buyouts of
                                    convertible securities ....................................................................... 36
                             E      Expert reports ................................................................................ 39
                                    When an expert report is required ................................................... 39
                                    Applying for nomination of experts .................................................. 40
                                    Our registers of experts ................................................................... 41
                                    How we nominate experts ............................................................... 41
                             F      Lodging compulsory acquisition and buyout documents ........ 43
                                    Form of notices to be lodged with ASIC and provided to the
                                    relevant market operator and company ........................................... 43
                                    Providing accompanying documents to ASIC ................................. 45
                             Appendix 1: Superseded guidance ..................................................... 46
                             Appendix 2: Accessible version of Figure 1 ....................................... 47
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 48
                             Related information ............................................................................... 50




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                                           Page 3
                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               The compulsory acquisition provisions are intended to balance the interests
                               of the overwhelming owner of an entity with the need to safeguard the
                               interests of minority holders.

                               Corresponding rights to be bought out ensure that remaining holders can
                               avoid being ‘locked-in’ to a minority position.

                               Our role in relation to the compulsory acquisition and buyout rights regimes
                               includes granting relief from the provisions in appropriate circumstances,
                               nominating experts to prepare reports and administering unclaimed
                               proceeds resulting from the process. In some cases, the court may have a
                               role approving the compulsory acquisition or stopping the acquisition.

                               The compulsory acquisition regime extends to the acquisition of securities
                               of listed and unlisted companies, listed managed investment schemes and
                               listed bodies that are not companies incorporated or formed in Australia.




The objectives of compulsory acquisition and buyout rights
              RG 10.1        Chapter 6A of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) gives a
                             person a right to compulsorily acquire securities under certain circumstances,
                             depending on the level of a person’s interest in the relevant class of
                             securities or the relevant entity overall.

              RG 10.2        Compulsory acquisition can be a necessary and desirable means of
                             corporate rationalisation, providing considerable benefits and flexibility
                             to the full owner: see Legal Committee of the Companies and Securities
                             Advisory Committee (CASAC), Compulsory acquisitions, January 1996
                             (Compulsory Acquisitions Report), paragraph 1.11. Allowing access to
                             these benefits improves the efficiency of businesses, financial markets and
                             the economy overall.

              RG 10.3        Providing for the compulsory acquisition of remaining securities also
                             enhances the market for corporate acquisitions. Without the prospect of
                             achieving full ownership, potential bidders may be discouraged from
                             conducting takeovers or other control transactions, to the detriment of
                             security holders generally.

                                   Note: See the report of the Greene Committee, to which the original compulsory
                                   acquisition provisions in Australia can be traced: Board of Trade (UK), Report of the
                                   Company Law Amendment Committee, Cmd 2657, 1926 (Greene Committee Report),
                                   paragraph 84. See also CASAC, Report to the Minister for Financial Services and
                                   Regulation on compulsory acquisitions, March 2000, p. 2.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                      Page 4
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




              RG 10.4        However, as the compulsory acquisition process involves the expropriation
                             of existing interests, there is also a need to ensure that minority holders are
                             adequately protected.


                             The compulsory acquisition regime

              RG 10.5        The objective of the compulsory acquisition regime in Ch 6A is to balance
                             the interests of the overwhelming owner of an entity with the need to
                             safeguard the interests of minority holders. This balance involves allowing
                             the overwhelming owner to gain access to the economic, administrative and
                             tax-related benefits of full ownership while ensuring minority interest
                             holders:
                             (a)   are treated fairly;
                             (b)   are given sufficient information relevant to the acquisition and their
                                   rights; and
                             (c)   where necessary, have access to external scrutiny through the courts and
                                   ASIC’s regulatory oversight.

              RG 10.6        The compulsory acquisition provisions also help prevent the practice of
                             ‘greenmailing’, where minority holders seek prices in excess of fair value in
                             exchange for delivering full ownership. This is consistent with the regulatory
                             objective of avoiding both minority oppression and minority dictation.

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum to the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program
                                   Bill 1998 (CLERP Bill), para 7.31, the Compulsory Acquisitions Report,
                                   paragraphs 1.11–1.13 and the Greene Committee Report, paragraph 84.


                             The buyout rights regime

              RG 10.7        Chapter 6A also provides a buyout right for minority interest holders where
                             a person has acquired an interest in all or most of the securities in a class.
                             This right allows remaining holders and the holders of convertible securities
                             to require the major interest holder to purchase their securities—for example,
                             where the major holder decides not to utilise compulsory acquisition.

              RG 10.8        The objective of buyout rights is to ensure that remaining holders have an
                             opportunity to avoid being ‘locked-in’ as a minority when another person
                             has acquired an interest in the vast majority of the securities in the relevant
                             class (or, in the case of convertible securities, the underlying class) as a
                             result of a scheme or offers made to holders.


                             Entities subject to the compulsory acquisition and buyout
                             provisions

              RG 10.9        As well as securities in a company, compulsory acquisition and buyout
                             rights extend to interests in listed registered managed investment schemes



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                              Page 5
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             and securities in listed incorporated bodies that are not companies: s660A
                             and 660B. Similar principles apply to investments in these entities.

              RG 10.10       Discussion in this guide that refers to securities in a company should be
                             taken to include equivalent references in the context of listed incorporated
                             bodies and interests in a listed registered managed investment scheme.
                             Adjustments that take account of the different features of managed
                             investment schemes are set out in s660B(1).

              RG 10.11       Neither the compulsory acquisition provisions nor the takeover provisions
                             apply to interests in unlisted managed investment schemes: s604. However,
                             the compulsory acquisition provisions do apply to an unlisted registered
                             scheme that was previously listed at the end of a bid or at the time a
                             compulsory acquisition notice is lodged: s660B(2) and (3).



The types of compulsory acquisition under Ch 6A
              RG 10.12       There are two types of compulsory acquisition under Ch 6A of the
                             Corporations Act:
                             (a)   compulsory acquisition following a takeover bid under Pt 6A.1 (post-
                                   bid compulsory acquisition); and
                             (b)   general compulsory acquisition under Pt 6A.2.

              RG 10.13       Table 1 outlines when the right to compulsorily acquire securities arises
                             under Ch 6A and the terms on which the compulsory acquisition may take
                             place. All securities acquired as part of the compulsory acquisition process
                             must be acquired on the same terms: s661C and 664B. Table 1 also includes
                             a cross-reference to the prescribed ASIC form to be used when undertaking
                             the relevant type of compulsory acquisition.

              RG 10.14       A court may stop the compulsory acquisition process if it is satisfied that the
                             terms of the acquisition do not give fair value for the securities: s661E(2)
                             and 664F(3).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                              Page 6
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Table 1:      Compulsory acquisition under Ch 6A

 Type of          When securities may be acquired                                       What a holder must               ASIC
 acquisition                                                                            receive                          form

 Post-bid         A bidder may compulsorily acquire any remaining                       The bidder must acquire          Form
 compulsory       securities in the bid class at the end of a full takeover bid if      all of the securities on the     6021
 acquisition:     it has met the compulsory acquisition threshold. To meet              terms that apply, or
 s661A(1)         the threshold the bidder must:                                        applied, to the bid at the
                   have a relevant interest in 90% of the bid class                    time the compulsory
                    securities (by number) during or at the end of the bid;             acquisition notice is
                    and                                                                 given.
                   have acquired 75% of the securities (by number) that                Where alternative forms
                    the bidder made offers for under the bid.                           of consideration are
                                                                                        available under the bid,
                  The compulsory acquisition may also extend to:
                                                                                        the holder may make an
                   any bid class securities issued or granted after the offer          election with a default
                    period up until the time the compulsory acquisition                 choice applying if no
                    notice is given;                                                    election is made.
                   any securities coming into the bid class on exercise or
                    conversion of convertible securities up to six weeks
                    after the notice is given;
                   certain non-transferable securities that would be in the
                    bid class but for a restriction on transfer in the
                    constitution (see RG 10.69–RG 10.82); and
                   any other bid class securities in which the bidder
                    already has a relevant interest.
                  Post-bid compulsory acquisition on the basis of the
                  threshold tests must commence with the dispatch of
                  notices no later than one month after the end of the offer
                  period.
                  Alternatively, a court can approve post-bid compulsory
                  acquisition even where the threshold is not met: s661A(3).

 General          Under general compulsory acquisition, any person can                  The acquirer must                Form
 compulsory       compulsorily acquire:                                                 propose to provide a cash        6024
 acquisition:      all of the securities in a class if the person (together with       sum for the securities.
 s664A(3)           any related body corporate) holds full beneficial                   The acquirer must also
                    interests in 90% or more of the securities (by number) in           include with the
                    the class; or                                                       compulsory acquisition
                   all the securities in every class of shares or securities           notice an expert report
                    convertible into shares, if the person:                             discussing whether the
                     − has 90% or more voting power in the company; and                 proposed terms of the
                                                                                        acquisition are fair value
                     − holds, together with any related bodies corporate, full
                                                                                        and (where applicable)
                       beneficial interests in 90% or more of all the securities
                                                                                        whether the acquirer has
                       (by value) in the company that are either shares or
                                                                                        met the test of having full
                       convertible into shares.
                                                                                        beneficial interests in
                  The right to compulsorily acquire a class expires if the              90% of all securities by
                  process is not commenced within six months of the right               value.
                  arising: s664AA.

Note: The full titles of the ASIC forms in this table are listed in the ‘Related information’ section of this guide. You should
complete and lodge these forms using the transaction named ‘Lodge compulsory acquisition and buy out notices’ in the ASIC
Regulatory Portal.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                             Page 7
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




When buyout rights arise
                RG 10.15     If a bidder has a relevant interest in 90% or more (by number) of the
                             securities in the bid class at the end of a takeover bid, or a person completes
                             general compulsory acquisition of a class of securities, any remaining
                             holders of securities in the class, or securities convertible into the class, may
                             have a right to be bought out under Ch 6A. A summary of when buyout
                             rights of this kind arise is set out in Table 2.

                RG 10.16     Under the buyout procedure the bidder or full owner must make buyout
                             offers and notify holders of their right to be bought out. Within one month of
                             this notification, a holder may respond with a notice requiring the bidder to
                             buy them out. The holder’s notice gives rise to a contract for sale on the
                             relevant terms set out in Table 2.
                                   Note: For the purposes of calculating when the one-month time limit begins, notices
                                   sent by post are taken to be given three days after posting, regardless of when they
                                   actually arrive: s662B(3), 663B(3) and 665B(3).

Table 2:       Buyout rights under Ch 6A

 Type of           Securities that may be bought out          Offer and contract terms                         ASIC
 buyout right                                                                                                  form

 Buyout rights if the bidder has a relevant interest in 90% of bid class securities (by number) at the end
 of the bid

 Post-bid          Remaining securities in the bid class      Unless the bidder and holder agree on            Form
 buyout of bid-    (except securities issued after the        other terms, the terms that applied to the       6022
 class             offer period closed, or after a notice     bid at the end of the offer period apply to
 securities:       of status of conditions was given if       the buyout contract.
 s662A(1)          the bid was conditional).
                                                              Where alternative forms of consideration
                                                              were offered under the bid, the holder
                                                              may make an election. Otherwise a
                                                              default choice specified by the bidder will
                                                              apply.

 Post-bid          Any securities convertible into bid        Terms must be proposed in the notice.            Form
 buyout of         class securities (unless a post-bid        The holder must be given an expert report        6023
 convertible       compulsory acquisition notice or           discussing whether the proposed terms of
 securities:       buyout notice has already been             the acquisition are fair value.
 s663A(1)          given for the convertible securities).
                                                              If the holder responds with a notice
                                                              requiring the bidder to buy them out, the
                                                              terms of the buyout may be either:
                                                               terms previously agreed between the
                                                                bidder and the holder; or
                                                               terms determined by a court on
                                                                application by the holder.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                       Page 8
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




 Type of            Securities that may be bought out             Offer and contract terms                            ASIC
 buyout right                                                                                                         form

 Buyout rights if a person acquires full beneficial interests in all securities in a class through general
 compulsory acquisition

 Buyout of          Any securities convertible into the           A cash sum must be proposed in the                  Form
 convertible        class that was compulsorily acquired          notice. The holder must be given an                 6025
 securities         (unless a post-bid or general                 expert report discussing whether the
 following          compulsory acquisition notice or a            proposed terms of the acquisition are fair
 general            bid class buyout notice has already           value.
 compulsory         been given for the convertible
                                                                  If the holder responds with a notice
 acquisition:       securities).
                                                                  requiring the bidder to buy them out, the
 s665A(2)
                                                                  terms of the buyout may be either:
                                                                   terms previously agreed between the
                                                                    acquirer and the holder; or
                                                                   terms determined by a court on
                                                                    application by the holder.

Note: The full titles of the ASIC forms in this table are listed in the ‘Related information’ section of this guide. You should
complete and lodge these forms using the transaction named ‘Lodge compulsory acquisition and buy out notices’ in the ASIC
Regulatory Portal.




ASIC’s role
                RG 10.17        ASIC has a number of functions and powers in relation to compulsory
                                acquisitions and buyouts under Ch 6A. We monitor compulsory acquisition
                                and buyout procedures to ensure compliance with the provisions and
                                purposes underlying Ch 6A.

                RG 10.18        ASIC also has a general exemption and modification power in relation to
                                Ch 6A: s669. Where appropriate, we may provide case-by-case relief from
                                certain requirements. We have also used ASIC’s power to provide relief to
                                clarify and enhance the objectives of the regime. Our legislative instruments,
                                and some of the case-by-case relief we may give, are discussed further in
                                this guide.

                RG 10.19        In certain situations, a person utilising compulsory acquisition, or notifying a
                                holder of buyout rights, must provide an expert report with the relevant
                                notice. In these cases, we have a role nominating the persons who may
                                prepare the expert report: s667AA.

                RG 10.20        We also administer the proceeds of compulsory acquisition that have not
                                been claimed by security holders. A person completing compulsory
                                acquisition of securities is entitled to pay the relevant consideration to, and
                                be registered as holder of the securities by, the company that issued the
                                securities if they do not settle directly with the holder (e.g. because the
                                holder is uncontactable). The company will retain records of holders’
                                entitlements and publish in the ASIC Gazette, by the end of the following
                                February, details of any entitlements remaining as at the end of December.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                             Page 9
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             The consideration is transferred to ASIC within a month of the anniversary
                             of the records being published—after which we administer the consideration
                             and assess claims from former holders who are entitled to receive the
                             proceeds of the compulsory acquisition.

                                   Note: For further information on unclaimed proceeds held by ASIC, including how to
                                   make a claim, visit our consumer website, Moneysmart.




Purpose of this guide
              RG 10.21       This guide discusses how we administer the compulsory acquisition and
                             buyout provisions in Ch 6A and the relief we have provided. It also
                             discusses the instances when we may exercise ASIC’s discretionary powers
                             to exempt from or modify the relevant provisions of the Corporations Act.

              RG 10.22       In this guide we discuss compulsory acquisition under Ch 6A. This guide
                             does not discuss other mechanisms that may be available under the
                             Corporations Act to compulsorily acquire or exclude minority holdings.

              RG 10.23       Table 3 summarises our guidance on compulsory acquisitions and buyouts.

Table 3:    Summary of our guidance on compulsory acquisitions and buyouts

 Topic                         What our guidance covers                                             Reference

 Post-bid compulsory           We discuss the principles underlying post-bid compulsory             Section B
 acquisition                   acquisition and the modifications we have made that have an
                               impact on calculating the threshold tests for its utilisation. We
                               also discuss our modifications to facilitate the acquisition of
                               non-transferable employee securities.

 General compulsory            We discuss the principles underlying general compulsory              Section C
 acquisition                   acquisition and the relief we may give from the requirement to
                               have a ‘full beneficial interest’ in securities. We also discuss
                               the relief we may give to stop the six-month period running in
                               certain circumstances, and how you lodge an application for
                               relief.

 Buyout rights                 We discuss the buyout provisions and the implications of             Section D
                               securities being subject to compulsory acquisition at the same
                               time a holder has a buyout right. We discuss some of the
                               circumstances where we may or may not provide relief from
                               the requirement to follow both processes.

 Expert reports                We discuss when an expert report is required and our process         Section E
                               for nominating experts, including how to lodge an application
                               for nominating an expert.

 Lodging compulsory            We discuss what you should lodge and provide to us as part of        Section F
 acquisition and buyout        the compulsory acquisition and buyout procedures. We also
 documents                     discuss how you lodge these documents.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                   Page 10
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Other guidance you may need to consider
              RG 10.24       Some of the discussion in this guide relates to compulsory acquisition and
                             buyout rights following a takeover bid. Our guidance on other aspects of
                             takeover bids and the requirements of Ch 6 may also be relevant:
                             (a)   Regulatory Guide 5 Relevant interests and substantial holding notices
                                   (RG 5);
                             (b)   Regulatory Guide 6 Takeovers: Exceptions to the general prohibition
                                   (RG 6); and
                             (c)   Regulatory Guide 9 Takeover bids (RG 9).

              RG 10.25       Applicants for case-by-case relief discussed in this guide should also
                             consider our general guidance on applications in Regulatory Guide 51
                             Applications for relief (RG 51).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 11
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




B          Post-bid compulsory acquisition

                               Key points

                               Post-bid compulsory acquisition allows a bidder to acquire any outstanding
                               bid class securities during or after a takeover bid if:
                               • the bidder acquires a relevant interest in 90% of all bid class securities
                                 and 75% of the securities for which offers were made; or
                               • a court otherwise approves the acquisition.
                               The purpose of the thresholds for post-bid compulsory acquisition is to
                               demonstrate overwhelming acceptance of the terms of a bid. This justifies
                               the compulsory acquisition of remaining holders on those terms.
                               The requirement to bid for ‘all the securities in the bid class’ in s661A(1)(a)(i)
                               means a full bid must be made to utilise post-bid compulsory acquisition.
                               We have modified the 75% acquisition test and 90% relevant interest test
                               to include and exclude certain holdings and acquisitions from the
                               calculation, consistent with the underlying policy of the threshold tests. We
                               have also modified Ch 6A to allow for post-bid compulsory acquisition of
                               non-transferable employee securities in a different class to the bid class in
                               certain circumstances.



Principles underlying post-bid compulsory acquisition
              RG 10.26       Under post-bid compulsory acquisition a bidder may compulsorily acquire
                             securities in the bid class on the same terms as under the bid, provided two
                             threshold tests are met:
                             (a)   the bidder and their associates have relevant interests in at least 90% of
                                   the securities in the bid class at some point during the offer period
                                   (s661A(1)(b)(i)); and
                             (b)   the bidder and their associates have acquired at least 75% of the
                                   securities that the bidder offered to acquire under the bid, whether the
                                   acquisitions happened under the bid or otherwise (s661A(1)(b)(ii)).

              RG 10.27       A bidder may also initiate compulsory acquisition following a takeover bid
                             with court approval: s661A(3).


                             Post-bid compulsory acquisition on the basis of the
                             threshold tests
              RG 10.28       The basic principle underlying post-bid compulsory acquisition is that, where
                             the terms of a takeover bid have received overwhelming acceptance, the
                             bidder should generally be able to acquire any remaining bid class securities
                             on those terms, unless the acquisition is otherwise shown to be unfair.
                                   Note: See Compulsory Acquisitions Report, paragraph 2.27.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 12
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




              RG 10.29       The efficiency and integrity of the takeover bid process under Ch 6 of the
                             Corporations Act is therefore an important part of post-bid compulsory
                             acquisition. The procedures and protections set out in Ch 6 are designed to
                             ensure that:
                             (a)   the acquisition of control under a takeover bid takes place in an
                                   efficient, competitive and informed market; and
                             (b)   target holders have sufficient information to assess the merits of the
                                   takeover offer and are treated equally (s602).

                             These procedures and protections underwrite the premise of the post-bid
                             compulsory acquisition provisions, that satisfaction of the thresholds
                             indicates widespread, fully informed and genuinely independent acceptance
                             of the bid terms.

              RG 10.30       Accordingly, an additional purpose of Ch 6 is to ensure that an appropriate
                             procedure is followed as a preliminary to compulsory acquisition under the
                             post-bid compulsory acquisition provisions: s602(d). If a bidder satisfies the
                             post-bid compulsory acquisition thresholds in a way that is not appropriate,
                             the Takeovers Panel may make a declaration of unacceptable circumstances:
                             s657A(2)(b).

              RG 10.31       The onus is placed on objectors to initiate court action to show the
                             consideration offered is not fair value for the securities under post-bid
                             compulsory acquisition: s661E(1). This is justified because there is already
                             some evidence that the offer price is fair value:
                             (a)   the price has been overwhelmingly accepted by holders independent of
                                   the bidder—as demonstrated by satisfaction of the threshold tests; and
                             (b)   these thresholds have been satisfied within the protective framework of
                                   Ch 6 and the bid process.
                                   Note: See also Compulsory Acquisitions Report, paragraph 2.81.


                             Court-approved post-bid compulsory acquisition

              RG 10.32       Even where the threshold tests have not been met, a bidder may utilise post-
                             bid compulsory acquisition with the approval of the court.

              RG 10.33       The court’s approval power provides additional flexibility to the post-bid
                             compulsory acquisition procedure and addresses any arbitrariness in the
                             precise 90% relevant interest threshold: Explanatory Memorandum to
                             CLERP Bill, para 7.127. For example, the court may allow post-bid
                             compulsory acquisition to proceed where:
                             (a)   the bidder is unable to satisfy the threshold tests due to untraceable
                                   holdings in the target; or
                             (b)   the bidder achieves a relevant interest in the target that is marginally
                                   below the 90% threshold (Re Sylvania Resources Ltd (2009) 74 ACSR 29).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 13
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




The requirement to bid for all securities
              RG 10.34       One of the requirements to utilise post-bid compulsory acquisition following
                             an off-market bid is that the bidder must have made its bid for ‘all the
                             securities in the bid class’: s661A(1)(a)(i).

              RG 10.35       We interpret this requirement to mean that the off-market bid must be a full
                             bid, not a proportional bid (i.e. it must be a bid for all the bid class securities
                             on issue at the date set by the bidder under s633(2)). The language ‘all the
                             securities in the bid class’ in s661A(1)(a)(i) is identical to the language in
                             s618(1)(a), where it is used to refer to a full bid rather than a proportional
                             bid made in accordance with s618(1)(b).

              RG 10.36       Requiring a full bid is consistent with the principles underlying compulsory
                             acquisition. Section 661A assists bidders seeking 100% ownership of the
                             target, while balancing the interests of minority holders. A bidder seeking to
                             maximise its chance of obtaining 100% ownership should not make a
                             proportional bid.

              RG 10.37       The 75% acquisition test for securities the bidder offered to acquire in
                             s661A(1)(b)(ii) would also be imperfect in demonstrating overwhelming
                             acceptance of the bidder’s offer in the case of a proportional bid. The bidder
                             must give holders the opportunity to accept into the bid for their entire
                             holding of bid class securities.


                             Securities issued after the s633(2) record date

              RG 10.38       The language ‘all the securities in the bid class’ does not mean the bidder
                             must have bid for all possible bid class securities, including those issued
                             after the record date determined by the bidder under s633(2). It means a full
                             bid, rather than a proportional bid, must be made: RG 10.35.

              RG 10.39       The view that an ‘ordinary’ full bid is an offer for all existing securities at
                             the s633(2) date is reinforced by the language of s617 and 618. Under
                             s617(1), a takeover bid relates to securities that exist, or will exist, as at the
                             record date set by the bidder under s633(2). If the language in s618 covered
                             securities issued after the s633(2) date due to the exercise of convertible
                             securities, this would mean that under s618 the bidder must offer to acquire
                             these later issued securities under the bid. This would be inconsistent with
                             the permissive language in s617(2) that the bid may extend to later issued
                             securities.

                                   Note: For further discussion of the securities to which a takeover bid relates, see
                                   RG 9.52–RG 9.60.

              RG 10.40       Also, if the bidder were required to bid for later issued securities as a
                             precondition to compulsory acquisition under s661A, this would indicate a
                             policy that all holders must receive an offer under the bid before their



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                            Page 14
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             securities can be compulsorily acquired. This is inconsistent with s661A(4),
                             which allows the bidder to elect whether to compulsorily acquire securities
                             issued after the end of the offer period.



The 90% relevant interest threshold
              RG 10.41       Under s661A(1)(b)(i), a bidder seeking to engage post-bid compulsory
                             acquisition must have, together with its associates, a relevant interest in 90%
                             of the securities in the relevant class during or at the end of the offer period.
                             A bidder who meets the 90% relevant interest test at some time during the
                             offer period is not disqualified if it ceases to satisfy the test because of the
                             issue of further securities in the bid class.


                             ASIC modification: Deemed relevant interests

              RG 10.42       Under s661A(2), any relevant interests that the bidder has ‘merely because
                             of the operation of subsection 608(3) (relevant interest by 20% interest in
                             body corporate)’ must be disregarded in determining whether the 90%
                             relevant interest threshold for post-bid compulsory acquisition has been met.

              RG 10.43       ASIC Corporations (Compulsory Acquisitions and Buyouts) Instrument
                             2023/684 modifies s661A(2) to:
                             (a)   clarify that deemed relevant interests arising from a controlling interest
                                   in a body corporate or managed investment scheme are not excluded
                                   (i.e. deemed interests under s608(3)(b)); and
                             (b)   extend the operation of the provision so that deemed relevant interests
                                   of the bidder’s associates under s608(3)(a) are excluded.

              RG 10.44       The 90% relevant interest test is a test of overwhelming ownership of the
                             relevant class of securities. Where a person’s only interest in securities arises
                             under s608(3)(a) as a result of their ownership of 20% or more of a body
                             corporate or managed investment scheme with a relevant interest in the
                             securities, it may be artificial to count those securities for the purposes of
                             determining whether the person has overwhelming ownership of the entity.
                             Deemed holdings of this kind are therefore excluded under s661A(2): see
                             Compulsory Acquisitions Report, paragraphs 2.21–2.26.

                                   Note: The operation of s661A(2) means, for example, that where a bidder has 20%
                                   voting power in, but not control of, another entity that holds bid class securities, the
                                   entity may need to accept into the bid for the bidder to be able to count the relevant
                                   interests it has in the bid class securities for the purposes of the 90% relevant interest
                                   test.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                           Page 15
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             Deemed relevant interests on the basis of controlled entities

              RG 10.45       Section 661A(2) refers to s608(3), under which a person is deemed to have
                             the relevant interests in securities that another body corporate or managed
                             investment scheme has if:
                             (a)   their voting power in the entity is above 20% (s608(3)(a)); or
                             (b)   they control the entity (s608(3)(b)).

              RG 10.46       We have modified s661A(2) to clarify that the exclusion from the 90%
                             relevant interest test only applies to deemed relevant interests arising under
                             the 20% limb in s608(3)(a). Our modification is consistent with the underlying
                             purpose of the provision and the legislative intention evident from:
                             (a)   the parenthetical reference in s661A(2) to deemed relevant interests on
                                   the basis of a 20% or greater holding; and
                             (b)   the recommendation in the Compulsory Acquisitions Report, on which
                                   the CLERP amendments were largely based (see Explanatory
                                   Memorandum to the CLERP Bill at para 7.118 and the Compulsory
                                   Acquisitions Report at paragraphs 2.21–2.26, which refer to s33 of the
                                   old Corporations Law).

                             Deemed relevant interests of associates

              RG 10.47       Our modification also extends the s661A(2) exclusion to the relevant interest
                             holdings of associates of the bidder. The 90% relevant interest test is based
                             on the interests of both bidders and their associates.

              RG 10.48       We have made this modification because the policy underlying the exclusion
                             of deemed relevant interests under s608(3)(a) applies equally to the interests
                             of the bidder’s associates.

              RG 10.49       Without our modification it may be possible for a bidder to avoid the
                             exclusion in s661A(2) by seeking to rely on deemed relevant interests held
                             by associates to satisfy the 90% relevant interest test.



The 75% acquisition threshold
              RG 10.50       As well as satisfying the 90% relevant interest test, a bidder and its associates
                             must have acquired 75% of the securities the bidder offered to acquire under
                             the bid in order to utilise post-bid compulsory acquisition: s661A(1)(b)(ii).
                             The purpose of this additional test is to ensure that overwhelming acceptance
                             of the bid terms is demonstrated even in cases where the bidder and its
                             associates started the bid with a significant holding in the target.

                                   Note: See Compulsory Acquisitions Report, paragraph 2.53.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 16
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




              RG 10.51       The 75% acquisition test requires that the bidder and its associates ‘acquire’
                             the bid class securities, rather than simply obtain a relevant interest in the
                             securities. The acquisitions need not be made under the bid. However, the
                             prohibition in s623(1) on the bidder and its associates offering collateral
                             benefits means that, generally, the only acquisitions the bidder and its
                             associates will make outside the bid during the offer period will be through
                             on-market purchases: s623(3)(b).

                                   Note: See RG 6.31.


                             ASIC modification: Excluded acquisitions

              RG 10.52       ASIC Instrument 2023/684 modifies s661A to ensure that, when calculating
                             whether the 75% acquisition test has been met, the following are excluded:
                             (a)   securities in which the bidder or their associates had a relevant interest
                                   as at the date of the first offer under the bid, other than securities
                                   acquired before that date in reliance on item 2 of s611; and
                             (b)   securities issued to an associate of the bidder during the offer period.

              RG 10.53       Under our modification, these securities are excluded from being counted
                             both as part of the number of securities ‘acquired’ and as part of the number
                             of securities ‘the bidder offered to acquire under the bid’. Having excluded
                             securities from the number ‘acquired’, it may otherwise be impossible for
                             the bidder to meet the 75% acquisition test if we did not also exclude them
                             from the number the bidder ‘offered to acquire’. The securities are therefore
                             excluded from both the numerator and denominator in the percentage
                             calculation.

              RG 10.54       We have modified the 75% acquisition test in this way to:
                             (a)   clarify its operation with respect to securities in which the bidder or its
                                   associates had a relevant interest at the start of the offer, including
                                   acquisitions by the bidder from an associate (see RG 10.55–RG 10.62);
                                   and
                             (b)   ensure that it is consistent with the underlying principle that the bidder
                                   should only be able to utilise post-bid compulsory acquisition if its offer
                                   received overwhelming acceptance from independent holders.

                             Securities acquired from associates

              RG 10.55       The 75% acquisition test applies to acquisitions during the offer period by
                             ‘the bidder and their associates’, regardless of how the acquisition takes
                             place. It may be unclear whether a bidder can satisfy the 75% acquisition test
                             by acquiring an associate’s securities.

              RG 10.56       The wording of s661A(1)(b)(ii) suggests that to be counted in the test,
                             securities must be acquired from persons other than the bidder or their



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 17
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             associates. The test treats the bidder and their associates as a group, with the
                             holdings of group members to be aggregated.

              RG 10.57       Under this approach, shares acquired by the bidder from an associate are
                             not ‘acquired’ under the test because they were already held by ‘the bidder
                             and their associates’. This also means the bidder cannot double count
                             securities acquired by an associate during the offer period that the bidder
                             acquired in turn.

              RG 10.58       ASIC Instrument 2023/684 clarifies this approach by expressly excluding
                             any securities in which the bidder’s associates have a relevant interest from
                             the 75% acquisition test.

                             Securities acquired under s611 item 2

              RG 10.59       ASIC Instrument 2023/684 modifies the operation of s661A(1)(b)(ii) to
                             expressly exclude, from the 75% acquisition test, any securities in which the
                             bidder or their associates have a relevant interest at the date of the first offer
                             under the bid.

              RG 10.60       As part of that modification, ASIC Instrument 2023/684 also clarifies that
                             relevant interests acquired in reliance on s611 item 2 during the bid period
                             are nevertheless included in the calculation of the 75% acquisition test: see
                             s661A(2A)(a)(i) inserted by ASIC Instrument 2023/684. Our modification
                             ensures any securities a bidder may acquire under s611 item 2 before offers
                             are made are treated in the same way as acquisitions under the bid for the
                             purposes of the 75% acquisition test, irrespective of whether the relevant
                             acquisitions are made during the bid period prior to the commencement of
                             the offer period. This upholds the underlying policy that the compulsory
                             acquisition process should be available to a bidder where the threshold is
                             satisfied by acceptances of independent holders.

                             Securities in which the bidder already has a relevant interest

              RG 10.61       There is a question whether a bidder is able to ‘acquire’ securities in which it
                             already has a relevant interest for the purposes of s661A(1)(b)(ii). Our
                             modification excludes acquisitions of this kind from the 75% acquisition
                             test, as the holder of the securities would not be clearly independent of the
                             bidder.

              RG 10.62       Our modification also ensures that the narrower ‘relevant interest’ concept in
                             s661A(2) does not apply to the 75% acquisition test (only the 90% relevant
                             interest test). This means that the usual test for a relevant interest in s608
                             (including the deeming provision in s608(3)(a)) applies for the purposes of
                             determining whether securities are excluded from the 75% acquisition test
                             under our modification in ASIC Instrument 2023/684, due to the bidder
                             having had a relevant interest in the securities at the date of the first offer
                             under the bid.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 18
                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             Securities issued to the bidder’s associates

              RG 10.63       If the target issues securities to the bidder’s associates during the offer
                             period, it is possible that the securities are ‘acquired’ for the purposes of the
                             75% acquisition test. Without our modification, these securities may be
                             counted towards meeting the test if the bidder has offered to purchase them
                             under the takeover bid.

              RG 10.64       Our modification excludes these securities because acquisitions by the
                             bidder’s associates of shares issued directly by the target may be unrelated to
                             the bid, and counting them would not promote the aim of the 75%
                             acquisition test of measuring acceptance of the bid by independent holders.


                             ASIC modification: Bids for convertible securities
              RG 10.65       ASIC Instrument 2023/684 also modifies s661A(1)(b)(ii) to provide relief
                             from the 75% acquisition test when the bid class for a takeover offer is
                             convertible securities. Under our modification, convertible securities that are
                             exercised or converted between the date under s633(2) and the end of the
                             offer period will be excluded from the number of convertible securities that
                             the bidder offered to acquire under the bid.
                                   Note: The date under s633(2) is the date set by the bidder for determining to whom
                                   offers under the bid will be sent.

              RG 10.66       Holders may exercise their convertible securities after the bidder has
                             determined to whom it must send its offers for convertible securities—often
                             to accept a simultaneous offer by the bidder for the underlying securities.
                             The bidder’s offer for underlying securities may extend to securities that
                             come into existence following conversion or exercise of the convertible
                             securities or derivatives: s617(2), ASIC Corporations (Takeover Bids)
                             Instrument 2023/683, and RG 9.51–RG 9.63.

              RG 10.67       Our modification is consistent with the underlying purpose of the 75%
                             acquisition test of determining whether holders overwhelmingly accepted the
                             offer under the takeover bid. If a holder exercises their convertible securities
                             rather than accepting the offer for the convertible securities under the bid,
                             the holder will neither have accepted nor directly rejected the bidder’s offer.
                             The holder may have exercised the convertible securities for other reasons.
                             Even if the holder preferred an offer by the bidder for the underlying
                             securities, the exercise of convertible securities itself does not show that the
                             bidder’s offer for the convertible securities was unfair.

              RG 10.68       Without our modification, if a substantial proportion of holders exercise their
                             convertible securities after the offer under the bid, it may be impossible for
                             the bidder to meet the 75% acquisition test. This is because the bidder cannot
                             count convertible securities that are exercised as securities acquired by it (the
                             numerator in the percentage calculation) but these convertible securities
                             would still be counted as securities that the bidder offered to acquire (the
                             denominator).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                     Page 19
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Compulsory acquisition of employee and other non-transferable
securities
              RG 10.69       Some target companies may have issued to employees non-transferable
                             securities as part of an employee incentive plan.

              RG 10.70       A company issues ‘non-transferable employee securities’ with the purpose of
                             remunerating employees while aligning their interests with those of the
                             company. Non-transferable employee securities prevent employees from
                             taking profits immediately and reinforce the interdependence of the company
                             and the employee.


                             Non-transferable securities as a separate class
              RG 10.71       In some cases, non-transferable employee securities will be in a separate
                             class to the bid class. A non-transferable security will be in a different class
                             to other securities if it ‘differs sufficiently in respect of rights, benefits,
                             disabilities, or other incidents, as to make it distinguishable from any other
                             category of shares’: Clements Marshall Consolidated Ltd v ENT Ltd (1988)
                             13 ACLR 90, 93.

              RG 10.72       In the case of a share that differs from ordinary shares only because of
                             restrictions on transfer, it is most likely that the share is in a different class if
                             the constitution or terms of issue of the share provide that the share is non-
                             transferable. In this case, it is clear the inability to transfer is attached to the
                             share.

              RG 10.73       In some employee share schemes, shares are purchased on-market and
                             transferred into trust for the benefit of the employee. The share will not be in
                             a separate class if it cannot be transferred merely because, in the case of an
                             employee, it is subject to a trust. In this case, the inability to transfer is not
                             attached to the shares but to the employee.
                                   Note: For further discussion on class distinction in the takeover context, see RG 9.36–
                                   RG 9.48.


                             ASIC modification: Non-transferable employee securities
              RG 10.74       The restrictions on non-transferable employee securities mean that they
                             cannot be acquired by the bidder under a bid. If the employee securities are
                             in their own class, it is impossible for the bidder to meet the post-bid
                             compulsory acquisition threshold tests under a bid for the employee
                             securities, by:
                             (a)   achieving a 90% relevant interest in all securities in the bid class; and
                             (b)   acquiring 75% of all securities that the bidder offered to acquire under
                                   the bid: s661A(1)(b).
                                   Note: A person may, however, compulsorily acquire non-transferable employee
                                   securities, even if they are unable to acquire full beneficial interests in 90% of them, if
                                   the requirements for general compulsory acquisition in s664A(2) are met.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                          Page 20
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




              RG 10.75       ASIC Instrument 2023/684 modifies s661A(1) so that if a bidder
                             compulsorily acquires bid class securities it may also compulsorily acquire
                             non-transferable employee securities where:
                             (a)   the employee securities are in a different class to the bid class merely
                                   because they are non-transferable (e.g. employee shares that would be
                                   ordinary shares if they were transferable); and
                             (b)   the employee securities, if included in the bid class, would not exceed
                                   10% of all bid class securities (by number worked out at the end of the
                                   offer period).

              RG 10.76       We have made this modification to ensure a bidder or 90% holder is not
                             prevented from acquiring 100% ownership of a company merely because
                             employee securities are non-transferable. As noted in the Explanatory
                             Memorandum to the CLERP Bill at para 7.40:
                                   Compulsory acquisition of each class of securities can be difficult …
                                   where there are restrictions on transferring some securities (for example,
                                   securities issued under employee share schemes).

              RG 10.77       Our modification counters the possible defensive effect of non-transferable
                             employee securities. Many bidders seek 100% ownership of the target.
                             Uncertainty about whether a bidder can compulsorily acquire non-
                             transferable securities may be a factor in discouraging takeover bids.

              RG 10.78       Our modification in ASIC Instrument 2023/684 is supported by various
                             indications that the compulsory acquisition provisions were intended to
                             cover non-transferable securities:
                             (a)   the Explanatory Memorandum to the CLERP Bill suggests that Ch 6A
                                   was intended to cover non-transferable securities (see RG 10.76);
                             (b)   the compulsory acquisition provisions ‘apply despite anything in the
                                   constitution of the company’ (s661A(5) and 664A(4)); and
                             (c)   the definition of ‘convertible securities’ in s9 states that: ‘An option
                                   may be a convertible security even if it is non-renounceable’. The
                                   language ‘non-renounceable’ suggests that the definition covers non-
                                   transferable options. Compulsory acquisitions extend to ‘convertible
                                   securities’.

                             How our modification operates

              RG 10.79       Our modification treats non-transferable employee securities similarly to bid
                             class securities issued during or after the offer period. The bidder may elect
                             to compulsorily acquire later issued securities if it acquires bid class
                             securities: s661A(4)(b) and (c).

              RG 10.80       For the purposes of our modification, securities are ‘non-transferable’ when
                             the constitution of the company or the terms of issue of the securities restricts
                             their transfer. An ‘employee security’ is a security issued under a scheme to,



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 21
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             or for, the benefit of employees or non-executive directors of the company
                             (or a related body corporate) in relation to their employment or services.
                                   Note: Our modification is unnecessary in the case of securities that are non-transferable
                                   only because they are held in trust under an employee share scheme. A trustee cannot
                                   resist compulsory acquisition merely because of the terms of a trust. In a compulsory
                                   acquisition the securities will be transferred regardless of the trust under the procedure
                                   for transfer in s666B.

              RG 10.81       Form 6021 Notice of compulsory acquisition following takeover bid includes
                             a section for use when the bidder acquires non-transferable employee
                             securities as well as bid class securities. For the avoidance of doubt, we also
                             modify s661A(5), 664A(4) and Pt 6A.3 of Ch 6A so that non-transferable
                             employee securities can be transferred in completion of a compulsory
                             acquisition, regardless of any restraint under the terms of issue of the
                             securities as well as the constitution of the company.

              RG 10.82       The terms of our relief seek to ensure that compulsory acquisition processes
                             are as similar as is practicable between non-transferable employee securities
                             and other securities that would be in the same class except for the employee
                             securities being non-transferable.


                             ASIC relief: Other cases of non-transferable securities

              RG 10.83       We may give case-by-case relief to allow post-bid compulsory acquisition of
                             non-transferable securities in circumstances where ASIC Instrument 2023/684
                             does not apply.

                             Employee securities exceeding 10% of combined bid class

              RG 10.84       A requirement of our modification in ASIC Instrument 2023/684 is that if
                             the employee securities were bid class securities, they would not exceed
                             10% of the bid class securities: see RG 10.75(b). Under our relief, the bidder
                             does not have to meet the 90% relevant interest and 75% acquisition tests for
                             the employee securities, as this would be impossible. This is more justifiable
                             where the employee securities are a minor class.

              RG 10.85       We will consider case-by-case relief in the unusual circumstance that the
                             employee securities exceed 10%. We will take into account the
                             circumstances of the issue of this number of securities under the employee
                             share scheme, including any indication that the scheme was administered
                             with a defensive purpose.

                             Other non-transferable securities

              RG 10.86       We may consider applications for case-by-case relief to compulsorily
                             acquire non-transferable securities other than employee securities. In
                             considering relief of this kind we will take into account the nature and
                             purpose of the restriction on transfer.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                        Page 22
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             How you lodge an application for relief

              RG 10.87       You should submit your application for relief through the ASIC Regulatory
                             Portal. Your application for relief should address the requirements set out in
                             RG 51. You will need to pay fees for your application. We have provided
                             details about payment options in the portal. For more information, see how
                             you apply for relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 23
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




C          General compulsory acquisition

                               Key points

                               General compulsory acquisition allows an overwhelming owner of a class
                               of securities, or the voting rights and value of an entity, to compulsorily
                               acquire the remaining securities, regardless of whether they have made a
                               takeover bid for the relevant class.

                               We may give case-by-case relief so that a registered managed investment
                               scheme, or a person who has granted a security interest over their holding,
                               can meet the 90% full beneficial interest test for general compulsory
                               acquisition in s664A(1) or (2).

                               We may grant case-by-case relief to stop the six-month time period for
                               commencing general compulsory acquisition running during court
                               proceedings or when a person’s holding is involuntarily diluted below
                               the 90% full beneficial interest threshold.




Principles underlying general compulsory acquisition
              RG 10.88       Under general compulsory acquisition, a person who is a 90% holder in
                             relation to a class of securities may compulsorily acquire all the remaining
                             securities in that class in which neither the person nor any related bodies
                             corporate have full beneficial interests: s664A(3).

              RG 10.89       A person is a 90% holder in relation to a particular class of securities if the
                             person (together with any related bodies corporate) holds full beneficial
                             interests in at least 90% of the securities (by number) in that class: s664A(1).

              RG 10.90       Additionally, a person is a 90% holder in relation to all classes of shares, or
                             securities convertible into shares, in a company if:
                             (a)   the person’s voting power in the company is at least 90%; and
                             (b)   the person holds, either alone or with a related body corporate, full
                                   beneficial interests in at least 90% by value of all the securities of the
                                   company on issue that are either shares or convertible into shares
                                   (s664A(2)).

              RG 10.91       Like post-bid compulsory acquisition, general compulsory acquisition
                             facilitates access by the overwhelming owner of an entity to the benefits of
                             full ownership.

              RG 10.92       The test in s664A(1) extends compulsory acquisition rights to the holder of
                             an overwhelming majority of the securities in a class even when a takeover
                             bid has not been made. When an overwhelming owner has acquired full
                             beneficial interests in over 90% of each class of securities on issue, the



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 24
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             owner will be able to obtain full ownership of all securities in the entity by
                             utilising general compulsory acquisition on the basis set out in s664A(1).

              RG 10.93       The alternative test for general compulsory acquisition in s664A(2) is
                             designed to ensure that the holder of an overwhelming economic and control
                             interest in an entity is able to access the advantages of full ownership
                             regardless of the capital or ownership structure of the entity. Section 664A(2)
                             overcomes the difficulties of class-by-class compulsory acquisition that may
                             arise when there are a large number of classes on issue, a small number of
                             holders in one or more classes, or restrictions on transferring or acquiring
                             securities in a particular class.

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum to the CLERP Bill, paras 7.40–7.42.

              RG 10.94       Because general compulsory acquisition applies whether or not a takeover
                             bid has been made, the procedure to be followed includes additional
                             protections for minority shareholders:
                             (a)   the 90% holder must have a ‘full beneficial interest’ rather than a
                                   relevant interest to meet the 90% threshold (s664A);
                             (b)   the 90% holder must offer a cash sum (s664B);
                             (c)   the 90% holder must provide an independent expert report addressing
                                   whether the consideration is fair value with its compulsory acquisition
                                   notice and (to the extent not covered by the expert report) include
                                   disclosure of any other information material to deciding whether to
                                   object to the acquisition (s664C(1)); and
                             (d)   if holders of 10% or more of the securities covered by the notice object
                                   to the compulsory acquisition, the 90% holder must apply to the court
                                   for approval of the acquisition, and bear the cost of court proceedings, if
                                   it wishes to proceed with the compulsory acquisition (s664F).

              RG 10.95       Further, in contrast to post-bid compulsory acquisition, if court proceedings
                             are commenced, the onus is on the 90% holder to establish that their offer
                             represents fair value: s664F(3).



Full beneficial interests
              RG 10.96       General compulsory acquisition operates by reference to an overwhelming
                             owner’s full beneficial interests in securities.

              RG 10.97       An overwhelming owner relying on s664A(1) must have full beneficial
                             interests in at least 90% of the securities in the class.

              RG 10.98       An overwhelming owner relying on s664A(2) must have full beneficial
                             interests in 90% of all securities in the entity by value. An owner of this kind
                             must provide an independent expert report that states whether, in the expert’s



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 25
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             opinion, the owner meets the test in s664A(2)(c): s667A(2). Section 667A(2)
                             refers to the expert stating their opinion on the owner’s ‘full beneficial
                             ownership’.

              RG 10.99       The phrase ‘full beneficial interest’ is not defined. The Explanatory
                             Memorandum to the CLERP Bill suggests a full beneficial interest is:
                             (a)   direct ownership; or
                             (b)   ownership through a nominee.

              RG 10.100      Case law indicates that a ‘full beneficial interest’ is directed towards
                             equitable ownership: see Austrim Nylex Ltd v Kroll and Others (No 2)
                             (2002) 42 ACSR 18 at [90]. In some cases the scope of what constitutes a
                             ‘full beneficial interest’ may be unclear.


                             When we may give relief

              RG 10.101      We may give case-by-case relief so that a person can meet the 90% full
                             beneficial interest test for compulsory acquisition in s664A(1) or (2) even if
                             the overwhelming owner’s interest may not constitute a full beneficial
                             interest. We may give this relief when:
                             (a)   the holding is scheme property of a registered managed investment
                                   scheme (this relief treats the registered managed investment scheme as
                                   a single entity that owns the securities); or
                             (b)   the owner has granted a mortgage, charge or other security interest over
                                   the holding.

              RG 10.102      We provide this relief because, even where they may not have a full
                             beneficial interest in securities, an overwhelming owner should be treated as
                             a 90% holder if in a commercial sense they own 90% of the securities. In our
                             view, a person owns securities in a commercial sense if they have both the
                             benefit and risk attached to the securities.

              RG 10.103      Our relief will also mean that if the holding is scheme property or the
                             overwhelming owner has given a mortgage, this will not prevent an expert
                             from stating an opinion that the owner has full beneficial ownership in at
                             least 90% (by value) of all the securities in the company for the purposes
                             of s667A(2).

              RG 10.104      When we give this relief, we will make corresponding modifications so that
                             s665A will apply to a holding that is scheme property or a holder who has
                             given a mortgage although there may be no full beneficial interest. This
                             preserves the operation of the buyout rights regime for convertible security
                             holders following general compulsory acquisition.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 26
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             ASIC relief: Registered managed investment schemes

              RG 10.105      Where securities are held by a registered managed investment scheme, it is
                             unlikely that the 90% full beneficial interest test in s664A(1) for general
                             compulsory acquisition can be met by:
                             (a)   the responsible entity (or any custodian) of the scheme; or
                             (b)   the members of the scheme.

                                   Note: Ch 6A extends to the acquisition of interests in a listed registered managed
                                   investment scheme: s660B. This problem is likely to become particularly apparent in a
                                   case where a registered managed investment scheme seeks to gain 100% ownership of a
                                   listed registered managed investment scheme.

              RG 10.106      It is unlikely that a managed investment scheme or its responsible entity (or
                             any custodian) can be a 90% holder under s664A(1), because the responsible
                             entity does not have a full beneficial interest in securities that are scheme
                             property.

              RG 10.107      It is also unlikely that a member of a managed investment scheme has a full
                             beneficial interest in such securities. A member would have a beneficial
                             interest in particular scheme property only if they have rights against the
                             responsible entity that are closely related to the property. This is unlikely for
                             a scheme in the nature of an equity fund. Such a beneficial interest may not
                             be ‘full’. Even if the members did have a full beneficial interest, their
                             interests could not be aggregated for the purposes of s664A(1) unless they
                             were related bodies corporate.

              RG 10.108      We may give case-by-case relief to treat a registered managed investment
                             scheme as a single entity that owns the securities, so that the registered
                             managed investment scheme can meet the 90% full beneficial interest test in
                             s664A(1) and the scheme can utilise general compulsory acquisition.

                             No aggregation with other holdings

              RG 10.109      When we give relief for a registered managed investment scheme, normally
                             it will be a term of our relief that the responsible entity cannot meet the 90%
                             full beneficial interest test in s664A by aggregating its interest in securities
                             that are property of a scheme with:
                             (a)   securities held by related bodies corporate of the responsible entity; and
                             (b)   the responsible entity’s interest in securities that are scheme property of
                                   another scheme.

              RG 10.110      Under s664A(1) and (2), a person’s full beneficial interests can be
                             aggregated with those of their related bodies corporate for the purposes of
                             meeting the 90% full beneficial interest test. This concept of group
                             ownership of the securities is not appropriate for a registered scheme. The
                             responsible entity has a legal obligation to exercise rights and benefits




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                   Page 27
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             attaching to securities that are scheme property for the benefit of members of
                             the scheme rather than the responsible entity’s corporate members.
                             Similarly, it may be inappropriate to aggregate holdings that are scheme
                             property of different schemes with a common responsible entity.


                             ASIC relief: Mortgaged or charged holdings

              RG 10.111      A person who gives a mortgage, charge or other security interest may not be
                             able to meet the 90% full beneficial interest test in s664A. Some commentators
                             have suggested that a beneficial interest would not be ‘full’ if any other
                             person has a vested or contingent beneficial interest in the securities. On this
                             view, a holder who gave a mortgage, charge or other security interest would
                             not have a full beneficial interest in the securities. There is an alternative
                             view that the problem arises for equitable mortgages only.

              RG 10.112      For certainty, we may give case-by-case relief so that s664A applies where
                             the overwhelming owner has given any mortgage, charge or other security
                             interest over the holding. Our relief for an owner that has given a mortgage
                             will require that:
                             (a)   the financier took or acquired the mortgage in the ordinary course of
                                   their business of providing financial accommodation and on ordinary
                                   commercial terms; and
                             (b)   the financier is not an associate of the owner.

                             In these circumstances it is clearer that the overwhelming owner who gave
                             the mortgage remains owner of the holding in the commercial sense. These
                             requirements are the same as those applying to the exception from the relevant
                             interest concept for money lending and financial accommodation: s609(1).



The six-month time limit for general compulsory acquisition
              RG 10.113      A person who becomes entitled to compulsorily acquire securities in a class
                             under s664A may only do so if they lodge a compulsory acquisition notice
                             within the period of six months after becoming a 90% holder.

              RG 10.114      The six-month period for lodging a compulsory acquisition notice protects
                             minority holders from ongoing uncertainty about the status of their holding.
                             At the same time, Pt 6A.2 aims to give the 90% holder a reasonable
                             opportunity to compulsorily acquire remaining securities and access the
                             benefits of full ownership.

                                   Note: See Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Securities, Parliament
                                   of Australia, Report on the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998,
                                   May 1999, paragraph 3.60.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                   Page 28
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             Reckoning the six-month period

              RG 10.115      The six-month period for commencing general compulsory acquisition
                             applies when a person first becomes a 90% holder in relation to the relevant
                             class. If a 90% holder ceases to meet the test and then meets it again, the six-
                             month period does not stop running until, or restart when, the holder
                             becomes a 90% holder again.

              RG 10.116      If this were not so, the 90% holder could sell down to retain its ability to rely
                             on s664A and repurchase when it is ready to compulsorily acquire the
                             remaining securities.


                             ASIC relief: Stopping the six-month period

              RG 10.117      We may provide case-by-case relief from s664AA to stop the six-month
                             period running in the following circumstances:
                             (a)   where the 90% holder has applied to a court under s664F(1) for
                                   approval of the acquisition (see RG 10.121); and
                             (b)   where the 90% holder ceases to meet the 90% full beneficial interest
                                   test in s664A for reasons beyond its control (see RG 10.125).

              RG 10.118      We consider that relief in these circumstances strikes a balance between:
                             (a)   the interests of minority holders; and
                             (b)   ensuring the overwhelming owner has access to the advantages of the
                                   compulsory acquisition provisions, including better management of
                                   company groups, reduction of administrative reporting requirements
                                   and discouraging minority shareholders from demanding a price for
                                   their securities that is above a fair value.

              RG 10.119      A 90% holder should consider compulsory acquisition soon after becoming a
                             90% holder, because our relief merely stops time running under s664AA.
                             For example, holders should leave sufficient time to improve the terms of the
                             compulsory acquisition if necessary after any proceedings under s664F.

              RG 10.120      A 90% holder should apply for relief from s664AA well within the
                             six-month period. We will not give relief after the six-month period has
                             passed.

                             Court proceedings

              RG 10.121      We may provide relief to stop the six-month period running during the time
                             that the 90% holder applies to the court under s664F(1) for approval of the
                             acquisition until the end of all proceedings in relation to the application
                             (including appeals).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 29
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




              RG 10.122      The court does not have the power to substitute a higher cash sum for that
                             stated by the 90% holder in its compulsory acquisition notice (except in
                             exceptional circumstances under s1350). Under s664F(3), the court must
                             either:
                             (a)   approve the acquisition of the securities on the terms in the compulsory
                                   acquisition notice; or
                             (b)   confirm that the acquisition will not take place.

              RG 10.123      A 90% holder should be able to improve the terms of its compulsory
                             acquisition in a second compulsory acquisition notice within a reasonable
                             period after court proceedings under s664F. Section 664C(6)(b)
                             contemplates giving a further notice, and the second notice will also be
                             subject to objections by minority holders and court approval.

              RG 10.124      Our relief ensures a 90% holder is able to improve the terms of the
                             compulsory acquisition if it failed to establish to the court that its notice
                             gives fair value under s664F. Without our relief, the six-month period under
                             s664AA may have passed by the time the proceedings are concluded.

                             Ceasing to be a 90% holder involuntarily

              RG 10.125      A 90% holder may cease to meet the 90% full beneficial interest test in
                             s664A(1) if its holding falls below 90% of the securities in the class. In some
                             cases, this may be due to events beyond the control of the 90% holder. For
                             example, a 90% holder may cease to meet the 90% full beneficial interest
                             test due to the exercise by others of convertible securities.

              RG 10.126      We may give case-by-case relief from s664AA to stop the period running
                             after a 90% holder ceases to meet the 90% full beneficial interest test until it
                             meets the test again. We will only give this relief if the 90% holder ceases to
                             meet the test for reasons beyond its control.



Employee performance rights
              RG 10.127      A company or listed registered managed investment scheme will sometimes
                             issue to its employees rights or entitlements to be issued with new shares or
                             interests contingent on the achievement of a particular performance measure
                             or milestone (employee performance rights).

              RG 10.128      Depending on their particular terms and the rules of the plan under which
                             they were issued, some employee performance rights may not fall within the
                             ambit of the general compulsory acquisition provisions because they are not
                             ‘securities’ as defined in s92(3). In particular, certain employee performance
                             rights may not fall within the definition of an ‘option’ to acquire by way of
                             issue a share or interest in a managed investment scheme: s92(3)(e). These
                             performance rights may instead be a derivative: see s761D(1), the definition
                             of ‘security’ in s761A and s92(3)(f).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 30
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




              RG 10.129      If the employee performance rights that are on issue are not securities, a 90%
                             holder in relation to the shares or interests that may be issued under the
                             employee performance rights will not be able to compulsorily acquire the
                             employee performance rights themselves under s664A(3) because a person
                             can only be a 90% holder in relation to a class of securities. This is the case
                             even if the person holds full beneficial interests in at least 90% by value of
                             the securities in the company that are either shares or interests or convertible
                             into shares or interests.


                             ASIC relief: General compulsory acquisition of employee
                             performance rights

              RG 10.130      We may give relief to allow a person who is, under s664A(2), a 90% holder
                             in relation to each class of shares or interests that may be issued under an
                             employee performance right, to utilise general compulsory acquisition to
                             acquire any outstanding employee performance rights.

              RG 10.131      However, we will only grant relief where, under the terms of the employee
                             performance rights, the employee is able to require the company or scheme
                             to issue it with shares or interests. Relief will not generally be required
                             where the bidder is able, for example, to procure the company or scheme to
                             satisfy its obligations under the employee performance rights by way of
                             payment of a cash sum.

              RG 10.132      We may be prepared to give this relief because, without the ability to acquire
                             employee performance rights that will result in the issue of new shares or
                             interests, a 90% holder seeking to acquire 100% control may be unable to
                             acquire or extinguish all outstanding obligations of the company or scheme
                             to issue securities in the relevant class. A 100% holder may therefore be at
                             risk of being diluted below 100% and unable to secure the benefits of full
                             ownership.

              RG 10.133      Our relief is consistent with the principles underlying general compulsory
                             acquisition discussed at RG 10.93 and the application of the test in
                             s664A(2)(a) to securities that are convertible into shares (or interests).



How you lodge an application for relief
              RG 10.134      See RG 10.87 for information on how you lodge an application for relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 31
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




D          Buyout rights

                               Key points

                               Buyout rights are designed to afford remaining holders an opportunity to
                               avoid being left as part of a ‘locked-in’ minority.

                               We have provided relief so that a bidder who has dispatched post-bid
                               compulsory acquisition notices to all remaining holders does not need to
                               make post-bid buyout offers for bid class securities under Div 2 of Pt 6A.1.

                               We will not generally give relief from the requirement to make post-bid
                               buyout offers for convertible securities under Div 3 of Pt 6A.1 on the basis
                               that a bidder is proceeding to general compulsory acquisition of the
                               convertible securities.




Principles underlying the buyout provisions
              RG 10.135      Under the buyout provisions in Ch 6A, certain minority interest holders are
                             able to require a bidder concluding a takeover bid, or a person who has
                             completed general compulsory acquisition of a class of securities, to acquire
                             their security holding.

              RG 10.136      Where a bidder has a relevant interest in 90% of the bid class securities (by
                             number) at the end of the offer period, the bidder must make offers to buy out:
                             (a)   the remaining holders of bid class securities (s662A(1)); and
                             (b)   the holders of securities that are convertible into bid class securities:
                                   (s663A(1)).

              RG 10.137      Where a person has successfully completed general compulsory acquisition
                             of a class of securities, they must make offers to buy out the holders of any
                             securities that are convertible into the relevant class: s665A(1).

              RG 10.138      Within one month after the bidder or full owner gives notice of the buyout
                             offers, a holder may respond with a notice requiring acquisition of their
                             securities. The holder’s notice gives rise to a contract for the sale of the
                             securities:
                             (a)   in the case of bid class securities—on the terms offered under the bid
                                   immediately before the end of the offer period, unless the bidder and
                                   holder otherwise agree to other terms (s662C(2)); or
                             (b)   in the case of convertible securities—either on terms agreed between
                                   the bidder and holder or terms determined by a court on application by
                                   the holder (s663C(2) and 665C(2)).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 32
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




              RG 10.139      The policy underlying the buyout provisions recognises that, apart from the
                             overwhelming interest holder who is close to deriving the benefits of full
                             ownership, the standpoint of remaining interest holders is also affected if a
                             person has, as a result of a scheme or offers, acquired interests in the vast
                             majority of the securities in a class.

              RG 10.140      As noted by the Cohen Committee, the position of the remaining holders ‘as
                             a small minority in a subsidiary company may be anything but satisfactory’:
                             Board of Trade (UK), Report of the Committee on Company Law
                             Amendment, Cmd 6659, 1945 (Cohen Committee Report), paragraph 141.

                                   Note: The Cohen Committee Report recommended the enactment of the regime on
                                   which the original buyout provisions introduced in Australia were based.

              RG 10.141      By providing a statutory right to require the overwhelming interest holder to
                             acquire their securities, the buyout provisions afford minority interest
                             holders (including holders of securities convertible into the relevant class) an
                             opportunity to avoid potentially being locked-in as a minority: see also
                             Explanatory Memorandum to the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Bill
                             1980, para 43.



Concurrent post-bid compulsory acquisition and buyout rights
relating to bid class securities
              RG 10.142      The post-bid compulsory acquisition provisions and the post-bid buyout
                             provisions apply to bid class securities in similar, but not identical,
                             circumstances. The result of a takeover bid may mean that both:
                             (a)   the bidder is entitled to compulsorily acquire certain bid class securities
                                   under s661A(1); and
                             (b)   the minority holder is entitled to require the bidder to acquire the
                                   securities under s662A(1).

              RG 10.143      Figure 1 sets out some of the overlapping features of the buyout and
                             compulsory acquisition processes in s661A and s662A.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                              Page 33
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Figure 1: Comparative requirements of the post-bid buyout and compulsory acquisition
          provisions

                                     Post-bid buyout of bid class                   Post-bid compulsory
                                        securities: s662A(1)                        acquisition: s661A(1)


    Activation threshold               Relevant interest in at least 90% (by number) of bid class securities


                                                                                And acquisition of 75% (by
                                                                                number) of the securities the
                                                                                bidder offered to acquire


    When the threshold                                      At the end of the offer period
    must be met
                                                                                Or during the offer period


    When notices may                  During the offer period, or up to one month after the end of the period
    be dispatched

                                                                                If court approval given, up to
                                                                                one month after the approval


    Bid class securities             Applies only to securities                 Must acquire all securities
    included                         issued before the end of the               issued before the end of the
                                     offer period (or in a conditional          offer period
                                     bid, issued before the s630(3)
                                     notice)
                                                                                May elect to acquire certain
                                                                                later issued securities and
                                                                                securities in which the bidder
                                                                                has a relevant interest


Note: See Table 7 in Appendix 2 for a text alternative for this figure (accessible version).



                             The exception for giving buyout notices

              RG 10.144      The potential overlap between the compulsory acquisition and buyout rights
                             regimes for bid class securities is recognised in s662B(1)(c)(ii), which states
                             that a bidder undertaking post-bid compulsory acquisition does not need to
                             give buyout notices to those holders it has already sent compulsory
                             acquisition notices. If all holders of remaining securities at the end of the
                             offer period are given a compulsory acquisition notice prior to the time for
                             giving a buyout notice (no later than one month after the end of the offer
                             period), no buyout notices will need to be dispatched.

              RG 10.145      However, even when no remaining holder is to be given a buyout notice
                             because of s662B(1)(c)(ii), the provisions still require that buyout offers are
                             made in accordance with s662B and 662C by lodging a notice with ASIC
                             and giving the notice to each relevant market operator: s662B(1)(b) and (d).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                    Page 34
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             Section 662A does not include an express exclusion of the kind found in
                             s663A(1), which makes it clear that none of the requirements in s663A apply
                             if a compulsory acquisition notice has already been given.

              RG 10.146      It may therefore be unclear whether holders still have buyout rights under
                             s662C(1) following the notification process. If no person had a buyout right,
                             it would be unnecessary to lodge a notice with ASIC and provide the notice
                             to the relevant market operator.


                             ASIC modification: Concurrent compulsory acquisition and
                             buyout rights relating to bid class securities

              RG 10.147      ASIC Instrument 2023/684 modifies s662B to confirm that a person does not
                             need to make buyout offers if they have given a post-bid compulsory
                             acquisition notice to every remaining holder, and the terms applying to the
                             compulsory acquisition notice are the same as the terms of the bid
                             immediately before the end of the offer period.

              RG 10.148      Our modification means that a bidder does not have to offer buyout rights,
                             including by lodging a notice with ASIC or providing that notice to a
                             relevant market operator, if every remaining holder has been given a
                             compulsory acquisition notice.

              RG 10.149      A buyout right under s662C allows remaining holders to have their securities
                             purchased on the terms that applied to the bid immediately before the end of
                             the offer period, unless a different price is agreed with the bidder.
                             Compulsory acquisition notices given to remaining holders will generally
                             provide for compulsory acquisition on the same terms that applied to the bid
                             immediately before the end of the offer period.

              RG 10.150      We have made this modification because, in the case described, there is no
                             difference between the terms on offer under the buyout right and the
                             compulsory acquisition. Although the buyout procedure allows for the
                             possibility of negotiation of a different price, there is no right to be bought
                             out on terms other than the bid terms. It is also possible that s661C(1)
                             restricts a bidder’s ability to acquire the securities subject to compulsory
                             acquisition on different terms. Once given, post-bid compulsory acquisition
                             notices cannot be withdrawn: s661B(2).

              RG 10.151      Our modification clarifies the interaction of the post-bid compulsory
                             acquisition and buyout rights regimes consistent with:
                             (a)   the scheme of the buyout provisions, which contemplates that where a
                                   person has a buyout right at a relevant time they should be given notice
                                   of it directly; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 35
                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             (b)   the previous buyout provisions, which provided for buyout rights only
                                   for holders who were given a notice: s703(1) and (2) of the old
                                   Corporations Law.

                                   Note: See also discussion at paragraph 3.26 of the Compulsory Acquisitions Report
                                   that, in recommending increasing the timeframe for providing post-bid buyout notices
                                   from one to two months (consistent with the timeframe for post-bid compulsory
                                   acquisition notices), made note of submissions that the time difference could otherwise
                                   create very different consequences given that buyout rights at the time allowed for court
                                   appraisal of the value of the shares. The change reflects an assumption of the framework
                                   that post-bid buyout rights do not arise where post-bid compulsory acquisition notices
                                   have been given.




General compulsory acquisition and post-bid buyouts of
convertible securities
              RG 10.152      Where a bidder has a relevant interest in 90% or more of the bid class
                             securities on issue at the end of a takeover bid, the holders of securities that
                             are convertible into bid class securities have the right to be bought out under
                             s663C—unless a bid was also made for the convertible securities and the
                             bidder has instead given:
                             (a)   a post-bid compulsory acquisition notice under s661B; or
                             (b)   a post-bid buyout notice under s662B (s663A(1)).

              RG 10.153      However, when a bidder seeks to rely on the general compulsory acquisition
                             process to acquire the convertible securities following a takeover bid, the
                             buyout obligation under s663C remains. The bidder will therefore be
                             required to conduct both processes.


                             How the buyout and compulsory acquisition processes
                             interact

              RG 10.154      Under the buyout procedure, convertible security holders are able to require
                             the bidder to acquire their securities either on the terms agreed, or terms
                             determined by a court on application by the holder: s663C(2). Buyout
                             notices must be dispatched within one month after the end of the offer period
                             and holders have one month to provide a notice requiring the buyout.

              RG 10.155      Under the general compulsory acquisition procedure the bidder has
                             six months from the time that they become a 90% holder to lodge a notice
                             offering a cash sum and the notice cannot be withdrawn: s664C. However, if
                             objections are received in respect of more than 10% of the securities covered
                             by the notice, the bidder has a choice of either abandoning the acquisition or
                             applying to court for approval of the acquisition: s664E(4).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                      Page 36
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             Consideration

              RG 10.156      The consideration available under the general compulsory acquisition and
                             buyout rights may differ. Under the compulsory acquisition the
                             consideration will be a cash sum determined by the bidder. Under the buyout
                             right the holder will be entitled to sell the securities on terms agreed with the
                             bidder or terms determined by a court. Both the compulsory acquisition
                             notices and the buyout notices must be accompanied by any expert reports
                             prepared under s667A.

              RG 10.157      Before, during and after the objection period for general compulsory
                             acquisition, the bidder must not offer, give, or agree to give a benefit to a
                             person not provided for in the compulsory acquisition notice if the benefit is
                             likely to induce the person to dispose of convertible securities, or to not
                             object to the acquisition: s664D. The bidder therefore is restricted in its
                             ability to offer better consideration under its buyout notice than that
                             proposed under the general compulsory acquisition notice, or to agree a
                             different price for the purposes of s663C(2)(a). However, in practice the
                             convertible security holder will still have access to the right to be bought out
                             at a court-determined price: s663C(2)(b).

                             Disclosure

              RG 10.158      General compulsory acquisition notices for convertible securities following a
                             bid should fully inform holders about their corresponding buyout rights:
                             s664C(1)(e). Whether the compulsory acquisition and buyout notices are
                             sent to holders together or otherwise, the bidder should include an
                             explanation of the reason for, and the effect of, the two notices to ensure
                             holders are not misled: s670A.


                             Why we will not grant relief from the buyout provisions

              RG 10.159      Generally, we will not give relief from the requirement to make buyout offers
                             for convertible securities in Div 3 of Pt 6A.1, on the basis that the bidder is
                             utilising general compulsory acquisition following a takeover bid. To do so
                             may deprive minority holders of valuable rights under the buyout provisions
                             that are not fully reflected in the general compulsory acquisition procedure.

                                   Note: Contrast this with the comparison between post-bid compulsory acquisition and
                                   buyouts discussed at RG 10.150.

              RG 10.160      The purpose of the buyout right is to enable convertible security holders to
                             avoid being left as a locked-in minority (including where an overwhelming
                             interest holder may not exercise an available compulsory acquisition right)
                             while protecting their right to fair compensation.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                   Page 37
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




              RG 10.161      The buyout right under s663C may be valuable to a convertible security
                             holder when a bidder is proceeding under general compulsory acquisition
                             following a bid because:
                             (a)   under the general compulsory acquisition process, if holders
                                   representing 10% or more of the convertible securities object, the bidder
                                   can determine not to proceed with the compulsory acquisition
                                   (s664E(4)(a)). Even if a bidder proceeds to court under s664F(1), if the
                                   terms offered are found to be unfair, the court is generally unable to
                                   substitute improved terms. The court can only order that the acquisition
                                   not proceed under s664F(3);
                             (b)   without the right to be bought out at a court-determined price as provided
                                   for in s663C, convertible security holders may be forced to accept the
                                   terms offered under the compulsory acquisition notice to avoid the
                                   potential that they remain a locked-in minority; and
                             (c)   a bidder may have less incentive to offer favourable terms where there
                                   is no corresponding buyout right—particularly if the bidder is prepared
                                   not to proceed with compulsory acquisition if they receive objections in
                                   respect of 10% or more of the convertible securities.

              RG 10.162      Our approach is consistent with comments in the Explanatory Memorandum
                             to the CLERP Bill that state that the different buyout right regime for
                             convertible security holders in s665C was in part proposed ‘so as not to
                             denigrate the existing rights of holders of convertible securities in a post-bid
                             acquisition’: para 7.125.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 38
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




E          Expert reports

                               Key points

                               A person who proposes to obtain an expert report for the purposes of
                               s663B, 664C or 665B must write to ASIC to request nomination of a person
                               to prepare the expert report(s): s667A.

                               We maintain two registers of independent experts that we will use when
                               nominating an expert: see RG 10.173. This is to ensure that a company
                               seeking to compulsorily acquire securities does not have an unfettered
                               discretion to appoint an expert of their choice.




When an expert report is required
              RG 10.163       In some cases, notices of compulsory acquisition and buyout rights must be
                              accompanied by at least one report by an independent expert that states
                              whether, in the expert’s opinion, the terms proposed in the notice give a fair
                              value for the securities and the reasons for forming that opinion.

              RG 10.164       The circumstances in which an expert report is required under Ch 6A are set
                              out in Table 4.


Table 4:    Chapter 6A procedures requiring an expert report

 Procedure                     Requirement

 General compulsory            Notices issued for general compulsory acquisition under Pt 6A.2 must be
 acquisition                   accompanied by an independent expert report: s664C(2)(b).

 Buyout of convertible         If the bidder and their associates have a relevant interest in 90% or more of the bid
 security holders following    class securities following a bid, the bidder must generally offer to buy out the
 bid                           holders of convertible securities. Among other things, the bidder must send an
                               expert report to the holders of those convertible securities: s663B(1)(c).

 Buyout following general      If a person holds 100% of securities in a class as a result of compulsory
 compulsory acquisition        acquisition under Pt 6A.2, the person must generally offer to buy out the holders of
                               convertible securities. Among other things, the person must send all of the expert
                               reports that have been prepared to the holders of those securities convertible into
                               this class: s665B(1)(c).



              RG 10.165       The expert is required to determine whether the proposed terms in the
                              buyout or compulsory acquisition notice give a fair value for the securities
                              and set out the reasons for their opinion: s667A. Section 667C prescribes
                              how an expert is to determine fair value for the securities being acquired or
                              bought out. Regulatory Guide 111 Content of expert reports (RG 111)



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                Page 39
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             discusses this approach further at RG 111.47–RG 111.50. RG 111 also
                             discusses more broadly the principles that should be applied, and the
                             information that should be provided, in an expert report.

              RG 10.166      In addition to the opinion on fair value, an expert report accompanying a
                             general compulsory acquisition notice that is given in reliance on s664A(2)
                             must include an opinion on whether the acquirer and related bodies corporate
                             have full beneficial ownership in at least 90% (by value) of all securities in
                             the entity that are shares or convertible into shares: s667A(2).

              RG 10.167      Under s667B(1), the expert who provides the report must not be an associate
                             of the person giving the relevant notice or the company that issued the
                             securities. The report must also disclose prior dealings and relationships:
                             s667B(2). For further discussion of the need for an expert to be independent
                             see Regulatory Guide 112 Independence of experts (RG 112).



Applying for nomination of experts
              RG 10.168      If an expert report must accompany a notice under Ch 6A, the person
                             sending the notice must write to ASIC to request nomination of one or more
                             experts to prepare the report: s667AA. The report must be prepared by an
                             expert we nominate: s667A(1)(a).

              RG 10.169      You should submit an application for a nomination or consent of an expert
                             through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.

              RG 10.170      Within 14 days of receiving a request for nomination we will nominate from
                             one to five experts: s667AA(2).

              RG 10.171      We are of the view that the intention of Parliament in enacting s667AA was
                             to ensure that a company seeking to compulsorily acquire securities did not
                             have an unfettered discretion to appoint an expert of their choice.

              RG 10.172      A person applying to ASIC to nominate experts must include in their
                             application:
                             (a)   the name of the company that issued the securities to be compulsorily
                                   acquired;
                             (b)   a copy of that company’s previous year’s financial statements
                                   (including details of all segment reporting);
                             (c)   details of any unusual aspects of the company’s operations and of its
                                   main activity (including geographic locations of operations);
                             (d)   identification of the class of securities to be reported on;
                             (e)   the name and address of the applicant and contact details;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 40
                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             (f)   identification of any expert who may have a conflict of interest or is
                                   otherwise requested not to be nominated together with the reason why
                                   the request has been made; and
                             (g)   any other relevant information—for example, an applicant may specifically
                                   request that experts be nominated from a particular register (see RG 10.173).



Our registers of experts
              RG 10.173      For the purpose of nominating independent experts under s667AA, we
                             maintain two registers of experts:
                             (a)   a register of experts who are able to prepare reports for ‘large
                                   companies’. A large company (including its controlled entities) is one
                                   with a consolidated gross operating revenue of more than $25 million or
                                   consolidated gross assets of more than $12.5 million for the past
                                   financial year; and
                             (b)   a register of experts who are able to prepare reports for ‘small
                                   companies’. A small company is one that meets neither of the criteria in
                                   RG 10.173(a).

              RG 10.174      We appoint to the registers only experts with an Australian financial services
                             (AFS) licence authorising the giving of financial product advice on securities.

                                   Note: Experts who are interested in being placed on either the large companies register
                                   or small companies register should contact ASIC.




How we nominate experts
              RG 10.175      When nominating experts, we will ask the next three experts on the
                             appropriate register, in rotational order, if they have a conflict or do not want
                             to be nominated in response to the particular application. We will expect a
                             response from each expert within two business days of telling them the
                             identities of the applicant and the body that has issued the securities to be
                             acquired. The experts must undertake to maintain the confidentiality of the
                             information provided to them in relation to possible nominations.

              RG 10.176      An expert may refuse nominations without disclosing the reason. However,
                             an expert who consistently declines nomination will be expected to justify
                             their continued inclusion on the register.

              RG 10.177      The three experts who first confirm their willingness to take the assignment
                             will generally be nominated to the applicant. However, in some
                             circumstances we may decline to nominate one or more of these experts. For
                             example, we may decline to nominate an expert on the basis that the expert




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                      Page 41
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             may be inappropriate given the nature of the company being valued. This is
                             an issue we must consider under s667AA(3).

              RG 10.178      An expert who has been characterised as a ‘specialist’ will not be nominated
                             until they are within the next three on rotation and the applicant is in an
                             industry within their speciality. All three nominated experts will then rotate
                             to the bottom of the register list.

              RG 10.179      Nominating three experts by rotation from a list of experts ensures that:
                             (a)   there are enough experts to choose from so that there is some
                                   competition between experts;
                             (b)   there is a limit on the applicant’s ability to select the expert of their
                                   choice; and
                             (c)   the system is fair and transparent.

              RG 10.180      We will not allow an applicant to suggest a particular expert to prepare the
                             report except in very unusual circumstances, such as when no suitable expert
                             is on the register. Cost savings to the applicant are not usually regarded as a
                             matter that would constitute very unusual circumstances.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 42
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




F          Lodging compulsory acquisition and buyout
           documents

                               Key points

                               Our prescribed forms allow for standardised notices for compulsory
                               acquisitions and buyouts to be lodged and sent to individual holders. It is
                               not necessary to lodge a notice for each and every holder who is to receive
                               the notice.

                               We review documents provided to holders as part of the compulsory
                               acquisition and buyout process. Lodging parties should provide any
                               documents that will accompany a compulsory acquisition or buyout notice
                               at the time of lodgement.




Form of notices to be lodged with ASIC and provided to the relevant
market operator and company
              RG 10.181      Under the procedure for compulsory acquisition and buyout rights, a person
                             must prepare a notice in the prescribed form. We have approved the forms in
                             Table 5 for the purposes of compulsory acquisition and buyout notifications
                             under s350(1)(b). These are the prescribed forms you must use under the
                             provisions listed in the table (the notification provisions).

              RG 10.182      You should prepare and lodge notices in the prescribed form through the
                             ASIC Regulatory Portal, using the transaction named ‘Lodge compulsory
                             acquisition and buy out notices’. You must complete all relevant information
                             set out in this transaction, which will then generate the notice in the
                             prescribed form.

              RG 10.183      When you have prepared your notice, you must then:
                             (a)   lodge the notice with ASIC. If you have prepared your notice using the
                                   portal transaction, you should lodge the notice through the portal;
                             (b)   give the notice to each other holder;
                             (c)   give a copy of the notice to each relevant market operator; and
                             (d)   in the case of general compulsory acquisition notices and buyout
                                   notices following general compulsory acquisition, give a copy of the
                                   notice to the company that issued the securities.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 43
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Table 5:      Approved forms for compulsory acquisition and buyouts

 Type of compulsory acquisition or buyout                                    Provision                  ASIC form

 Post-bid compulsory acquisition                                             s661B(1)                   Form 6021

 Post-bid buyout of bid class securities                                     s662B(1)                   Form 6022

 Post-bid buyout of convertible securities                                   s663B(1)                   Form 6023

 General compulsory acquisition                                              s664C(1)                   Form 6024

 Buyout of convertible securities following general compulsory               s665B(1)                   Form 6025
 acquisition

Note: The full titles of the ASIC forms in this table are listed in the ‘Related information’ section of this guide. You should
complete and lodge these forms using the transaction named ‘Lodge compulsory acquisition and buy out notices’ in the ASIC
Regulatory Portal. For more information, see how you lodge fundraising and corporate finance documents.



                                Standard notice to be lodged

                RG 10.184       The notification provisions for compulsory acquisition and buyout rights
                                allow for a notice in standard form to be lodged with ASIC, provided to
                                individual holders and (where relevant) market operators and the issuing
                                company.

                RG 10.185       It is unnecessary to lodge a notice in respect of each and every holder who is
                                to receive the notice which includes individual details of each holding—in
                                particular the holder’s name and address. The principal purpose of the
                                lodgement requirement is to notify interested parties that a compulsory
                                acquisition or buyout process is in progress and the relevant basis and details
                                of that process. A standard notice is sufficient for this purpose. Accordingly,
                                ASIC’s forms do not prescribe name and address details or other information
                                that may vary from holder to holder.

                RG 10.186       To the extent that holders may find individual details in each notice useful—
                                for example, for the purpose of collectively resisting a compulsory
                                acquisition—the Corporations Act already makes specific provision for
                                holders’ rights. In a post-bid compulsory acquisition, holders may ask the
                                bidder for the names and addresses of each other holder that has been given
                                a notice and the notice of compulsory acquisition must inform them of this
                                right: see s661B(1)(a)(ii)(A) and 661D. In a general compulsory acquisition,
                                the notice must inform holders of their right under s173 to obtain the names
                                and addresses of other remaining holders from the company register:
                                s664C(1)(c)(i).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                            Page 44
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Providing accompanying documents to ASIC
              RG 10.187      We regularly review expert reports and other disclosures made as part of the
                             compulsory acquisition and buy out process.

              RG 10.188      At the time of lodging a compulsory acquisition or buyout notice, we strongly
                             encourage you to provide us with any documents that are to accompany the
                             notice sent to remaining holders for our review. We may seek a copy of these
                             documents from you where they are not provided.

              RG 10.189      You can attach electronic copies of accompanying documents when lodging
                             the notice through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 45
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Appendix 1: Superseded guidance

              RG 10.190      This guide discusses compulsory acquisitions and buyout notices. Additional
                             updated guidance on other aspects of Chs 6–6C is provided in:
                             (a)   RG 5 Relevant interests and substantial holding notices;
                             (b)   RG 6 Takeovers: Exceptions to the general prohibition; and
                             (c)   RG 9 Takeover bids.

              RG 10.191      Together these four guides consolidate and replace a number of pre-existing
                             regulatory guides, taking into account changes in the law since the guides
                             were first published. The guides replaced by this guide on compulsory
                             acquisitions and buyout notices are listed in Table 6.

                             Table 6:     Superseded regulatory guides

                               Number       Name of guide

                               SRG 159      Takeovers, compulsory acquisitions and substantial holding notices
                                              Note: Parts of SRG 159 have been replaced by other guides.

                               SRG 171      Anomalies and issues in the takeover provisions
                                              Note: Parts of SRG 171 have been replaced by other guides.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                              Page 46
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Appendix 2: Accessible version of Figure 1

                RG 10.192        This appendix is for people with visual or other impairments. It provides a
                                 text alternative for Figure 1.

Table 7:      Comparative requirements of the post-bid buyout and compulsory acquisition
              provisions

 Requirement                                  Post-bid buyout of bid class           Post-bid compulsory
                                              securities: s662A(1)                   acquisition: s661A(1)

 Activation threshold                         Relevant interest in at least 90%      Relevant interest in at least 90%
                                              (by number) of bid class securities    (by number) of bid class securities

                                                                                     And acquisition of 75% (by
                                                                                     number) of the securities the
                                                                                     bidder offered to acquire

 When the threshold must be met               At the end of the offer period         At the end of the offer period

                                                                                     Or during the offer period

 When notices may be dispatched               During the offer period or up to one   During the offer period or up to one
                                              month after the end of the period      month after the end of the period

                                                                                     If court approval given, up to one
                                                                                     month after the approval

 Bid class securities included                Applies only to securities issued      Must acquire all securities issued
                                              before the end of the offer period     before the end of the offer period.
                                              (or in a conditional bid, issued
                                                                                     May elect to acquire certain later
                                              before the s630(3) notice)
                                                                                     issued securities and securities in
                                              ed before the end of the offer         which the bidder has a relevant
                                              period (or in a conditional bid,       interest
                                              issued before the s630(3) notice)

Note: This table provides a text alternative for Figure 1.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                         Page 47
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               75% acquisition test      The threshold test for post-bid compulsory acquisition in
                                                         s661A(1)(b)(ii) of the Corporations Act

                               90% holder                A holder entitled to acquire remaining securities in a class
                                                         under general compulsory acquisition as defined in
                                                         s664A(1) and (2) of the Corporations Act

                               90% relevant interest     The threshold test for post-bid compulsory acquisition in
                               test                      s661A(1)(b)(i) of the Corporations Act

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               associate                 Has the meaning given in s12 of the Corporations Act

                               bid class                 Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               bidder                    The bidder under a takeover bid as defined in s9 of the
                                                         Corporations Act

                               buyout right              The right of a minority holder of securities or convertible
                                                         securities to be bought out under s662C, 663C or 665C
                                                         of the Corporations Act

                               CASAC                     Companies and Securities Advisory Committee

                               Ch 6A (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 6A)

                               class                     A class of securities

                               CLERP Bill                Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998

                               Cohen Committee           Board of Trade (UK), Report of the Committee on
                               Report                    Company Law Amendment, Cmd 6659, 1945

                               Compulsory                Legal Committee of CASAC, Compulsory acquisitions,
                               Acquisitions Report       January 1996

                               convertible securities    Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               deemed relevant           A relevant interest arising under the deeming provisions
                               interest                  in s608(3) of the Corporations Act

                               general compulsory        Compulsory acquisition under Div 1 of Pt 6A.2 of the
                               acquisition               Corporations Act

                               Greene Committee          Board of Trade (UK), Report of the Company Law
                               Report                    Amendment Committee, Cmd 2657, 1926




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                  Page 48
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               holder                    A holder of securities

                               non-transferable          Securities issued to employees as part of an employee
                               employee securities       incentive plan which cannot be freely traded

                               notification provisions   Sections 661B(1), 662B(1), 663B(1), 664C(2) and
                                                         665B(1) of the Corporations Act

                               old Corporations Law      The law, set out in s82 of the Corporations Act 1989,
                                                         which preceded the Corporations Act. Unless otherwise
                                                         indicated, a reference to the old Corporations Law is a
                                                         reference to the law as it stood before implementation of
                                                         the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Act 1999

                               post-bid compulsory       Compulsory acquisition following a takeover bid under
                               acquisition               Div 1 of Pt 6A.1 of the Corporations Act

                               Pt 6A.1                   A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                         6A.1)

                               relevant interest         Has the meaning given in s608–609B of the Corporations
                                                         Act

                               RG 51 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 51)

                               s602 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 602), unless otherwise specified

                               securities                Has the meaning given to that term for the purposes of
                                                         Ch 6A in s92(3) of the Corporations Act

                               takeover bid              Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               target                    Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               voting power              Has the meaning given in s610 of the Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                                 Page 49
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             75% acquisition threshold, 90% relevant interest threshold, associates, bid
                             class securities, buyout rights, compulsory acquisition provisions, convertible
                             securities, expert reports, fair value, full beneficial interest, minority holder,
                             overwhelming owner


                             Instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Compulsory Acquisitions and Buyouts) Instrument
                             2023/684

                             ASIC Corporations (Takeover Bids) Instrument 2023/683


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 5 Relevant interests and substantial holding notices

                             RG 6 Takeovers: Exceptions to the general prohibition

                             RG 9 Takeover bids

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 111 Content of expert reports

                             RG 112 Independence of experts


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Ch 6, Ch 6A, Pts 6A.1–6A.3, s9, 173, 350, 602, 604,
                             608(3), 609(1), 617, 618, 630(3), 633(2), 657A(2)(b), 660A, 660B, 661A,
                             661B, 661C, 661D, 661E(1), 661E(2), 662A, 662B, 662C, 663A, 663B,
                             663C, 664A, 664AA, 664B, 664C, 664E(4), 664F, 665A, 665B, 665C,
                             666B, 667A, 667AA, 667B(1), 667B(2), 667C, 669, 670A, 1350; old
                             Corporations Law, s33 and 703(1)–(2)

                             Explanatory Memorandum to the CLERP Bill, paras 7.31, 7.40–7.42, 7.118,
                             7.125, 7.127

                             Explanatory Memorandum to the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Bill
                             1980




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 50
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 10: Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts




                             Cases

                             Austrim Nylex Ltd v Kroll and Others (No 2) (2002) 42 ACSR 18

                             Clements Marshall Consolidated Ltd v ENT Ltd (1988) 13 ACLR 90

                             Re Sylvania Resources Ltd (2009) 74 ACSR 29


                             ASIC forms

                             Form 6021 Notice of compulsory acquisition following takeover bid

                             Form 6022 Notice of right of buy out to remaining holder of securities
                             following a takeover bid

                             Form 6023 Notice of right of buy out to holders of convertible securities
                             following a takeover bid

                             Form 6024 Notice of compulsory acquisition

                             Form 6025 Notice of right of buy out to holders of convertible securities by
                             100% holder


                             Other reports

                             Board of Trade (UK) (Cohen Committee), Report of the Committee on
                             Company Law Amendment, Cmd 6659, 1945

                             Board of Trade (UK) (Greene Committee), Report of the Company Law
                             Amendment Committee, Cmd 2657, 1926

                             CASAC, Compulsory acquisitions, January 1996

                             CASAC, Report to the Minister for Financial Services and Regulation on
                             compulsory acquisition, March 2000

                             Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Securities, Report on
                             the Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998, May 1999




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2024                                             Page 51
