REGULATORY GUIDE 51

Applications for relief

February 2025




About this guide
This guide is for applicants and advisers who are making an application for
relief under relevant provisions of legislation ASIC administers.

It sets out our general approach to granting relief, the requirements and
process for making relief applications, and how ASIC charges fees for such
applications.

The examples used in this guide refer to powers commonly exercised by
ASIC; however, the principles apply to our discretionary powers generally.
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in February 2025 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 51, issued December 2009, reissued
                                     July 2020
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 51, issued September 2006, rebadged as
                                     a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how legislation ASIC administers applies
                             to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                           Page 2
                                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




Contents


                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Our approach to relief applications .................................................... 4
                                    Types of relief applications ................................................................ 5
                                    The application process ..................................................................... 5
                             B      Our approach to relief applications ............................................... 6
                                    ASIC’s discretionary powers to grant relief ........................................ 6
                                    Factors we consider when assessing relief applications ................... 8
                                    Relief by legislative instrument ........................................................ 10
                                    Individual relief ................................................................................. 10
                                    Limits to the relief we may grant ...................................................... 11
                                    No-action letters ............................................................................... 13
                             C      Types of relief applications .......................................................... 14
                                    Standard, minor and technical, and novel relief applications .......... 14
                                    What to include in a relief application .............................................. 15
                             D      The application process................................................................ 19
                                    Preparing a relief application ........................................................... 19
                                    Submitting a relief application .......................................................... 21
                                    How we assess relief applications ................................................... 22
                             E      How ASIC charges fees for relief applications ........................... 25
                                    Fees payable for relief applications ................................................. 25
                                    The principles we apply in calculating fees ..................................... 26
                                    Revocations or variations ................................................................ 28
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 29
                             Related information ............................................................................... 31




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                                      Page 3
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               ASIC has discretionary powers to grant relief by exemption or declaration
                               (to omit, vary or modify) on an individual or class basis, or by approval,
                               consent, determination, direction, statement or nomination, under certain
                               legislative provisions and in certain circumstances.

                               This guide covers our general approach to assessing applications for the
                               exercise of our discretionary powers.

                               There are three types of relief applications available—standard
                               applications, minor and technical applications, and novel applications.

                               Applications for relief are required to follow a process, which includes
                               clearly and completely identifying and addressing key issues relating to the
                               legislative provisions from which the proposed relief is sought, and
                               highlighting other relevant matters that will help us with our assessment of
                               the application, including any urgency surrounding the application.



Our approach to relief applications
              RG 51.1        In assessing an application for relief, we take the following factors into
                             consideration:
                             (a)   the facts, circumstances and merits of the application: see RG 51.19;
                             (b)   our two broad objectives―consistency and definite principles: see
                                   RG 51.21–RG 51.26;
                             (c)   the policy objectives of the particular provisions in relation to which
                                   relief is sought: see RG 51.27;
                             (d)   any relevant policy ASIC has published and the underlying principles of
                                   that policy: see RG 51.28;
                             (e)   our regulatory objectives in s1(2) of the Australian Securities and
                                   Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act): see RG 51.29; and
                             (f)   where relevant, the commercial benefit and any net regulatory benefit or
                                   detriment that would flow from granting the relief: see RG 51.30–
                                   RG 51.32.

                                   Note: We generally publish our policies in the form of regulatory guidance.

              RG 51.2        If we have the power and it is appropriate to do so, we may make a
                             legislative instrument granting class relief to relevant persons or entities to
                             avoid the need for applicants to apply for relief individually: see RG 51.34.

                                   Note: ASIC legislative instruments were previously called ‘class orders’ and this term is
                                   used in our regulatory guidance published before 2015.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                     Page 4
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




              RG 51.3        If legislative instruments are not appropriate, or if we do not have the power
                             to make them, we may publish policy for exercising our discretionary
                             powers on an individual basis, and may publish pro forma instruments where
                             appropriate: see RG 51.35.

              RG 51.4        We generally only provide relief from provisions of legislation ASIC
                             administers (that are currently in force) in relation to future conduct. In
                             certain circumstances we may consider applications relating to provisions
                             that have been enacted but have not commenced. In general, we cannot grant
                             relief in relation to past conduct (e.g. breaches that have already occurred),
                             but in some circumstances we may be able to give relief for ongoing
                             breaches arising from that past conduct.


Types of relief applications
              RG 51.5        There are three types of relief applications:
                             (a)   standard applications—seeking relief in accordance with published
                                   ASIC policy and pro forma instruments (see RG 51.50);
                             (b)   minor and technical applications—involving the application of existing
                                   policy to new situations (see RG 51.51–RG 51.54); and
                             (c)   novel applications—requiring us to formulate substantive new policy
                                   (see RG 51.55).

                                   Note: Whether an application is standard, minor and technical or novel is dependent on
                                   the nature and details of the application.

              RG 51.6        All applications must address the matters set out in Table 1. Minor and
                             technical and novel applications should also address the matters set out in
                             Table 2.


The application process
              RG 51.7        You should submit your relief application through the ASIC Regulatory
                             Portal. Generally, we will only be able to determine applications that are
                             complete and provide, in sufficient detail, the information required in
                             Section C.

              RG 51.8        We aim to give applicants an in-principle decision within 28 days. However,
                             our assessment may take longer if the application is novel, incomplete or
                             contains insufficient detail, or if we are waiting for information we have
                             requested.

              RG 51.9        We describe the application process in Section D (including timeframes for
                             our assessment) and how ASIC charges fees for relief applications in
                             Section E.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                   Page 5
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




B          Our approach to relief applications


                               Key points

                               ASIC has discretionary powers to grant relief under certain legislative
                               provisions and in certain circumstances.

                               We consider and determine each relief application on the basis of its facts,
                               circumstances and merits, having regard to:
                               • our two broad objectives―consistency and definite principles;
                               • the policy objectives of the particular provisions in relation to which relief
                                 is sought;
                               • any relevant policy ASIC has published and the underlying principles of
                                 that policy; and
                               • our regulatory objectives in s1(2) of the ASIC Act.
                               For minor and technical and novel applications, we will also take into
                               consideration whether there is a net regulatory benefit, or if any regulatory
                               detriment is minimal and is clearly outweighed by the commercial benefit.

                               In some instances we may provide class relief to reduce the burden on
                               applicants having to apply for relief on an individual basis.

                               Where the effect of the legislation in a particular case is uncertain or
                               unclear, we may grant comfort relief, provided this relief is legally and
                               commercially necessary and would be consistent with our policy. We will
                               usually only consider applications for relief from provisions of (or
                               regulations under) legislation ASIC administers that are currently in force,
                               however in certain circumstances we may consider applications relating to
                               provisions that have been enacted but have not yet commenced.
                               Generally, we do not have power to grant relief in relation to past conduct
                               (i.e. retrospective relief).




ASIC’s discretionary powers to grant relief
              RG 51.10       We may exercise ASIC’s discretionary powers to grant relief by exemption
                             or declaration (to omit, vary or modify) under relevant provisions of
                             legislation ASIC administers. This includes provisions of:
                             (a)   the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act);
                             (b)   the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 (SIS Act);
                             (c)   the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 (National Credit
                                   Act);
                             (d)   the National Consumer Credit Protection (Transitional and
                                   Consequential Provisions) Act 2009 (Transitional Act);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                          Page 6
                                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             (e)   the ASIC Act;
                             (f)   the Insurance Act 1973 (Insurance Act); or
                             (g)   other legislation ASIC administers that provides such discretionary
                                   powers.

                                   Note 1: References in this guide to the National Credit Act include references to the
                                   Transitional Act.

                                   Note 2: In some circumstances, ASIC may grant extensions of time for compliance with
                                   certain obligations, where the relevant provision specifically provides ASIC with this
                                   power. For example, s70 and s250P of the Corporations Act.

                                   Note 3: We also have a power to exempt or declare that the application of the
                                   ePayments Code is modified in a specified way. This guide is also relevant to the use of
                                   that power.

                                   Note 4: ASIC also has the power to grant a waiver of a market integrity rule: see
                                   RG 265.28 and 265.29.

              RG 51.11       ASIC may also grant relief by approval, consent, determination, direction,
                             statement or nomination under relevant provisions of the Acts in RG 51.10
                             in certain situations.

              RG 51.12       Our discretionary powers generally enable us to, among other things:
                             (a)   exempt a person or modify the law when the strict operation of the
                                   legislation may produce unintended or unreasonable results; and
                             (b)   facilitate innovation that was not contemplated at the time the
                                   legislation was drafted.

              RG 51.13       We most frequently exercise our discretionary powers under the provisions
                             of the Corporations Act (e.g. involving financial reporting, takeovers,
                             fundraising, managed investment schemes, licensing, and conduct and
                             disclosure requirements relating to financial products and services) and the
                             National Credit Act. However, this guide applies to all relief applications.

              RG 51.14       This regulatory guide covers our general approach to applications for the
                             exercise of our discretionary powers. In addition to this guide, we have
                             published more specific policy explaining how we interpret and administer
                             the law in relation to specific issues, as well as when and how we may
                             exercise specific discretionary powers. Where appropriate, we have also
                             supported our policy by publishing pro forma instruments.

              RG 51.15       You should read this guide in conjunction with information and regulatory
                             guidance relevant to the subject matter of your application. These are
                             available on our website.

                                   Note: Also see ‘Related information’ for a list of regulatory guides and other materials
                                   dealing with our discretionary powers.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                       Page 7
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




              RG 51.16       Our published policies are intended to be complementary and consistent with
                             each other. However, where they include details about how to apply for
                             particular kinds of relief, this guide prevails if the details are inconsistent.

              RG 51.17       You should also read this guide in conjunction with:
                             (a)   Regulatory Guide 103 Confidentiality and release of information
                                   (RG 103); and
                             (b)   Information Sheet 9 ASIC decisions: Your rights (INFO 9).

              RG 51.18       This guide does not apply to our registration approval or licensing powers
                             under the Corporations Act: see, for example, s20-5 of Sch 2, s913A, and
                             1279.


Factors we consider when assessing relief applications
              RG 51.19       When assessing relief applications, we will take into account the facts,
                             circumstances and merits of each application.

              RG 51.20       When making decisions, we attempt to achieve two broad objectives—
                             consistency and definite principles.


                             Broad objectives

                             Consistency

              RG 51.21       This objective ensures that we exercise our discretionary powers consistently
                             and with consideration of our regulatory objectives, without turning our
                             administrative policies into inflexible rules.

              RG 51.22       We will normally only depart from existing ASIC policy that is relevant to
                             an application (particularly where that policy has been published) when we
                             are satisfied that the policy:
                             (a)   requires significant change or reversal; or
                             (b)   is not applicable due to the special features of the application.

                             Definite principles

              RG 51.23       This objective ensures that our decisions are based on definite principles. We
                             aim to have a clear understanding of the circumstances of each application
                             and how the relief sought will operate in those circumstances. In this way,
                             we can:
                             (a)   use each decision as a precedent when similar applications arise in the
                                   future; and
                             (b)   distinguish the precedent when it is inapplicable.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                           Page 8
                                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




              RG 51.24       An application for minor and technical or novel relief should explain the
                             commercial and legal nature of the proposal for which the relief is sought.
                             This allows us to consider both the specific application and the more general
                             precedent it may set. We are required by administrative law to have regard to
                             the effect of relief in the particular situation in which it will operate.
                             However, we cannot foresee what precedent we will set by making a
                             decision unless we understand the particular situation for which the relief is
                             required.

              RG 51.25       You should also explain any legal and commercial constraints that form part
                             of the reason why the relief should be granted. In general, if there is a lawful
                             and effective way of doing something without relief (or with standard relief
                             only), we will be inclined to refuse relief (or non-standard relief).

              RG 51.26       Every decision sets a precedent. Even if we are willing to give relief to allow
                             a proposal to proceed, we may give relief in terms different from those
                             proposed in an application to set a precedent that is more consistent with the
                             development of policy.


                             Policy objectives of legislation

              RG 51.27       We will consider the purpose of the provisions in relation to which relief is
                             sought, however we will not consider individual provisions in a vacuum.
                             Rather, we will promote the policy objectives underlying the Corporations
                             Act, the SIS Act, the National Credit Act, the ASIC Act or the Insurance Act
                             (whichever is relevant).

                                   Note: For example, in applications concerning Ch 6 of the Corporations Act, we will
                                   consider the criteria set out in s602. In applications made under s340(1) or 341 of the
                                   Corporations Act, we will consider the criteria set out in s342.


                             Relevant ASIC policy

              RG 51.28       We will also consider any relevant policy ASIC has published and the
                             underlying principles of that policy. The fact that we have not published a
                             policy about a particular activity does not mean that we have a policy for or
                             against that activity.


                             Regulatory objectives

              RG 51.29       When exercising our powers, we will do so in accordance with our
                             regulatory objectives in s1(2) of the ASIC Act.


                             Net regulatory benefit or regulatory detriment

              RG 51.30       When considering minor and technical and novel applications, we attempt to
                             weigh the commercial benefit and any net regulatory benefit or detriment



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                      Page 9
                                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             that would flow from granting the relief on the conditions proposed. We will
                             generally grant relief when:
                             (a)   we consider that there is a net regulatory benefit; or
                             (b)   the regulatory detriment is minimal and is clearly outweighed by the
                                   resulting commercial benefit.

              RG 51.31       We will scrutinise any argument that the ordinary costs associated with, or
                             that the ordinary inconvenience of compliance with provisions of legislation
                             ASIC administers or existing published ASIC policy, are excessive. Any
                             applicant who claims to be affected by compliance costs will need to explain
                             why the effect of the law in their circumstances is anomalous.

              RG 51.32       In any discussion about the commercial benefits of granting relief, dollar
                             estimates should be made relating to:
                             (a)   the cost of compliance with the provisions if no relief were granted; and
                             (b)   the potential costs and benefits if relief as sought is granted.

              RG 51.33       In addition, the basis on which the dollar estimates are calculated should be
                             clearly explained. Failure to include this information may result in a delay in
                             assessing the application, or refusal.



Relief by legislative instrument
              RG 51.34       We may make a legislative instrument to provide class relief where we have
                             the power and it is appropriate to do so. This avoids the need for applicants
                             to apply on an individual basis (provided they meet the requirements of the
                             legislative instrument).

                                   Note: A legislative instrument usually applies to a class of persons or entities who carry
                                   out a particular activity in certain circumstances by providing exemptions,
                                   modifications, declarations, waivers and rules.




Individual relief
              RG 51.35       Where legislative instruments are not appropriate or we do not have the
                             power to make them, we:
                             (a)   may develop policies for the exercise of our discretionary powers on an
                                   individual basis and publish these policies in the form of regulatory
                                   guidance; and
                             (b)   may support these policies by publishing pro forma instruments.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                     Page 10
                                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




              RG 51.36       In general, pro forma instruments, published individual relief instruments,
                             and notifiable instruments, enable us to administer our policies more
                             efficiently. They also ensure consistency of relief.

                                   Note 1: Relief under some provisions of the Corporations Act and the National Credit
                                   Act only take effect from the date of gazettal or execution of the relevant instrument.

                                   Note 2: A notifiable instrument is an instrument that is likely to be of long-term public
                                   interest and for which public accessibility and centralised management is desirable. This
                                   includes instruments declared to be notifiable instruments by primary law or
                                   regulations.




Limits to the relief we may grant

                             Retrospective relief

              RG 51.37       In general, we cannot give relief for breaches of provisions of legislation
                             ASIC administers that have already taken place. In other words, we
                             generally do not have power to grant retrospective relief.

              RG 51.38       To the extent that we can give relief that is not clearly retrospective but may
                             take away the future consequences of past conduct, our general policy is not
                             to do so. However, we may give relief in these circumstances where:
                             (a)   no mischief (e.g. harm) has yet occurred; and
                             (b)   the regulatory detriment of the breach is minimal and clearly
                                   outweighed by the commercial benefit which would result from us
                                   giving the proposed relief.

              RG 51.39       Our paramount consideration in exercising our powers in these circumstances
                             is whether anyone has already been adversely affected by the previous breach.


                             Court relief

              RG 51.40       The court has some powers to grant retrospective relief. For example, the
                             court has power under:
                             (a)   s1322 of the Corporations Act (on the application of any interested
                                   person), to make orders about irregularities generally (i.e. validating
                                   acts and relieving persons from civil liability);
                             (b)   s1318 of the Corporations Act to grant relief from liability to certain
                                   persons in civil proceedings to which that section applies; and
                             (c)   s183 of the National Credit Act to grant relief from liability for
                                   contravention of civil penalty provisions.

                                   Note: The court’s retrospective powers and a few express grants of power to give
                                   retrospective relief confirm that ASIC’s role in relation to past conduct is generally
                                   restricted to giving relief from future consequences of the past conduct.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                      Page 11
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             Comfort relief

              RG 51.41       We may receive applications for relief from legislation ASIC administers
                             when it is not clear whether an applicant needs the relief to proceed with
                             their planned course of action (i.e. comfort relief).

              RG 51.42       We will consider a request for comfort relief (on the basis that the relevant
                             Act does apply) when an applicant requests such relief because:
                             (a)   it is uncertain whether or how the Act applies; and
                             (b)   commercially significant effects would flow from their application.

              RG 51.43       We may grant comfort relief when we recognise that the effect of the
                             relevant Act in a particular case is uncertain or unclear. However, such relief
                             should not be taken to imply that we have formed any particular view of the
                             effect of the Act in such cases.

              RG 51.44       We will generally refuse to grant comfort relief if:
                             (a)   the operation of the relevant provisions of the relevant Act is clear and
                                   we consider that the relief is clearly not legally necessary. In these
                                   cases, we will inform the applicant why we have formed the view that
                                   the particular relief is unnecessary; or
                             (b)   we consider that the relief is commercially unnecessary (i.e. if the
                                   applicant’s reasonable expectation of loss or other commercial
                                   detriment from the refusal of relief is insignificant).

              RG 51.45       Generally, ASIC’s refusal to grant comfort relief under RG 51.44(a) is in
                             effect giving a no-action letter on the subject matter of the application: see
                             Regulatory Guide 108 No-action letters (RG 108). However, such a refusal
                             is not a certification by us that the proposed action will be lawful in every
                             respect. For example, we may refuse to grant relief from Ch 6 of the
                             Corporations Act for a takeover offer on the grounds that the particular relief
                             is not necessary for the transaction. This refusal is not an indication that we
                             will take no investigative, surveillance or any other enforcement action over
                             other aspects of the takeover that are not the subject of the application.
                             Further, even if we refuse relief from Ch 6 on the grounds that the relief is
                             not legally necessary, we may still make an application to the Australian
                             Government Takeovers Panel (Takeovers Panel) if there are unacceptable
                             circumstances in relation to the subject matter.

              RG 51.46       Applications for comfort relief must be made before the potential breach has
                             occurred. We will grant or refuse such applications on standard policy
                             grounds (i.e. we will not grant relief for which there is no policy
                             justification, purely for the sake of certainty).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                          Page 12
                                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             Relief from provisions enacted but not commenced

              RG 51.47       We will not usually consider applications for relief from provisions of (or
                             regulations under) legislation ASIC administers that have not yet
                             commenced.

              RG 51.48       Where it would be prudent and convenient for us to consider the impact of
                             incoming provisions or regulations on an applicant’s commercial
                             circumstances, we will do so. Applications of this kind are examples of
                             novel applications: see RG 51.55.



No-action letters
              RG 51.49       In some instances, a person may ask ASIC to give a no-action letter where
                             there is no specific relief available in the circumstances: see RG 108 for
                             further details in relation to no-action letters.

                                   Note: In cases where we cannot grant relief (e.g. in relation to past conduct), you may
                                   wish to consider whether it is appropriate to apply for a no-action letter. No-action
                                   letters may only be given under certain circumstances (see Section C of RG 108).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                    Page 13
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




C          Types of relief applications


                               Key points

                               There are three types of applications—standard, minor and technical, and
                               novel applications.
                               All applications should include the matters outlined in Table 1.
                               In addition to the matters in Table 1, minor and technical and novel
                               applications should also cover the matters outlined in Table 2.




Standard, minor and technical, and novel relief applications

                             Standard applications

              RG 51.50       Standard applications seek relief precisely in accordance with the terms of
                             published ASIC policy and pro forma instruments (where relevant).


                             Minor and technical applications

              RG 51.51       Minor and technical applications:
                             (a)   are not completely standard but are clearly within the policy of the
                                   legislation ASIC administers or ASIC’s existing policy; and
                             (b)   do not raise issues of such significance as to require our extensive
                                   consideration.

              RG 51.52       In general, these applications involve applying existing policy to new
                             situations, either legislative or administrative (e.g. where there is an existing
                             policy, but it needs to be adapted to cover the application).

              RG 51.53       These applications can concern:
                             (a)   relief from the requirements of legislation ASIC administers;
                             (b)   minor changes to relief previously granted to an applicant (where there
                                   has been no significant change in the circumstances surrounding the
                                   granting of relief or in existing policy); or
                             (c)   relief or changes to relief arising from changes in existing policy. This
                                   includes, but is not limited to, published ASIC policy.

              RG 51.54       Minor and technical applications typically concern unusual situations or new
                             developments that are not anticipated in legislation ASIC administers or in
                             existing ASIC policy. In particular, our published policy cannot specify
                             every possible set of circumstances to which the policy may be applied.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                         Page 14
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             Rather, it sets out general principles and illustrates them by way of common
                             examples. Our officers, therefore, often consider applications that, although
                             not specifically covered by published policy, can be determined using the
                             general principles set out in that policy.


                             Novel applications

              RG 51.55       Novel applications are those requiring us to formulate substantive new
                             policy, because they:
                             (a)   raise policy considerations that are entirely new;
                             (b)   involve more than minor and technical variations of existing ASIC
                                   policy; or
                             (c)   involve a significant change to, or reversal of, existing ASIC policy.

              RG 51.56       Novel applications should be made as early as possible to ensure that we
                             have sufficient time to assess them. Decisions can then be carefully and
                             properly considered and other applications will not be unfairly delayed. We
                             will refuse to grant relief if an applicant requires relief by a particular time
                             and this requirement would not give us sufficient opportunity to consider
                             whether the relief is appropriate.

                                   Note: Target assessment times are set out in ASIC’s service charter. Please note that
                                   these times are indicative only and may vary on a case-by-case basis, for example,
                                   where an application raises complex or new policy issues, or if an applicant does not
                                   give us all the information we need.




What to include in a relief application
              RG 51.57       Table 1 sets out the information that applicants need to provide in their relief
                             applications. These requirements apply to all relief applications.

              RG 51.58       You should also read and consider all ASIC published policy that is relevant
                             to your application.

                                   Note: For example, Regulatory Guide 167 AFS licensing: Discretionary powers
                                   (RG 167), Regulatory Guide 169 Disclosure: Hawking and disclosure: Discretionary
                                   powers (RG 169) or Regulatory Guide 275 The deferred sales model for add-on
                                   insurance (RG 275). For a list of resources dealing with our discretionary powers see
                                   ‘Related information’.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                   Page 15
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             Table 1:     All applications—Information required

                               Type and nature       Specify what relief is being sought, including:
                               of relief sought       the particular discretionary power(s) ASIC is being
                                                       requested to exercise;
                                                      the specific provision(s) from which the proposed relief is
                                                       sought;
                                                      any provisions of the law affected by the proposed relief;
                                                       and
                                                      the relevant published policy or policies.
                                                        Note: The application should include the sections of the
                                                        Corporations Act, the SIS Act, the National Credit Act, the ASIC
                                                        Act or the Insurance Act (whichever is relevant) under which relief
                                                        is sought and any provisions of the relevant Act that are affected
                                                        by the application.

                               The reason(s)         Explain why relief is being sought. The application must give
                               relief is being       sufficient details to enable us to determine whether the facts
                               sought                meet the prerequisites of the relevant published policy. It
                                                     should include any facts that may imply that it would be
                                                     inappropriate to apply the relevant published policy to the
                                                     particular case and reasons why this is so.

                               Information           Demonstrate how any statutory pre-conditions are satisfied
                               required by the       (if applicable).
                               statutory
                                                     Provide any other information required by any relevant ASIC
                               provisions and
                                                     published policy, by including the supporting documents by
                               any relevant ASIC
                                                     link or attachment to the application.
                               published
                               policy(ies)

                               Consultation with     If you have previously consulted with ASIC or another
                               ASIC or other         relevant organisation, provide:
                               relevant               details of any relevant ASIC officers who have been
                               regulatory              consulted in relation to the application and the outcome of
                               organisations           that consultation: see RG 51.66–RG 51.67; and
                                                      details of any other relevant regulatory organisations that
                                                       have been consulted in relation to the application and the
                                                       outcome of that consultation.

                               Third parties         Provide:
                               affected by the        details of any third parties whose interests may be
                               application             adversely affected if the application was granted; and
                                                      details of any consultation that had been undertaken with
                                                       those third parties.

                                                     ASIC may determine that we are required to provide
                                                     procedural fairness to a third party, if ASIC considers that a
                                                     third party may be affected by the decision: see RG 51.86–
                                                     RG 51.87.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                     Page 16
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             Minor and technical or novel applications

              RG 51.59       Due to their nature, minor and technical applications and novel applications
                             are required to include additional information to help us with our
                             assessment. These additional requirements are set out in Table 2.

                             Table 2:      Minor and technical or novel applications—Additional
                                           information required

                               Details regarding     Explain the proposed commercial activity and advise of any
                               the proposed          factual matters that:
                               activity, including    could reasonably be relevant to the application; or
                               any relevant
                                                      may have implications for how the relevant legislative
                               factual matters
                                                       provisions or existing ASIC policy is applied in the
                                                       circumstances of the case.

                               The impact of         Explain how legislative provisions or existing ASIC policy
                               legislative           would impede the proposed activity and why the proposal
                               provisions or         cannot be adapted to comply with these provisions or with
                               existing ASIC         existing statutory or legislative instrument relief.
                               policy
                                                     Explain how the relief sought would extend, relax, or vary:
                                                      any legislation ASIC administers;
                                                      the scope of ASIC published policy;
                                                      any precedent relief, legislative instruments or pro forma
                                                       instruments; or
                                                      any previous ASIC policy decision(s).
                                                     Explain precisely how the proposed relief would operate to
                                                     facilitate the proposal.

                               Reason(s) the         Explain why ASIC should grant the relief. For example:
                               relief should be       minor and technical variation of any legislation ASIC
                               granted                 administers—the application should explain why it is within
                                                       the policy underlying that provision;
                                                      departure from existing ASIC policy—an application should
                                                       set out the extent of the departure; or
                                                      variation of an instrument that already applies to the
                                                       applicant—an application should:
                                                        − confirm that the basis of the original relief still applies;
                                                          and
                                                        − explain why the variation is required.

                                                     You should also include any information we will need in
                                                     considering the issues set out in Section B of this regulatory
                                                     guide.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                   Page 17
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                               The legal and         Explain the consequences of granting the relief and the
                               cost-benefit          reasons why it should be granted from:
                               arguments for          a legal perspective―for example, why is the relief required
                               relief                  as a matter of law?
                                                      a commercial perspective―for example, why it is not
                                                       commercially feasible to comply with the legislation ASIC
                                                       administers or existing ASIC policy, or to restructure or
                                                       redesign your proposed operations to bring them into
                                                       alignment with the law?
                                                      a policy perspective―for example, identify the net
                                                       regulatory benefit or detriment that would result if the relief
                                                       was granted. In particular, balance commercial
                                                       considerations against any relevant consumer or investor
                                                       interests (if applicable).
                                                        Note: See RG 51.30–RG 51.33 for further details.

                               The conditions        Suggest any suitable limitations or conditions that should be
                               that should be        placed on the relief to appropriately narrow the scope of the
                               imposed on the        relief and limit the impact of the relief on third parties. For
                               relief                example, having identified any regulatory detriment to
                                                     consumers or investors if the relief was granted, the
                                                     applicant might propose parameters or conditions on the
                                                     relief to minimise or avoid potential detriment.
                                                        Note: Draft instruments of relief may also be submitted with the
                                                        application: see RG 51.61–RG 51.62.



                             Obtaining legal advice

              RG 51.60       You should consider obtaining your own legal advice before making minor
                             and technical or novel applications. A legal analysis of the need for relief
                             often helps us assess an application promptly and effectively.

                             Submitting a draft instrument

              RG 51.61       You may submit a draft instrument as part of your minor and technical or
                             novel application to help clarify the exact relief being sought. If appropriate,
                             and to the extent possible, a draft instrument should be adapted from a
                             current or recent individual instrument, legislative instrument, notifiable
                             instrument or pro forma instrument. An applicant should explain the
                             adaptations and highlight any changes in the application.

                                   Note: Individual instruments are published in the ASIC Gazette.

              RG 51.62       We will only use the draft instrument as an aid in assessing the application.
                             If we grant the relief, we may do so on terms other than those of the draft
                             instrument.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                    Page 18
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




D          The application process


                               Key points

                               Applicants must submit their relief application through the ASIC Regulatory
                               Portal and clearly indicate if the application is urgent or confidential. After
                               submission, ASIC may request additional details to support the type and
                               nature of your request, or if the application is incomplete.

                               ASIC assigns an officer to each application. Under the ASIC service
                               charter, we aim to reach an in-principle decision:
                               • for 70% of relief applications received––within 28 days of all information
                                 and fees being provided; and
                               • for 90% of relief applications received––within 90 days of all information
                                 and fees being provided.

                               We encourage applicants to begin the process for relief as early as
                               possible when structuring their proposed activity, and to obtain legal and
                               other relevant professional advice during their preparations.

                               Applications for relief should be submitted in advance of any proposed
                               transaction, or relevant statutory deadline, to allow sufficient time for ASIC
                               to consider their application.

                               We cannot guarantee that applications submitted shortly before a
                               transaction is to be undertaken, or shortly before the statutory deadline,
                               can be processed by ASIC within the requested timeframe. Applications
                               that are submitted with insufficient time for ASIC to consider may be
                               refused and application fees will still be payable.




Preparing a relief application
              RG 51.63       You are responsible for:
                             (a)   determining the specific provision(s) from which the proposed relief is
                                   sought and applying to ASIC for all appropriate relief;
                             (b)   providing all relevant information and the accuracy and completeness of
                                   the information to support your application (see Table 1 and Table 2);
                                   and
                             (c)   payment of the application fees (see Section E).

              RG 51.64       All applications for relief should meet the requirements set out in this guide,
                             and where relevant, the requirements in other ASIC guidance on particular
                             kinds of relief. We can only determine applications for relief that are
                             complete and provide sufficient detail. It is important for applicants to




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                         Page 19
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             provide all the information required to avoid delays in ASIC’s assessment of
                             their application.

              RG 51.65       We will analyse the proposed commercial activity to decide whether the
                             relief applied for is necessary and sufficient to overcome the legal obstacles
                             identified in an application. We will not necessarily look for other legal
                             obstacles to an applicant’s proposed course of action.

              RG 51.66       Discussions with ASIC officers are not a substitute for legal advice.
                             Applicants are responsible for obtaining their own legal and other
                             professional advice.

              RG 51.67       An application that has been preceded by discussions with ASIC officers
                             will not receive any priority on that account alone, and the views of
                             individual ASIC officers on policy issues are not binding on ASIC.


                             Incomplete applications

              RG 51.68       We may refuse an application that does not fully address all of the relevant
                             issues. In this situation, and if it is possible to do so, our officers will inform
                             the applicant before refusing an application and may give an applicant an
                             opportunity to provide the additional information. However, if all of this
                             information is not supplied within a specified time, we will refuse the
                             application.


                             Applications on a tentative basis

              RG 51.69       If you make a tentative application before your proposed activity is settled,
                             in some circumstances we may be able to indicate our in-principle decision
                             on the relief, noting that we must consider our obligations to record and
                             make public our decisions. We may withdraw our in-principle decision if
                             further information subsequently becomes available that results in us
                             changing our view of the appropriateness of the relief or if you have not
                             notified us that you will proceed with the transaction within a reasonable
                             time.

                                   Note: The prescribed fee must be paid when you make your application, even if you
                                   later withdraw your application or decide not to proceed with the proposed activity.


                             Urgent applications

              RG 51.70       In certain situations, we may assess applications on an urgent basis (i.e.
                             within a specific and short timeframe). However, we will only do so in
                             exceptional circumstances because this would give the urgent application
                             priority over previously submitted applications.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                   Page 20
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




              RG 51.71       Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the urgency results from factors
                             beyond their reasonable control that they could not have reasonably
                             foreseen. Self-imposed deadlines are not a sufficient basis for urgent
                             consideration. Urgent applications that are not submitted to ASIC at the
                             earliest practicable time run the risk of being refused because we have not
                             had the opportunity to fully consider the application. If we have not had time
                             to reach a clear view that the application should be granted, we may refuse
                             the application.


                             Confidentiality

              RG 51.72       You should clearly indicate if your application is confidential up to a
                             particular point in time, including the reason(s) for its confidentiality. In this
                             case, you should advise us of the name of the person to receive all
                             communications regarding the application.

              RG 51.73       Under s127 of the ASIC Act, ASIC must take reasonable measures to
                             prevent unauthorised use and disclosure of information we receive in
                             confidence in connection with our statutory functions. Certain uses and
                             disclosure are taken to be authorised.

                                   Note 1: ASIC also has express powers under s25 and s37 to disclose certain information
                                   for certain purposes.

                                   Note 2: Certain instruments must be gazetted, published on our website and entered on
                                   our public database: see RG 51.78.

              RG 51.74       A person directly and materially adversely affected by a decision to use or
                             disclose confidential information should normally be accorded procedural
                             fairness.

              RG 51.75       For information about our approach to confidentiality, see Regulatory
                             Guide 103 Confidentiality and release of information (RG 103).

                                   Note: We may be required to provide documents under the Commonwealth freedom of
                                   information legislation and court and parliamentary processes.




Submitting a relief application
              RG 51.76       Applicants must submit their relief applications through the ASIC
                             Regulatory Portal and clearly indicate if the application is urgent or
                             confidential. For more information, see How to apply for relief and
                             FAQs: Apply for relief.

                                   Note: Applicants are required to pay fees set under legislation: see Section D. We have
                                   provided details about payment options in the ASIC Regulatory Portal.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                   Page 21
                                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




How we assess relief applications
              RG 51.77       An ASIC officer will be assigned to assess each relief application. An
                             applicant should deal directly with this nominated officer.

              RG 51.78       If your application is successful, the ASIC officer will:
                             (a)   give you notice of the in-principle decision and a copy of the draft
                                   instrument of relief (when ready);
                             (b)   execute the instrument; and
                             (c)   arrange for the instrument to be gazetted (if necessary) or published on
                                   our website (which is required for some relief instruments) and entered
                                   on our public database.

                                   Note 1: Our in-principle decision to grant relief is subject to the settling of the final
                                   form of the relief instrument, including any requirements or conditions, with the
                                   applicant. We may refuse to grant the relief notwithstanding an earlier in-principle
                                   decision to grant relief if we are unable to settle the final form of the relief instrument
                                   with the applicant.

                                   Note 2: Under the Legislation Act 2003, a legislative instrument is generally required to
                                   be tabled in Parliament and is subject to a process of potential disallowance. Further, a
                                   legislative instrument is subject to an expiry date and will be repealed automatically, or
                                   ‘sunset’, after 10 years (or such earlier date specified in the instrument), unless we take
                                   action to preserve its effect by remaking it.

              RG 51.79       If your application is unsuccessful, the ASIC officer will notify you of our
                             in-principle decision and briefly set out the reasons for the decision. We will
                             generally give you an opportunity to respond to our in-principle decision to
                             refuse relief. We will consider your response to our in-principle decision
                             before making our final decision. We will generally provide an applicant an
                             opportunity to withdraw their application if we have decided, in principle, to
                             refuse the application, provided there is sufficient time for the applicant to
                             respond (e.g. before the passing of a statutory deadline).

                                   Note 1: If an applicant would like to withdraw their application at any time, they should
                                   advise us of that fact. The application will be recorded as having been withdrawn, rather
                                   than refused.

                                   Note 2: Information Sheet 9 ASIC decisions: Your rights (INFO 9) summarises your
                                   rights regarding our decision about your relief application. In addition to the rights set
                                   out in INFO 9, ASIC has certain obligations relating to confidential information and
                                   procedural fairness. Where relevant, an applicant may have a right to seek review by the
                                   Takeovers Panel of certain decisions under s655A and s673 of the Corporations Act.

                                   Note 3: You may have a right to seek a review of ASIC’s decision by the
                                   Administrative Review Tribunal. For further information, see the Administrative
                                   Review Tribunal webpage.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                        Page 22
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             Standard applications

              RG 51.80       In dealing with a standard application, the ASIC officer will:
                             (a)   determine whether you satisfy the prerequisites for the relief, by
                                   reference to published ASIC policy and pro forma instrument (where
                                   relevant); and
                             (b)   make and record the decision.


                             Minor and technical applications

              RG 51.81       In dealing with a minor and technical application, the ASIC officer must be
                             satisfied that:
                             (a)   the departure from existing policy is in fact minor and technical (see
                                   RG 51.51–RG 51.54); and
                             (b)   the request for a variation to the existing policy is no wider than is
                                   reasonably required to achieve an applicant’s commercial objectives.

              RG 51.82       We will refuse or limit excessively wide-ranging applications. When we can
                             accommodate an applicant’s objective with standard relief, the ASIC officer
                             will offer to deal with the application as a standard application under the
                             relevant published policy.

              RG 51.83       After an application has been determined as either successful or
                             unsuccessful, the process is as per RG 51.78–RG 51.79.


                             Novel applications

              RG 51.84       When considering a novel application, the ASIC officer will:
                             (a)   obtain internal legal advice on the relief sought, if needed—you should
                                   be aware that this takes time;
                             (b)   consider the policy implications of the application to determine whether
                                   the relief should be granted and, if so, on what conditions—this may
                                   involve liaising internally on policy issues and, as such, may also take
                                   time; and
                             (c)   conclude the application as per RG 51.78–RG 51.79.

              RG 51.85       Novel applications often raise issues that we decide require public comment.
                             ASIC may seek public comment through hearings or submissions, either
                             before or after the application is finalised. If extensive liaison with the public
                             is required before a general policy decision can be made, we may give
                             interim relief or a no-action letter to the applicant, if appropriate, pending
                             final resolution of the application.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                         Page 23
                                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             Providing procedural fairness to third parties

              RG 51.86       When assessing a relief application, ASIC must also consider whether the
                             interests of any third party could be affected by the decision to grant
                             relief. In some circumstances, we may be required to consult with a third
                             party to understand whether and how they might be affected. If we determine
                             that third-party consultation is required, we will notify the applicant of our
                             intention to provide information about the relief application to the third party.

                                   Note: Applicants are asked to provide details of any third parties affected by the
                                   application: see Table 1.

              RG 51.87       If we determine that we are required to provide procedural fairness to a third
                             party who may be affected by our decision to grant relief, this may affect the
                             assessment times for the relief application.


                             Assessment times

              RG 51.88       We encourage applicants to apply for relief as early as possible when
                             structuring their proposed activity and to obtain legal advice at this time.
                             However, applicants should only apply when there is sufficient information
                             for us to consider their application. This will help us deal with applications
                             in a timely and efficient way.

              RG 51.89       Applicants should direct any query about assessment times to the officer
                             assigned to their application.

              RG 51.90       Assessment times given by ASIC are indicative only. They are also based on
                             the assumption that:
                             (a)   an application is fully and carefully made in accordance with any
                                   relevant existing policy; and
                             (b)   an applicant has disclosed everything that they are aware of that is
                                   relevant to the making of our decision (see Section C).

              RG 51.91       Subject to RG 51.90, we aim to give applicants an in-principle decision
                             within 28 days of receiving a complete application, including all the
                             necessary information to support the application and fees. Where an
                             application is novel, or if an applicant does not give us all the information
                             we need, our assessment of the application may take longer to complete.

                                   Note: Target assessment times are set out in ASIC’s service charter, which is available
                                   on our website. Please note that these times are indicative only and may vary on a case-
                                   by-case basis.

              RG 51.92       Generally, a relief application that is standard or minor and technical will
                             take less time to consider than a novel application. However, we will still
                             consider the circumstances of the individual application and have regard to
                             the factors set out in Section C. If an application is novel, we will aim to
                             give the applicant an interim response to inform them of our progress.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                        Page 24
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




E          How ASIC charges fees for relief applications


                               Key points

                               For each application for relief, the fee that we will charge depends on:
                               • the number of substantive matters raised in the application;
                               • the number of heads of power involved;
                               • whether there are ancillary matters;
                               • if there is more than one person or entity seeking relief; and
                               • if there are any revocations or variations required.

                               Generally, we will charge a fee for each substantive matter raised and each
                               head of power required to be used for each application. For applications
                               involving a pro forma instrument, we will charge a fee for each head of
                               power involved.




Fees payable for relief applications
              RG 51.93       Fees are payable to the Commonwealth for ‘chargeable matters’, as defined
                             in s9 of the Corporations (Fees) Act 2001 (Corporations Fees Act) and s4(1)
                             of the National Consumer Credit Protection (Fees) Act 2009 (Credit Fees
                             Act). An application to ASIC for an exemption, declaration, approval,
                             consent or statement under certain provisions of the legislation ASIC
                             administers is a chargeable matter under the Corporations Fees Act and the
                             Credit Fees Act. We charge fees for all ‘chargeable matters’.

              RG 51.94       Fees are set under legislation. The amount that we will charge for an
                             application depends on the relief that is sought. For more information, see
                             Information Sheet 30 Fees for commonly lodged documents (INFO 30).
                             Details about the payment options are available through the ASIC
                             Regulatory Portal.

                                   Note: Also see Sch 1 to the Corporations (Fees) Regulations 2001 and Sch 1 to the
                                   National Consumer Credit Protection (Fees) Regulations 2010 for current fee amounts.


                             Liability to pay fees

              RG 51.95       Applicants are liable to pay the application fee even if we decide to grant
                             relief in a different form to what they have requested or if the application is
                             withdrawn or refused. An applicant must pay, and we must collect, the
                             prescribed fee. The fee is non-refundable and generally cannot be waived.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                Page 25
                                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




              RG 51.96       We may refuse to undertake an act that requires payment of a fee until the
                             fee has been paid: see s1355 of the Corporations Act and s233 of the
                             National Credit Act.



The principles we apply in calculating fees
              RG 51.97       We consider the following when calculating the fees payable for an
                             application:
                             (a)   the number of substantive matters involved;
                             (b)   the number of heads of power involved;
                             (c)   if there are ancillary matters;
                             (d)   if there is more than one person or entity seeking relief (e.g. AFS
                                   licence, credit licence, managed investment scheme, CCIV or
                                   company); and
                             (e)   if there are any revocations or variations required.

                             Table 3:      Principles for calculating fees

                               Principle          Considerations

                               Fee for each       A fee is chargeable for each substantive matter raised in an
                               substantive        application. A substantive matter is a matter requiring us to
                               matter             make a separate decision.

                                                  To determine whether an application requires a separate
                                                  decision, and is therefore a substantive matter, we consider
                                                  whether the relief being sought under an application may stand
                                                  by itself without the need for additional relief.

                                                  An application that involves a merely ancillary matter would
                                                  generally be insufficient to stand by itself and would normally
                                                  require additional relief to be granted in order for the relief to
                                                  have the intended effect for which the relief was sought.

                               Fee for each       Different powers
                               head of power
                                                  Generally, an application involving the exercise of powers under
                                                  two provisions comprises two chargeable matters. For example,
                                                  an applicant who seeks relief under both s951B and s1020F of
                                                  the Corporations Act must pay the fee referable to each of those
                                                  sections.

                                                  Same power

                                                  If an application is seeking more than one exemption or
                                                  declaration under the same head of power, (e.g. two or more
                                                  modifications to Ch 2 under s109 of the Credit Act), one or more
                                                  fees may be charged, depending on the number of substantive
                                                  decisions required.

                                                  If there are multiple substantive decisions to be made, a multiple
                                                  of the prescribed fee will be payable.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                  Page 26
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                               Principle          Considerations

                               Fee for each       If, however, there is only one substantive decision involved, then
                               head of power      only one fee will be charged (it will not matter how many
                               (cont.)            provisions of the legislation may be affected). For example, an
                                                  application to modify several provisions of Ch 2 of the Credit Act
                                                  using the same power in s109 of the Credit Act.

                               Fee for            In many cases, an application affects more than one provision,
                               ancillary          although it deals with only one substantive matter. We will
                               matters            charge only one fee if a suite of exemptions or declarations is
                                                  needed to deal with one substantive matter—although many
                                                  merely ancillary matters may be involved (subject to the principle
                                                  relating to ‘fees for each head of power’).

                                                  For example, if we decide to modify the effect of Pt 5C.6 of the
                                                  Corporations Act, dealing with the withdrawal rights provisions
                                                  and procedures for illiquid schemes, an ancillary declaration to
                                                  modify s601GA(4) of the Corporations Act is also likely to be
                                                  necessary to give effect to the substantive decision. In such a
                                                  case, we charge only one fee.

                               More than one      If we receive a request to exercise one or more heads of power
                               person or          for more than one credit licence, managed investment scheme,
                               entity seeking     CCIV or company, a separate decision is needed for each head
                               relief             of power for each entity—to the extent that the decision is not for
                                                  ancillary relief. Accordingly, the number of substantive matters
                                                  raised (and therefore the number of fees charged) will be the
                                                  number of heads of power required to be exercised multiplied by
                                                  the number of entities affected.

                                                  For example:
                                                   If a group of 10 credit licensees makes an application for the
                                                    same relief for each credit licensee (i.e. where the application
                                                    is made by a law firm for a number of licensees in the same
                                                    group), the applicable fee would be the 10 credit licensees
                                                    multiplied by the prescribed fee for the exercise of that head of
                                                    power.
                                                   If a responsible entity of 10 different schemes sought the
                                                    same declaration to modify s601GA under s601QA(1)(b) of
                                                    the Corporations Act for each scheme, the applicable fee is
                                                    10 times the prescribed fee for the exercise of that head of
                                                    power.

                                                  Similarly, if a number of wholly owned subsidiaries of one
                                                  holding company require financial reporting and audit relief
                                                  under s340 of the Corporations Act, the applicable fee is the fee
                                                  attracted by s340 multiplied by the number of wholly owned
                                                  subsidiaries that require relief.



                             Pro forma applications

              RG 51.98       Generally, we will treat a standard pro forma instrument as relating to only
                             one substantive matter, even if a particular pro forma modifies or provides
                             an exemption from several different provisions, or relates to the operation of



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                               Page 27
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             one provision in different fact situations. Therefore, we will charge one fee
                             for an application for a pro forma instrument if that application requires us to
                             make an exemption or declaration under one head of power. If, however, a
                             pro forma application requires the exercise of powers under more than one
                             head of power, the prescribed fee will be charged for each head of power
                             affected.

              RG 51.99       For example, in the case of Pro Forma 187 Management rights schemes
                             where the strata unit cannot be used as a residence (PF 187), fees are
                             payable for:
                             (a)   the exemption under s992B(1)(a) of the Corporations Act; and
                             (b)   the exemption under s1020F(1)(a) of the Corporations Act.

              RG 51.100      Paragraph 3 of PF 187 gives an exemption from s992AA of the Corporations
                             Act to a person, other than a promoter referred to in Schedule A of the
                             instrument, if there is an offer to sell an interest in the relevant managed
                             investment scheme. This is considered an ancillary matter to the other relief
                             in the instrument given under s992B(1)(a) of the Corporations Act and so
                             does not attract an additional fee.



Revocations or variations
              RG 51.101      An instrument that varies or revokes a previous instrument is made under the
                             same power as the original instrument: see s33(3) of the Acts Interpretation
                             Act 1901. Therefore, the fee for a new application to vary or revoke an
                             existing instrument will be assessed in accordance with the principles in
                             Table 3.

              RG 51.102      When an instrument needs to be amended or revoked to deal effectively with
                             the original application, no fee will be charged. This is because the new
                             instrument is needed to deal with the original matter. An example is when
                             we have made an error in the original instrument of relief.

              RG 51.103      If a new instrument is needed because there was an issue with the original
                             application or its scope has changed, an additional fee will be charged. This
                             is because a corrected or changed application will raise a new substantive
                             matter.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                        Page 28
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AGM                       Annual general meeting

                               ancillary matter          A matter that, by itself, will normally require additional
                                                         relief to have the effect for which it is sought

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                         2001

                               chargeable matter         A matter set out in s9 of the Corporations Fees Act or s4
                                                         of the National Credit Fees Act. A chargeable matter
                                                         includes a relief application

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               Corporations Fees         Corporations (Fees) Act 2001
                               Act

                               Corporations Fees         Corporations (Fees) Regulations 2001
                               Regulations

                               Credit Fees Act           National Consumer Credit Protection (Fees) Act 2009

                               credit licence            An Australian credit licence under s35 of the National
                                                         Credit Act that authorises a licensee to engage in
                                                         particular credit activities

                               credit licensee           A person who holds an Australian credit licence under
                                                         s35 of the National Credit Act

                               Insurance Act             Insurance Act 1973

                               legislation ASIC          This refers to:
                               administers                the ASIC Act;
                                                          the Corporations Act;
                                                          the Insurance Act
                                                          the National Credit Act;
                                                          the SIS Act;
                                                          the Transitional Act; or
                                                          any other legislation ASIC administers
                                                           Note: In some cases ASIC administers only part of the
                                                           legislation.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                   Page 29
                                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               legislative instrument    An ASIC instrument that usually applies to a class of
                                                         persons or entities who carry out a particular activity in
                                                         certain circumstances by providing exemptions,
                                                         modifications, declarations, waivers and rules
                                                           Note: Prior to 2015, legislative instruments were referred to as
                                                           ‘class orders’.

                               managed investment        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                               scheme

                               notifiable instrument     A notifiable instrument is an instrument that is likely to be
                                                         of long-term public interest and for which public
                                                         accessibility and centralised management is desirable.
                                                         This includes instruments declared to be notifiable
                                                         instruments by primary law or regulations

                               National Credit Act       National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009
                                                           Note: References in this guide to the National Credit Act
                                                           include references to the Transitional Act.

                               no-action letter          A letter in which we state to a particular person that we
                                                         do not intend to take regulatory action against that person
                                                         over a particular state of affairs or conduct at a specific
                                                         point in time

                               relief                    Relief by exemption or declaration (to omit, vary or
                                                         modify) under legislation ASIC administers

                               relief application        An application for ASIC to exercise its exemption or
                                                         declaration powers when the relief is provided by
                                                         instrument, and includes an approval, exemption,
                                                         declaration, consent or statement under certain legislative
                                                         provisions

                               responsible entity        A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined in
                                                         s9 of the Corporations Act

                               RG 275 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example, numbered
                                                         275)

                               SIS Act                   Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993

                               substantive matter        A matter requiring ASIC to make a separate decision




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                    Page 30
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




Related information


                             Headnotes

                             ancillary matters, applications for relief, chargeable matters, class relief,
                             comfort relief, disclosure, discretionary powers, extension of time for
                             holding AGM, fees, licensing, no-action letters, retrospective relief,
                             substantive matters


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 28 Relief from dual lodgement of financial reports

                             RG 43 Financial reports and audit relief

                             RG 44 Annual general meeting: Extension of time

                             RG 72 Foreign securities: Disclosure relief

                             RG 103 Confidentiality and release of information

                             RG 108 No-action letters

                             RG 115 Audit relief for proprietary companies

                             RG 136 Funds management: Discretionary powers

                             RG 167 AFS licensing: Discretionary powers

                             RG 169 Hawking and disclosure: Discretionary powers

                             RG 174 Relief for externally administered companies and registered
                             schemes being wound up

                             RG 189 Disclosure relief for rights issues

                             RG 233 Indirect self-acquisition: Relief for investment funds

                             RG 265 Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for participants of
                             securities markets

                             RG 266 Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for participants of futures
                             markets

                             RG 275 The deferred sales model for add-on insurance




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                         Page 31
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 51: Applications for relief




                             Information sheets

                             INFO 9 ASIC decisions: Your rights

                             INFO 30 Fees for commonly lodged fees

                             INFO 82 Apply for relief


                             Legislation

                             Acts Interpretation Act 1901, s33(3)

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001, s1(2), 12A, 127

                             Corporations Act 2001, Ch 6, Pt 5C.6, s340, 340(1), 341, 342, 601GA,
                             601GA(4), 601QA(1)(a), 601QA(1)(b), 602, 655A, 673, 911A(2)(1), 913A,
                             922B(1)(a), 951B, 992AA, 992B(1)(a), 1020F, 1020F(1)(a), 1279, 1318,
                             1322, 1355

                             Corporations (Fees) Act 2001, s9

                             Corporations (Fees) Regulations 2001, Sch 1

                             ePayments Code

                             Insurance Act 1973

                             Legislation Act 2003

                             National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009, s183, 233

                             National Consumer Credit Protection (Fees) Act 2009, s4, 4(1)

                             National Consumer Credit Protection (Fees) Regulations 2010, Sch 1

                             National Consumer Credit Protection (Transitional and Consequential
                             Provisions) Act 2009

                             Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                        Page 32
