REGULATORY GUIDE 78

Breach reporting by AFS
licensees and credit licensees

December 2023




About this guide
This guide is for Australian financial services (AFS) licensees and Australian
credit licensees (credit licensees).

It gives guidance on your obligation to report to ASIC certain breaches of the
law under Div 3 of Pt 7.6 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act)
and Div 5 of Pt 2-2 of the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009
(National Credit Act).
    Note: This guide does not cover certain reporting obligations: see RG 78.12.
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was reissued in December 2023 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. In May 2024, we updated
                             RG 78.148(b)(viii) to include mention of Ch 7 of the Corporations Act, and
                             updated the link to the ASIC Regulatory Portal in RG 78.155. In August
                             2025, we made some minor updates to reflect ASIC’s relief that took effect
                             on 24 June 2025, and updated the question numbering in Appendix 2. In
                             February 2026, we made minor changes following the reissue of Regulatory
                             Guide 34 Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC (RG 34).

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 78, issued September 2008, reissued
                                     February 2014, March 2020, September 2021, April 2023, August 2025;
                                     and
                                    Superseded Breach reporting by AFS licensees: An ASIC guide, issued
                                     October 2004, reissued May 2006, and known in the ASIC Digest as
                                     [SGD 190]; rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007.


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                              Page 2
                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Contents


                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Who this guide applies to................................................................... 4
                                    What is the breach reporting obligation? ........................................... 4
                                    Our approach to guidance ................................................................. 6
                                    What this guide does not cover ......................................................... 6
                                    How our guidance applies ................................................................. 8
                             B      What you must report to ASIC........................................................ 9
                                    What is a ‘reportable situation’? ......................................................... 9
                                    What is a breach or likely significant breach of your core
                                    obligations? ...................................................................................... 12
                                    What is a reportable investigation? ................................................. 24
                                    What are additional reportable situations? ...................................... 30
                                    Reportable situations about other licensees: Financial advisers
                                    and mortgage brokers ...................................................................... 31
                             C      When and how to report to ASIC ................................................. 36
                                    When must you report a reportable situation?................................. 36
                                    How do you report a reportable situation? ....................................... 42
                                    When can multiple reportable situations be grouped together in a
                                    single report (the ‘grouping test’)? ................................................... 44
                                    What will ASIC do after we receive your report? .............................. 48
                                    What are the consequences of failing to report to ASIC? ............... 49
                                    What information will ASIC publish? ................................................ 50
                             D      Compliance systems and identifying, recording and
                                    reporting breaches ........................................................................ 51
                                    What arrangements should you have in place for recording and
                                    reporting breaches? ......................................................................... 51
                                    Developing your approach to the breach reporting obligation: Some
                                    practical insights ............................................................................... 53
                                    Do you need a breach register? ...................................................... 55
                             Appendix 1: Summary of core obligations for licensees .................. 56
                             Appendix 2: Frequently asked questions about how to complete
                                ASIC’s reportable situations form ............................................... 61
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 73
                             Related information ............................................................................... 77




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                                      Page 3
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              If you are an Australian financial services (AFS) licensee or an Australian
                              credit licensee (credit licensee), you must comply with your obligation to
                              report certain breaches of the law to ASIC.

                              This guide explains:
                              • what you must report to ASIC (see Section B);
                              • when and how you must report to ASIC, including information about how
                                we deal with the reports we receive and the information we will publish
                                about your reports (see Section C); and
                              • our expectations and guidance about your compliance systems (see
                                Section D).




Who this guide applies to
              RG 78.1        This guidance applies to AFS licensees and credit licensees and their
                             representatives.

                                  Note: In this guide, we refer collectively to AFS licensees and credit licensees as
                                  ‘licensees’.

              RG 78.2        A breach reporting obligation for credit licensees was introduced into Div 5
                             of Pt 2-2 of the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 (National
                             Credit Act) by the Financial Sector Reform (Hayne Royal Commission
                             Response) Act 2020 (Financial Sector Reform Act). This obligation mirrors
                             the breach reporting obligation for AFS licensees in Subdiv B, Div 3, Pt 7.6
                             of Ch 7 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) as reformed by the
                             Financial Sector Reform Act. Specific credit guidance is provided
                             throughout this guide where relevant.



What is the breach reporting obligation?
              RG 78.3        The breach reporting obligation requires licensees to self-report specified
                             matters to ASIC. As stated in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Financial
                             Sector Reform (Hayne Royal Commission Response) Bill 2020 (Explanatory
                             Memorandum):
                                  Breach reporting is a cornerstone of Australia’s financial services regulatory
                                  structure. Breach reports allow ASIC to detect significant non-compliant
                                  behaviours early and take action where appropriate. It also allows ASIC to
                                  identify and address emerging trends of non-compliance in the industry.
                                  Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.3.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                        Page 4
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




              RG 78.4        Early detection and reporting of misconduct and breaches of regulatory
                             requirements allows ASIC to:
                             (a)   monitor the extent and severity of non-compliance and commence
                                   surveillance and investigation when necessary;
                             (b)   take law enforcement and regulatory action when warranted, including
                                   administrative action to protect consumers of financial products and
                                   services; and
                             (c)   identify and respond to emerging threats, harms and trends within the
                                   financial services industry, detect significant non-compliant behaviours
                                   early, and take the appropriate regulatory response.

              RG 78.5        The regulatory regime acknowledges that, despite an expectation of
                             compliance, breaches will occur and licensees then have an obligation to
                             report these to ASIC. Licensees have a clear role in lifting industry standards
                             as a whole, and part of this is timely identification of their own problems.

              RG 78.6        We consider that a licensee’s experience with incident and issues management,
                             including breaches, should be a vital source of learning to both reinforce and
                             improve an entity’s compliance framework and overall function. Instances of
                             non-compliance highlight a weakness to be understood, so improvements can
                             be made to prevent the recurrence of the breach in the future.

              RG 78.7        Breach reporting has been identified as an important aspect of our regulatory
                             regime by:
                             (a)   the ASIC Enforcement Review Taskforce, which made several
                                   recommendations for strengthening and clarifying the breach reporting
                                   requirements in the Corporations Act and recommended that a
                                   comparable breach reporting regime for credit licensees be introduced
                                   (Recommendation 2);
                             (b)   the Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation
                                   and Financial Services Industry (Financial Services Royal
                                   Commission), which recommended that the Taskforce
                                   recommendations should be carried into effect (Recommendation 7.2)
                                   and that serious compliance concerns be reported (Recommendations
                                   2.8 and 1.6); and
                             (c)   Report 594 Review of selected financial services groups’ compliance
                                   with the breach reporting obligation (REP 594), which sets out the
                                   findings of ASIC’s review of AFS licensees’ compliance with their
                                   breach reporting obligation under s912D of the Corporations Act.

                                   Note: See Treasury, ASIC enforcement review: Taskforce report, December 2017;
                                   Financial Services Royal Commission, Final report, February 2019.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                               Page 5
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Our approach to guidance
              RG 78.8        This guide gives guidance on your obligation as a licensee to report to ASIC
                             certain breaches of the law. We explain what information must be provided
                             when reporting to ASIC, and what happens after you report, including what
                             information we will publish as required by law. By explaining how we deal
                             with these breach reports, we seek to enhance the transparency of our
                             processes.

              RG 78.9        To help you understand your obligations and how they might apply in
                             different factual circumstances, this guide contains a number of examples
                             and historical case studies drawn from REP 594. These examples and case
                             studies are for illustrative purposes only, and do not purport to limit the
                             types of reportable situations that must be reported to ASIC or the reasons
                             why a particular breach may or may not be considered significant.

              RG 78.10       Rather, we provide these examples and case studies to help provide clarity
                             and promote the delivery of consistent and high quality reports. Ultimately,
                             it is your responsibility to decide whether you must report to ASIC under the
                             law, by considering the circumstances of your case.

              RG 78.11       This guide should be read in conjunction with our regulatory guides on how
                             we administer Ch 7 of the Corporations Act and Ch 2 of the National Credit
                             Act, including Regulatory Guide 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general
                             obligations (RG 104), Regulatory Guide 105 AFS licensing: Organisational
                             competence (RG 105) and Regulatory Guide 205 Credit licensing: General
                             conduct obligations (RG 205).



What this guide does not cover
              RG 78.12       This guide does not cover the following obligations to report matters to ASIC
                             if you:
                             (a)   are a body regulated by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
                                   (APRA) and you cease to hold that status—for example, if you are a
                                   superannuation trustee and you have your approval as a trustee revoked
                                   by APRA (see Pro Forma 209 Australian financial services licence
                                   conditions (PF 209), condition 11);
                             (b)   become aware of a change in control of the licensee (see
                                   reg 7.6.04(1)(i) of the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations
                                   Regulations) or reg 9(10) of the National Consumer Credit Protection
                                   Regulations 2010 (National Credit Regulations));

                                   Note 1: For more information about a change in control of the licensee, see Change in
                                   control of AFS licensee on the ASIC website.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                   Page 6
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                   Note 2: In this guide, we use the term ‘regulations’ when referring collectively to the
                                   Corporations Regulations and the National Credit Regulations.

                             (c)   are an auditor whose reporting obligations are imposed by s311,
                                   s324CA–CC, 324CE–CG, 601HG, 990K or 1226H of the Corporations
                                   Act or s104 of the National Credit Act (see RG 34); or
                             (d)   are a credit licensee, the obligation imposed by s53 of the National
                                   Credit Act to lodge an annual compliance certificate (see Information
                                   Sheet 135 Annual compliance certificates for credit licensees
                                   (INFO 135)).

              RG 78.13       You may also have separate obligations to report in addition to the breach
                             reporting obligation. For example:
                             (a)   Market integrity rules: A market participant must notify ASIC of
                                   certain suspicious activities (see Rule 5.11.1 of the ASIC Market
                                   Integrity Rules (Securities Markets) 2017, Rule 3.6.1 of the ASIC
                                   Market Integrity Rules (Futures Markets) 2017, Regulatory Guide 265
                                   Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for participants of securities
                                   markets (RG 265) and Regulatory Guide 266 Guidance on ASIC market
                                   integrity rules for participants of future markets (RG 266)).
                             (b)   Australian Passport Rules: Australian passport fund operators must
                                   notify ASIC of specified changes and certain breaches of these rules, or
                                   of the passport rules of an applicable host economy of the fund (see s12
                                   of the Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018 and Regulatory Guide 132
                                   Funds management: Compliance and oversight (RG 132)).
                             (c)   Product design and distribution obligations: These obligations require
                                   an issuer to notify ASIC of a ‘significant dealing’ (see s994G of the
                                   Corporations Act and Regulatory Guide 274 Product design and
                                   distribution obligations (RG 274).
                             (d)   Internal dispute resolution (IDR) reporting: The IDR data reporting
                                   obligation requires some licensees to report to ASIC information about
                                   their IDR processes in operation (see s912A(1)(g)(ii) and 1017G(1)(d)
                                   of the Corporations Act, s47(1)(ha) of the National Credit Act,
                                   s47(1)(c) of the Retirement Savings Account Act 1997 (RSA Act) and
                                   s101(1)(c) of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 (SIS
                                   Act).

              RG 78.14       The IDR data reporting obligation is separate to the IDR requirements set
                             out in Regulatory Guide 271 Internal dispute resolution (RG 271), which
                             licensees must have in place to meet ASIC’s standards and requirements. A
                             significant breach of the enforceable IDR requirements may need to be
                             reported under the breach reporting regime (see RG 78.37(c) and
                             Example 4(e) in Table 4).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                      Page 7
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




How our guidance applies
              RG 78.15       For both AFS licensees and credit licensees, the breach reporting obligation
                             under the Financial Sector Reform Act as discussed in this guide applies to
                             ‘reportable situations’ that arose on or after 1 October 2021.

              RG 78.16       When an investigation must be reported to us as a reportable situation is
                             discussed at RG 78.48–RG 78.62. Investigations into an incident that
                             happened entirely before 1 October 2021 (i.e. the conduct that is the subject
                             of the incident is not continuing) are not reportable to ASIC, even if the
                             licensee commences an investigation into the incident on or after 1 October
                             2021, and the incident would have been a reportable situation had it occurred
                             on or after 1 October 2021.

              RG 78.17       An investigation that commenced before 1 October 2021 became a
                             reportable situation if:
                             (a)   the investigation was still in progress on or after 1 October 2021 and
                                   continued for more than 30 days; and
                             (b)   the investigation concerned an incident that started before 1 October
                                   2021 and the conduct that was the subject of the incident was
                                   continuing on 1 October 2021.


                             Credit licensees: Reporting breaches that occurred before
                             1 October 2021

              RG 78.18       Credit licensees are not required to report breaches of the National Credit
                             Act that occurred wholly before 1 October 2021, even if the breach is
                             identified on or after 1 October 2021.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                             Page 8
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




B          What you must report to ASIC

                              Key points

                              As a licensee, you must report to ASIC a range of conduct that the law
                              describes as ‘reportable situations’.
                              The types of reportable situations that you must report include:
                              • significant breaches or likely significant breaches of ‘core obligations’;
                              • investigations into whether there is a significant breach or likely breach
                                of a ‘core obligation’ if the investigation continues for more than 60 days;
                              • the outcome of such an investigation if it discloses there is no significant
                                breach or likely breach of a core obligation;
                              • conduct that constitutes gross negligence or serious fraud; and
                              • conduct of financial advisers and mortgage brokers who are
                                representatives of other licensees in certain prescribed circumstances.




What is a ‘reportable situation’?
              RG 78.19       You must report to ASIC all ‘reportable situations’: see s912DAA of the
                             Corporations Act, s50B of the National Credit Act. This term has a specific
                             meaning under the law and includes a range of conduct.

              RG 78.20       In this guide, we refer to four types of reportable situations (see Table 1):
                             (a)   breaches or ‘likely breaches’ of core obligations that are significant;
                             (b)   investigations into breaches or likely breaches of core obligations that
                                   are significant;
                             (c)   additional reportable situations; and
                             (d)   reportable situations about other licensees.

              RG 78.21       When we refer to a ‘likely breach’, we are referring to a situation where a
                             licensee is no longer able to comply with a core obligation and the breach, if it
                             occurs, will be significant: see s912D(1)(b) of the Corporations Act,
                             s50A(1)(b) of the National Credit Act.

              RG 78.22       For example, one of your licence conditions may require you to have
                             professional indemnity (PI) insurance. You become aware that your PI
                             insurance policy will lapse soon and you have been unable to secure a renewed
                             policy. If you are unable to find a new PI insurance policy before it lapses, you
                             will become uninsured and will no longer be able to comply with your licence
                             conditions. You must report to ASIC.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                             Page 9
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Table 1:    Types of reportable situations

 Type of situation          Description                                                 Guidance and examples

 Breaches or ‘likely        These situations include:                                   See RG 78.29–RG 78.47
 breaches’ of core           any breach of a ‘core obligation’ where the breach          Note: For guidance on
 obligations that are         is significant; and                                         determining whether or not
 significant                                                                              a breach is significant, see
                             any ‘likely breach’ of a ‘core obligation’ where the        RG 78.31–RG 78.47.
                              licensee or a representative of the licensee is no
                              longer able to comply with a core obligation and the
                              breach, if it occurs, will be significant.

 Investigations into        These situations include:                                   See RG 78.48–RG 78.62
 breaches or likely          investigations that continue for more than 60 days          Note: For guidance on
 breaches of core             into whether there is a breach or likely breach of a        determining whether or not
 obligations that are                                                                     a breach is significant, see
                              core obligation that is significant; and                    RG 78.31–RG 78.47.
 significant
                             the outcome of such an investigation if it discloses
                              there is no breach or likely breach of a core
                              obligation that is significant.

 Additional reportable      These situations include:                                   See RG 78.63–RG 78.67
 situations                  conduct constituting gross negligence;
                             conduct constituting serious fraud; and
                             other circumstances prescribed by the regulations.

 Reportable situations      These situations relate to conduct in certain               See RG 78.68–RG 78.82
 about other licensees      prescribed circumstances of financial advisers and
                            mortgage brokers of other licensees.


              RG 78.23       You must lodge a report with ASIC within 30 days after you first know that,
                             or are reckless with respect to whether, there are reasonable grounds to
                             believe a reportable situation has arisen: see s912DAA(3) of the
                             Corporations Act, s50B(4) of the National Credit Act.

                                  Note: For guidance on when reasonable grounds might arise, and the required
                                  timeframes for reporting, see RG 78.83–RG 78.106.

              RG 78.24       If a reportable situation arises, failure to report to ASIC in accordance with
                             your obligations is an offence and can lead to criminal or civil penalties: see
                             s912DAA of the Corporations Act, s50B of the National Credit Act.

                                  Note: For guidance on the consequences of failing to report, see RG 78.123–RG 78.126.

              RG 78.25       Reportable situations, ‘core obligations’ and objective determinations of
                             ‘significance’ are important and interrelated concepts underlying the breach
                             reporting obligation: see Figure 1.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                Page 10
                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Figure 1: Reportable situations, core obligations and objective determinations of ‘significance’

                                                Additional                     Investigations that take
                                           reportable situations                 more than 30 days
                                           (gross negligence or
                                              serious fraud)

                Reportable                                                        Deemed significant
                situations                                                           breaches

                                             Breaches or likely
                                             breaches of ‘core
                                                obligations’                   Other breaches that are
                                                                                     significant


Note: This figure is described in RG 78.25–RG 78.27 (accessible version).


               RG 78.26        While we provide guidance on these terms throughout this guide, Figure 1
                               highlights (with dark shading) three reportable situations that do not require
                               a ‘determination of significance’ before being reported to ASIC. These are:
                               (a)   ‘additional reportable situations’ (i.e. gross negligence or serious fraud),
                                     which must be reported to ASIC and require no determination of
                                     significance;
                               (b)   ‘deemed significant breaches’, which are automatically taken to be
                                     significant by operation of law; and
                               (c)   ‘investigations that continue for more than 60 days’, which require
                                     consideration of whether there may be a breach, or likely breach, of a
                                     core obligation that is significant, but do not require a determination of
                                     significance before being reported to ASIC.

               RG 78.27        Breaches or likely breaches of core obligations that do not fall into one of these
                               categories (shown with light shading in Figure 1) require an objective
                               determination of significance before being reported to ASIC.

                               Breaches by representatives

               RG 78.28        A licensee must report breaches committed by the licensee and by its
                               representatives, as this term is defined in the Corporations Act and the
                               National Credit Act:
                               (a)   for AFS licensees—representatives include authorised representatives,
                                     an employee or director of the licensee or related body corporate, or any
                                     other person acting on behalf of the licensee (see s9 of the Corporations
                                     Act); and
                               (b)   for credit licensees—representatives include an employee or director of
                                     the licensee or related body corporate of the licensee, credit
                                     representatives of the licensee, or any other person acting on behalf of
                                     the licensee (see s5 of the National Credit Act).
                                     Note: See RG 78.132–RG 78.146 for guidance on compliance systems, and monitoring
                                     and supervision of representatives (including authorised representatives at RG 78.136).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                     Page 11
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




What is a breach or likely significant breach of your core
obligations?
              RG 78.29       You must report to ASIC any significant breach (or likely significant breach)
                             of your ‘core obligations’, as defined in s912D(3) of the Corporations Act
                             for AFS licensees or s50A(3) of the National Credit Act for credit licensees.
                             Appendix 1 to this guide includes a detailed summary of the core obligations
                             for both AFS licensees and credit licensees.

                                   Note: In this guide, references to s912D(3) of the Corporations Act and s50A(3) of the
                                   National Credit Act are modified by s6 of ASIC Corporations and Credit (Breach
                                   Reporting—Reportable Situations) Instrument 2024/620.

              RG 78.30       You are only required to report breaches (or likely breaches) of core
                             obligations that are ‘significant’: see RG 78.31.


                             What does ‘significant’ breach mean?

              RG 78.31       You must report any breach or likely breach of a core obligation if the
                             breach is ‘significant’. There are two ways to determine whether a breach is
                             significant:
                             (a)   Deemed significant breaches: In certain situations, a breach or likely
                                   breach of a core obligation is taken to be significant (see RG 78.34–
                                   RG 78.44); and

                                   Note: Some breaches are excluded from being deemed significant: see section 6 of
                                   ASIC Instrument 2024/620.

                             (b)   Other breaches that may be significant: In other situations, a breach or
                                   likely breach of a core obligation will need to be considered against the
                                   factors in s912D(5) of the Corporations Act or s50A(5) of the National
                                   Credit Act to determine whether it is significant (see RG 78.45–
                                   RG 78.47).

              RG 78.32       In determining whether a breach is significant, you should first consider
                             whether a breach is a deemed significant breach. Only if it is not such a
                             breach should you then proceed to determine whether it is significant, having
                             regard to the factors in s912D(5) of the Corporations Act or s50A(5) of the
                             National Credit Act.

              RG 78.33       Licensees need an adequate incident and issues management system in place
                             to properly deal with each breach. As a critical part of such a system, an
                             accurate and complete breach register can help with the timely identification
                             of breaches and determination of whether or not an individual breach is
                             significant. For example, if you identify a single, isolated breach that is not
                             significant, it should be recorded in your breach register or risk management
                             system. Although a single breach may not be significant, multiple breaches
                             of the same kind may result in a later breach being considered significant:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 12
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                             see s912D(5)(a) of the Corporations Act or s50A(5)(a) of the National Credit
                             Act (which relate to the number or frequency of similar breaches).

                                   Note: For more information on breach registers and how you can demonstrate
                                   compliance with your obligations, see Section D. For guidance on breaches of s912D(5)
                                   of the Corporations Act or s50A(5) of the National Credit Act, see RG 78.45–RG 78.47.


                             What are ‘deemed significant breaches’?

              RG 78.34       Under s912D(4) of the Corporations Act or s50A(4) of the National Credit
                             Act, certain breaches of core obligations are taken to be significant (‘deemed
                             significant breaches’). If a breach is a ‘deemed significant breach’, no
                             additional steps are needed to determine whether the breach is ‘significant’
                             before reporting to ASIC. As stated in the Explanatory Memorandum:

                                   The purpose of the deemed significance test is to provide greater certainty
                                   for industry and to ensure significant breaches are reported to ASIC in a
                                   timely manner. For example, where a breach constitutes a contravention of
                                   a relevant civil penalty provision or the commission of a relevant offence,
                                   the significance of the breach is immediately taken to be satisfied.

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.37.

              RG 78.35       Deemed significant breaches include:
                             (a)   breaches that constitute the commission of an offence and the
                                   commission of the offence is punishable on conviction by a penalty that
                                   may include imprisonment for:
                                   (i)    three months or more if the offence involves dishonesty; or
                                   (ii)   12 months or more in any other case;
                             (b)   breaches of a civil penalty provision (other than a civil penalty
                                   provision that is excluded under the regulations);

                                   Note: Certain contraventions of core obligations, including the civil penalty provisions,
                                   are not taken to be significant: see RG 78.38.

                             (c)   for credit licensees, breaches that constitute a contravention of a key
                                   requirement under s111 of the National Credit Code (Sch 1 to the
                                   National Credit Act) (except if the key requirement is exempted under
                                   the regulations);
                             (d)   breaches that contravene s1041H(1) of the Corporations Act or
                                   s12DA(1) of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                   2001 (ASIC Act) (the misleading or deceptive conduct provisions);

                                   Note: Certain contraventions of core obligations, including the misleading or deceptive
                                   conduct provisions, are not taken to be significant: see RG 78.38.

                             (e)   breaches that result, or are likely to result, in material loss or damage to:
                                   (i)    for credit licensees—a credit activity client of the licensee;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                    Page 13
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                                Note: The term ‘credit activity client’ is defined in s50A(6) of the National
                                                Credit Act.

                                   (ii)   for AFS licensees:
                                          (A)    in all cases—a person or persons to whom the AFS licensee or
                                                 a representative of the licensee provides a financial product or
                                                 a financial service as a wholesale or retail client;
                                          (B)    in the case of a managed investment scheme—a member or
                                                 members of the scheme; or
                                          (C)    in the case of a superannuation entity—a member or members
                                                 of the entity.

                             Breaches of civil penalty provisions, key requirements, the misleading
                             or deceptive conduct provisions and relevant exemptions

              RG 78.36       Breaches of civil penalty provisions and breaches of key requirements under
                             s111 of the National Credit Act must be reported to us as deemed significant
                             breaches. Breaches of the misleading or deceptive conduct provisions must
                             also be reported to us as deemed significant breaches.

              RG 78.37       However, a number of civil penalty provisions and key requirements are
                             excluded from the list of core obligations for which a breach is deemed to be
                             significant under s912D(4)(b) of the Corporations Act and s50A(4)(b) of the
                             National Credit Act, as follows:
                             (a)   Regulation 7.6.02A(2) of the Corporations Regulations (AFS licensees)
                                   and reg 12A of the National Credit Regulations (credit licensees)
                                   specify breaches of civil penalty provisions that do not need to be
                                   reported solely because the breach is a contravention of a civil penalty
                                   provision.
                             (b)   Regulation 12B of the National Credit Regulations excludes from
                                   deeming a number of key requirements under the National Credit Code.
                             (c)   While the enforceable paragraphs of RG 271 are civil penalty
                                   provisions, s5 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620 relieves single breaches of
                                   these provisions from being deemed significant breaches under
                                   s912D(4)(b) of the Corporations Act and s50A(4)(b) of the National
                                   Credit Act.

              RG 78.38       In addition, s6 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620 provides that certain
                             insignificant contraventions of core obligations are not taken to be
                             significant. These include:
                             (a)   a breach of the misleading or deceptive conduct provisions or the
                                   prohibition in s12DB(1) of the ASIC Act (the false or misleading
                                   representation prohibition) if the breach meets the following
                                   conditions:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                        Page 14
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                   (i)     the underlying circumstances in relation to the breach must have
                                           only given rise, and only be likely to give rise, to a single
                                           reportable situation;

                                   Note: Section 6 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620 provides that there is a single reportable
                                   situation even if particular conduct constitutes a single contravention of two or more of
                                   s12DA(1) or s12DB(1) of the ASIC Act or s1041H(1) of the Corporations Act: see
                                   notional s912D(4B)(a) of the Corporations Act and notional s50A(4B)(a) of the
                                   National Credit Act.

                                   (ii)    the relevant breach must only impact one person or, if the breach
                                           relates to a financial product, credit product, consumer lease,
                                           mortgage or guarantee that is, or is proposed to be, jointly held by
                                           consumers, impact only those consumers; and
                             (b)   the relevant breach must not result in, and be unlikely to result in, any
                                   financial loss or damage to any person (regardless of whether that loss
                                   or damage has been, or will or may be, remediated);a breach of a core
                                   obligation that meets the following conditions:
                                   (i)     the underlying circumstances in relation to the breach must have
                                           only given rise to a single reportable situation or single group of
                                           reportable situations;

                                   Note: A single group of reportable situations means two or more reportable situations
                                   that each involve the same or substantially similar conduct other than the identity of the
                                   consumer and the date of the conduct, and occur within a period of no more than 60
                                   days.

                                   (ii)    the underlying circumstances in relation to the breach must not
                                           constitute a contravention of sections 828C or 981M;
                                   (iii)   there are no more than 10 persons impacted by the single
                                           reportable situation or single group of reportable situations;
                                   (iv)    the total financial loss or damage from the single reportable
                                           situation or single group of reportable situations results does not
                                           exceed $1,000 (regardless of whether than loss or damage has
                                           been, or will or may be, remediated); and
                                   (v)     the breach must have been rectified (including any remediation to
                                           clients) within 60 days after the reportable situation first occurred.

              RG 78.39       If a breach is excluded from deeming under s6 of ASIC Instrument
                             2024/620, but then the underlying circumstances in relation to the breach
                             give rise to further reportable situations or it becomes evident that the breach
                             has given rise to further financial loss so that it no longer meets the
                             conditions of our relief, you must report it and any further breach(es) to us.

              RG 78.40       When a breach is excluded from deeming under the regulations or s5 or s6 of
                             ASIC Instrument 2024/620 you must still consider whether it is a deemed
                             significant breach under any of the other criteria in s912D(4) of the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                     Page 15
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                             Corporations Act or s50A(4) of the National Credit Act (see RG 78.35), such
                             as when the breach:
                             (a)   is a commission of an offence carrying certain penalties of
                                   imprisonment; or
                             (b)   results, or is likely to result in, material loss or damage to a client.

              RG 78.41       If you determine that none of those criteria apply, you must also consider
                             whether it is significant in light of the factors in s912D(5) of the
                             Corporations Act or s50A(5) of the National Credit Act (see RG 78.45–
                             RG 78.47).

                             Breaches that result, or are likely to result, in material loss or damage

              RG 78.42       The term ‘material loss or damage’ is not defined in the legislation. We
                             provide some examples of material loss or damage: see Example 3(a) in
                             Table 2.

              RG 78.43       In determining whether there is material loss or damage, licensees should be
                             guided by the Parliamentary intent in the Explanatory Memorandum (as it
                             applies to both the Corporations Act and the National Credit Act provisions):
                                   ‘Loss or damage’ in the context of the deemed significance test has its
                                   ordinary meaning, which is extensive. The term includes financial and non-
                                   financial loss or damage.
                                   Whether a breach results or is likely to result in material loss or damage to a
                                   person will depend on the person’s circumstances. For example, a relevant
                                   circumstance may include the person’s financial situation.
                                   If a breach affects several people, it is sufficient for significance to be
                                   established if the breach is likely to result in material loss or damage to one
                                   person. Additionally, where the breach affects several people, licensees
                                   should consider the total loss or damage resulting from the breach. For
                                   example, even if the breach does not result in a material loss or damage to
                                   individual persons, the total loss or damage to persons resulting from the
                                   breach may, when aggregated, amount to material loss or damage to
                                   persons, thereby satisfying the significance requirement.
                                   Consistent with the common law position, ‘likely to result in material loss
                                   or damage’ is intended to mean that there is a real and not remote
                                   possibility that loss or damage will occur as a result of the breach.
                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraphs 11.30–11.33.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 16
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




              RG 78.44       You should consider the financial circumstances of clients (retail and
                             wholesale) affected by a breach in considering whether loss or damage
                             suffered is material. This does not mean you should delay reporting a breach
                             while the specific financial circumstance of each affected client is
                             determined. However, the circumstances of clients who suffer loss or
                             damage as a result of a breach are relevant, particularly when there is a small
                             number of clients who have suffered loss and the loss may be substantial to
                             one or more of them. In this situation, we would expect you to consider
                             information about these clients that is within your knowledge to determine if
                             the loss is material to them.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 17
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Table 2:    Examples of deemed significant breaches

 Example 3(a): Material loss or       Material loss or damage to a debtor
 damage to clients                    If a debtor with a credit contract surrenders goods to a credit provider under
                                      s85 of the National Credit Code and the credit provider fails to comply with its
                                      obligations to sell those goods as soon as reasonably practicable to a
                                      purchaser nominated by the debtor (or, where a purchaser is not nominated
                                      by a debtor, for the best price reasonably obtainable), the debtor may suffer
                                      loss or damage.
                                      The breach may need to be reported to ASIC when the loss or damage to the
                                      debtor is material given:
                                       the value of the goods surrendered;
                                       the length of any delay in the sale of the goods to a purchaser nominated
                                        by the debtor (or, where a purchaser is not nominated by the debtor, the
                                        difference between the amount the goods are sold for and the best price
                                        that could have been reasonably obtained); and
                                       the financial situation of the debtor.

                                      Material loss or damage to consumer credit insurance clients

                                      Over a four-year period, an insurer allowed consumer credit insurance (CCI) to
                                      be sold to clients who the insurer knew, or should have known, at the time of
                                      the sale were not eligible to claim for unemployment or temporary or
                                      permanent disability cover provided by the CCI. While on average the breach
                                      meant that the general insurer had collected $153 in unsuitable premiums per
                                      client, collectively the breach may amount to material loss, with the insurer
                                      refunding over 65,000 clients around $10 million. Separately, consideration of
                                      materiality also included the affected clients’ financial situation, as they were
                                      mostly low-income students or people who were unemployed.

                                      Material loss or damage to members of a superannuation fund

                                      A superannuation fund trustee identifies issues with its operation and control
                                      systems that led to overcharging of member insurance premiums.

                                      The trustee establishes that the individual loss to members is low (and
                                      estimated to be less than $80 per member). However, the breach collectively
                                      results in a large cohort of affected members (over 70,000) who suffer a
                                      significant collective loss (over $5 million).

                                      In assessing whether a breach results, or is likely to result, in material loss or
                                      damage to a member or members of a superannuation entity, a
                                      superannuation fund trustee should take into account the total and
                                      aggregated loss or damage to affected members of the entity, even if the
                                      individual loss per affected member is small.


 Example 3(b): Dishonestly            If a licensee, or a licensee’s representative, breaches a core obligation by
 obtaining client funds               engaging in conduct that constitutes a criminal offence, the licensee must
 (criminal offence)                   report this to ASIC.

                                      For example, if the licensee identifies, after complaints have been lodged by
                                      clients, that an authorised representative has given advice to clients to
                                      dishonestly obtain client funds and use them for personal expenses or other
                                      purposes, the licensee must report that breach to ASIC.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                Page 18
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 Example 3(c): Governance             If the licensee is a responsible entity of a registered scheme and it becomes
 failures in a responsible entity     aware that in exercising its powers and carrying out its duties as responsible
 (civil penalty provision)            entity it has not complied with the compliance plan for the registered scheme,
                                      it will be in breach of the obligations under s601FC(1)(h) of the Corporations
                                      Act (duties of responsible entity) and must report this to ASIC.

                                      Because a breach of s601FC(1)(h) contravenes s601FC(5) and incurs a civil
                                      penalty under s1317E, such a breach is deemed to be significant and must
                                      be reported to ASIC.

 Example 3(d): Quality of             An AFS advice licensee identifies that four of its representatives have failed
 advice and failure to act in         to comply with their best interests duty (in breach of s961B of the
 interests of the client (civil       Corporations Act) and to provide appropriate advice to multiple clients (in
 penalty provision)                   breach of s961G of the Corporations Act).

                                      As a result, the advice licensee may be in breach of its obligation to take
                                      reasonable steps to ensure that its representatives comply with the best
                                      interests duty (s961L)—a civil penalty provision. There may also be breaches
                                      of the licensee’s core obligations to comply with the relevant financial
                                      services laws (s912A(1)(c)—licensees must ensure compliance) in relation to
                                      s961L. There may also be a failure to take reasonable steps to ensure that
                                      its representatives comply with those laws: see s912A(1)(ca).

                                      The advice licensee must report the breach to ASIC.

 Example 3(e): Contraventions         If a licensee or representative contravenes the misleading or deceptive
 of the misleading or deceptive       conduct provisions or the false or misleading representation prohibition, and
 conduct provisions or false or       the contravention does not meet the conditions for relief in s6 of ASIC
 misleading representation            Instrument 2024/620, the licensee must report this to ASIC.
 prohibition
                                      Credit licensees

                                      A licensed mortgage broker conducts an audit of one of its representatives
                                      and identifies a loan application containing false information, which indicates
                                      that its representative made false representations to a number of potential
                                      lenders that are likely to cause financial loss or damage to those lenders.
                                      Based on this information, the mortgage broker has reasonable grounds to
                                      believe a reportable situation has arisen (misleading or deceptive conduct in
                                      contravention of s12DA of the ASIC Act), and it must report this to ASIC.

                                      AFS licensees

                                      An AFS licensee identifies that a representative has contravened the
                                      misleading or deceptive conduct provisions by asking clients to sign blank
                                      forms, signing clients’ names on an authority to proceed (part of the SOA),
                                      and falsely declaring to have witnessed forms. As the conduct has impacted
                                      multiple clients, the licensee has reasonable grounds to believe that a
                                      reportable situation has arisen (misleading or deceptive conduct in
                                      contravention of s1041H of the Corporations Act) and it must report this to
                                      ASIC.

 Example 3(f): Charging               A contravention of a key requirement, as defined for the purposes of the
 prohibited fees to a debtor          National Credit Code, must be reported to ASIC, except when excluded by
 (key requirement under the           the regulations: see s50A(4)(c) of the National Credit Act.
 National Credit Code)
                                      For example, a credit licensee conducts a review of its credit contracts and
                                      identifies that it is imposing a fee or charge that is prohibited under s23(1)
                                      (prohibited money obligations) of the National Credit Code. The licensee
                                      must report this to ASIC, even if the fee or charge is imposed on only one
                                      debtor.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                              Page 19
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 Example 3(g): Efficiently,           Under its general licence obligations, an AFS licensee must do all things
 honestly and fairly (civil           necessary to ensure that the financial services covered by its licence are
 penalty provision)                   provided efficiently, honestly and fairly: see s912A(1)(a) of the Corporations
                                      Act. If it contravenes this obligation, it must report this to ASIC.

                                      A licensee is undertaking a large remediation as a result of discovering that
                                      customers had been overcharged fees for a particular financial product for
                                      over 10 years.

                                      The licensee failed to establish and maintain adequate systems, processes
                                      and procedures to ensure that the product was delivered as promised, and to
                                      identify the failure when it occurred.
                                      As a result of this failure, customers have suffered loss and the licensee
                                      understands that it is obliged to compensate them for that loss.

                                      Due to a significant decrease in the number of new customers over the last
                                      two years, the licensee is experiencing a sizeable downturn in revenue. As a
                                      result of this, and following discussions with the executive committee, its
                                      customer remediation unit has altered its remediation timetable to effectively
                                      adopt a ‘go slow’ approach to paying remediation to these customers.

                                      The licensee’s conduct in overcharging fees and the resulting decision to go
                                      slow on remediation is systemic because it affects many of its customers, it
                                      continued over an extended period, and highlights failings in its systems,
                                      processes and procedures. We consider this conduct would be in breach of
                                      the licensee’s obligation to do all things necessary to ensure financial
                                      services covered by its licence are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly,
                                      and it therefore has an obligation to report this conduct to ASIC.



                              Other breaches that are significant

              RG 78.45        Except for deemed significant breaches and additional reportable situations,
                              a breach (or likely breach) of a core obligation needs to be assessed to
                              determine whether it is significant having regard to certain factors in
                              s912D(5) of the Corporations Act or s50A(5) of the National Credit Act.
                              These factors are:
                              (a)   the number or frequency of similar breaches;
                              (b)   the impact of the breach or likely breach on the licensee’s ability to
                                    supply the financial services or engage in credit activities covered by
                                    the licence;
                              (c)   the extent to which the breach or likely breach indicates that the
                                    licensee’s arrangements to ensure compliance with those obligations are
                                    inadequate; and
                              (d)   any other matters prescribed by the regulations.

              RG 78.46        Whether a particular breach is significant should be determined objectively:
                              see RG 78.25. Table 3 explains how each of these factors may be applied to
                              determine whether a breach is significant. Table 4 gives examples of




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                             Page 20
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                               breaches we consider may be significant, while Table 5 gives examples of
                               breaches we consider may not be significant.
                                    Note: As noted earlier, these examples are for illustrative purposes only; a
                                    determination of significance for a particular breach, or likely breach, will depend on
                                    the licensee’s individual circumstances: see RG 78.9–RG 78.10.

              RG 78.47         You must have regard to all of the factors in RG 78.45 when determining
                               whether a breach (or likely breach) is significant. A breach may be
                               significant even if only one of the factors applies to your circumstances, or
                               when there is a combination of factors.

Table 3:    Factors that determine whether a breach (or likely breach) is ‘significant’ under
            s912D(5) of the Corporations Act or s50A(5) of the National Credit Act

 Factor                         How it may be applied to determine whether a breach is significant

 The number or frequency        The greater the number or frequency of similar breaches, the more likely it will be
 of similar breaches: see       that the new breach will be significant. The repeat of a breach may also indicate
 s912D(5)(a) of the             a continuing underlying systemic problem.
 Corporations Act,
                                If minor breaches of a technical or administrative nature repeatedly occur, you may
 s50A(5)(a) of the
                                become aware that you can no longer comply with your obligations under the
 National Credit Act
                                financial services laws or credit legislation (e.g. because you have inadequate
                                compliance arrangements, risk management systems, or technological or human
                                resources). This may be a reportable situation under s912D(1)(b) of the
                                Corporations Act or s50A(1)(b) of the National Credit Act.

                                It would also amount to a deemed significant breach, as the following sections are
                                civil penalty provisions:
                                 s912A(1)(d) of the Corporations Act (obligation to have adequate resources to
                                  provide financial services covered by your licence);
                                 s912A(1)(h) of the Corporations Act (obligation to have adequate risk
                                  management systems);
                                 s47(1)(k) of the National Credit Act (obligation to have adequate arrangements
                                  to ensure compliance with the general obligations under s47); and
                                 s47(1)(l) of the National Credit Act (obligation to have adequate risk
                                  management systems and adequate resources to provide credit activities
                                  covered by your licence).

 The impact of the breach       If a breach or likely breach reduces your ability or capacity to supply the financial
 or likely breach on your       services or engage in the credit activities covered by your licence, it is likely to be
 ability to supply the          significant. For example, we consider that a breach of the financial requirements
 financial services or          of your licence conditions may be significant. If these minimum requirements are
 engage in credit activities    not met, you may not have the financial ability or capacity to supply the financial
 covered by your licence:       services or credit activities covered by your licence.
 see s912D(5)(b) of the
                                If the breach or likely breach will not affect your ability or capacity to supply the
 Corporations Act,
                                financial services or credit activities covered by your licence, it may still be
 s50A(5)(b) of the
                                significant having regard to one or more of the other factors.
 National Credit Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                      Page 21
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 Factor                       How it may be applied to determine whether a breach is significant

 The extent to which the      If the breach or likely breach indicates that your arrangements to ensure
 breach or likely breach      compliance failed to prevent the breach in an isolated and specific instance, it may
 indicates that the           not be significant. However, if it indicates broader inadequacies in your compliance
 licensee’s arrangements      arrangements, it is more likely to be significant and, if so, you should report it to
 to ensure compliance         ASIC.
 with those obligations are
                              We recognise that compliance arrangements are unlikely to ensure full compliance
 inadequate: see
                              with every aspect of the law at all times, and occasional and minor breaches do
 s912D(5)(c) of the
                              not of themselves mean that your compliance arrangements are inadequate.
 Corporations Act,
 s50A(5)(c) of the National   However, this factor requires you to consider whether a breach or likely breach
 Credit Act                   indicates that your compliance arrangements are inadequate. We expect that
                              under this factor you would ask yourself questions such as the length of time the
                              incident went undetected, to what extent the compliance arrangements helped in
                              identifying the breach, and the timeframe it took to investigate and assess the
                              incident as a breach. We consider that, when systems are appropriately
                              resourced, used and audited, they should identify instances of non-compliance in
                              a timely manner.

 Any other matters            You should check to see whether the regulations have prescribed any further
 prescribed by the            factors.
 regulations: see
 s912D(5)(d) of the
 Corporations Act,
 s50A(5)(d) of the
 National Credit Act


Table 4:    Examples of breaches that may be significant under s912D(5) of the Corporations Act
            or s50A(5) of the National Credit Act

 Example 4(a): Failure to     If a licensee is required as a condition of its licence to report to ASIC when a
 notify ASIC of changes       person ceases to be an officer or perform duties on behalf of the licensee, and it
 in key persons               fails to inform ASIC within the required time period and lodge information in
                              relation to the replacement of that key person, there may be a significant breach.

                              If the departure of one or more key persons will impact on the licensee’s ability to
                              provide the financial services or credit activities covered by its licence, that is a
                              breach of s912A(1)(b) of the Corporations Act or s47(1)(c) of the National Credit Act.
                              A failure to inform ASIC and appoint an appropriate replacement person should be
                              reported to ASIC if the breach is significant under s912D(5) of the Corporations Act
                              or s50A(5) of the National Credit Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                              Page 22
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 Example 4(b): Failure to     If a fund is promoted as following a particular investment mandate or as having
 follow disclosed             particular characteristics, we would expect a failure of the responsible entity to
 investment mandates          ensure that the scheme complies with the mandate or has the promoted
                              characteristic (which in certain circumstances will be a breach of s601FC(1)(c) of
                              the Corporations Act) to be a significant breach, even when the breach may not
                              have resulted in material loss or damage to members.
                              For example, if a scheme is promoted as having an investment mandate that
                              compels the scheme to invest in certain ethical investments (e.g. ‘green energy’) or
                              investment types and to avoid others (e.g. tobacco, fossil fuels), a failure to comply
                              with this would adversely affect the interests of members and may mean the
                              promotional material issued to investors is misleading. It may not cause material loss
                              and damage if the returns generated by the scheme were the same or higher than
                              would have been achieved under the disclosed mandate. This would nevertheless
                              be morally unacceptable to many of them.
                                Note: If you identify that the promotional material for the scheme is potentially misleading,
                                this will constitute misleading or deceptive conduct and therefore be a deemed significant
                                breach: see Example 3(e) in Table 2.

 Example 4(c): Breach         Operators of licensed markets and participants in financial markets must comply
 of ASIC market               with the ASIC market integrity rules made under s798G of the Corporations Act.
 integrity rules              Failure to comply with these rules (which in certain circumstances may be a breach
                              of s798H of the Corporations Act) is a civil penalty provision excluded from deemed
                              significance. However, such a breach may still need to be reported to us if one of
                              the other circumstances of deemed significance in s912D(4) applies, or if it is
                              otherwise significant under s912D(5) of the Corporations Act.

                              For example, dealing in a financial product by the participant on account of a client
                              when a market participant ought reasonably suspect that the client has placed the
                              order with the intention of creating a false or misleading appearance of the price of
                              a financial product: see Rule 5.7.1 of the ASIC Market Integrity Rules (Securities
                              Markets) 2017. The same dealing may also constitute a breach of Rules 5.6.1 or
                              5.6.3 if the dealing was conducted through the market participant’s automated
                              order processing system.

 Example 4(d): Breach         If a licensee breaches the IDR standards outlined in the enforceable paragraphs of
 of IDR requirements          RG 271, it will not be a deemed significant breach despite being a breach of a civil
                              penalty provision. This is because s5 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620 excludes such
                              a breach from being deemed significant under s912D(4)(b) of the Corporations Act
                              or s50A(4)(b) of the National Credit Act. However, the breach may still be
                              reportable.

                              For example, a licensee identifies that a pro forma letter sent by the licensee in
                              response to complaints for the past three months as part of the IDR process did
                              not inform the complainants that they can take their complaint to the Australian
                              Financial Complaints Authority (AFCA). This failure to inform is in breach of the
                              enforceable paragraphs of RG 271: see RG 271.53–RG 271.54. This breach
                              would likely be significant due to the number of clients impacted and may also
                              indicate that a licensee’s arrangements to ensure compliance are inadequate and
                              must be reported to us: see s912D(5) of the Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                       Page 23
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Table 5:    Examples of breaches that may not be significant

 Example 5(a): Isolated       A licensee identifies an isolated instance of an authorised representative or credit
 failure to give a            representative failing to give a client a copy of an FSG or Credit Guide in
 disclosure document          contravention of s941B of the Corporations Act or s113(1) of the National Credit
 (Financial Services          Act, which are civil penalty provisions excluded from deemed significance by the
 Guide (FSG) or Credit        regulations. The licensee must still consider whether the breach is significant
 Guide)                       under any of the other deeming categories, or otherwise significant under s912D(5)
                              of the Corporations Act or s50A(5) of the National Credit Act: see RG 78.45.

                              If, for example, the licensee determines that there are no further contraventions or
                              losses arising from the contravention, it is unlikely to be required to report to ASIC.
                              However, if it identifies multiple breaches of the same nature, or issues
                              surrounding the contravention that suggest that there are deficiencies in its
                              compliance systems, it may be required to report the breach to ASIC.

 Example 5(b): Isolated       If a licensee fails to give a periodic statement of account to an individual client in
 failure to provide a         the time period required by the National Credit Code in an isolated instance, the
 statement of account         breach is not likely to be significant and the licensee is unlikely to be required to
                              report to ASIC.
                              However, if the licensee identifies that the breach relates to multiple clients or
                              multiple breaches relate to individual clients, the breach will likely be significant
                              and must be reported to ASIC.




What is a reportable investigation?
              RG 78.48       Investigations into whether a significant breach (or likely significant breach)
                             of a core obligation has occurred, and that continue for more than 60 days,
                             must be reported to ASIC as a ‘reportable situation’: see s912D(1)(c) of the
                             Corporations Act, s50A(1)(c) of the National Credit Act as modified by s6A
                             of ASIC Instrument 2024/620.

              RG 78.49       If the investigation commences and concludes within 60 days and there are
                             no reasonable grounds to believe that a reportable situation has arisen, the
                             investigation is not a ‘reportable situation’. If an investigation that concludes
                             within 60 days identifies reasonable grounds to believe that a reportable
                             situation has arisen, you must report to ASIC notifying us of the reportable
                             situation that has arisen within 30 calendar days.

                                  Note: An investigation becomes a reportable situation on day 61 of the investigation,
                                  and you must lodge a report within 30 days of this date. See RG 78.83–RG 78.106 for
                                  guidance on when you must report a reportable situation to ASIC, including
                                  RG 78.102–RG 78.106 on how to report investigations.

              RG 78.50       The term ‘investigation’ is not defined. As stated in the Explanatory
                             Memorandum:
                                  The term ‘investigation’ is not defined in the legislation and has its
                                  ordinary meaning. What constitutes an investigation is likely to vary
                                  significantly depending on the size of the licensee’s business, their internal
                                  systems and processes, and the type of breach.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                 Page 24
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                   The Macquarie Dictionary defines ‘investigation’ as ‘a searching inquiry in
                                   order to ascertain facts.’ Accordingly, if a … licensee is considering
                                   whether it has conducted an investigation, a relevant factor would be
                                   whether there has been some information gathering or human effort applied
                                   by the licensee to determine whether a breach has occurred or will occur.
                                   Examples of information gathering may include:
                                    communicating with representatives or staff of the licensee who may
                                     have been involved in the relevant conduct;
                                    communicating with potentially affected clients; or
                                    seeking specialist or technical advice.

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraphs 11.43–11.44.

              RG 78.51       Licensees must also have regard to the guidance set out in the Explanatory
                             Memorandum as follows:
                             (a)   Entry into risk management systems:
                                   Merely entering a suspected compliance issue into a risk management
                                   system is unlikely to amount to a searching inquiry to ascertain facts,
                                   although this will depend on the circumstances in each case.

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.45.

                             (b)   Description of investigation:
                                   The intention is that the term ‘investigation’ applies irrespective of how the
                                   licensee describes an investigation in its internal processes, as long as it
                                   satisfies the ordinary meaning of the term.

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.46.

                             (c)   Outsourcing investigations:
                                   [A] licensee is also considered to have conducted an investigation if it
                                   outsources the investigation, or if a related entity (such as a parent
                                   company) conducts the investigation.

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.48.

              RG 78.52       Table 6 sets out some examples of investigations that must be reported to
                             ASIC as reportable situations.

              RG 78.53       For the commencement of an investigation, as stated in paragraph 11.47 of
                             the Explanatory Memorandum, the time at which an investigation
                             commences is a matter of fact and is not a matter for subjective
                             determination by the licensee.

              RG 78.54       For the investigation to be reportable to us under s912D(1)(c) of the
                             Corporations Act or s50A(1)(c) of the National Credit Act, the investigation
                             must at least in part be into whether there is a breach (or likely breach) of a
                             core obligation that is significant, and that investigation must continue for
                             more than 60 days.

              RG 78.55       Depending on the specific facts of each case, and excluding scenarios where
                             investigations are not required as set out in RG 78.62, we consider that:



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 25
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                             (a)   the mere receipt of a detective control such as a complaint, a
                                   whistleblower disclosure or a regulatory request is not an investigation
                                   that must be reported to us;
                             (b)   preliminary steps and initial fact-finding inquiries into the nature of the
                                   incident, which are completed over a short timeframe and conducted as
                                   an initial response to detective controls (such as the receipt of a
                                   complaint), would not generally be reportable to us (see Example 6(d)
                                   in Table 6); and
                             (c)   ‘business as usual’ inquiries, such as routine audits, quality assurance
                                   monitoring, or other internal compliance review processes, are only
                                   reportable to us if they are triggered by an incident or assess, or will be,
                                   assessing a possible breach of a core obligation (see Examples 6(a)
                                   and 6(c)).

              RG 78.56       Particularly for larger licensees, the person or team within the licensee that
                             commences an investigation (e.g. a compliance team) is not determinative of
                             whether a reportable investigation has commenced: see
                             RG 78.104 for further guidance, including Example 10.

Table 6:    Examples of investigations that are reportable situations

 Example 6(a): Internal        A routine internal audit of unit pricing functions identifies that there is a risk that unit
 audit of unit pricing         pricing errors have occurred as a result of inadequate manual systems being used
                               for the calculation of unit prices. After the potential pricing errors are identified by
                               the internal audit team, a separate investigation is undertaken into the extent and
                               cause of the pricing errors and potentially affected clients.

                               The licensee must report the investigation into the nature and extent of the unit
                               pricing errors if it has continued for 60 days. If the investigation concludes in less
                               than 60 days and there are not reasonable grounds to believe that a reportable
                               situation has arisen, the investigation does not need to be reported to ASIC.

                               As the internal audit itself is routine and not directed at identifying whether a
                               significant breach of a core obligation has arisen, it does not constitute an
                               investigation.

 Example 6(b): Client          A licensee receives several client complaints that clients have been charged for
 complaints about fees         financial advice without having received any advice. In light of those complaints, the
 for no service                licensee reviews its client books and fee arrangements and identifies a large
                               number of additional clients who are being charged ongoing advice fees but who
                               are not attached to a financial adviser.

                               From the initial review, which has now been ongoing for longer than 60 days, it
                               appears that the issue is likely to be systemic and impacting a large number of
                               clients. It also appears that it may involve multiple breaches of the licensee’s
                               obligations under s12DI(3) of the ASIC Act (accepting payment without being able
                               to supply services), and possible breaches of the licensee’s obligation to provide
                               financial services efficiently, honestly and fairly under s912A(1)(a) and to comply
                               with the financial services laws under s912A(1)(c) of the Corporations Act.

                               The licensee must report the review of fee arrangements to ASIC as an
                               investigation after the review has continued for more than 60 days. The
                               investigation commenced when the licensee conducted a review of its client books.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                   Page 26
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 Example 6(b): Client          Once the investigation identifies reasonable grounds to believe that a reportable
 complaints about fees         situation has arisen (i.e. that there are reasonable grounds to believe a
 for no service                contravention of a relevant civil penalty provision has occurred), this must also be
 (continued)                   reported to ASIC as a reportable situation.

                               If the investigation identifies this reportable situation within 60 days, the
                               investigation does not need to be reported at this time. However, if the investigation
                               is ongoing in regard to possible additional breaches, the licensee must report the
                               investigation once it continues for more than 60 days, as well as any further
                               reportable situations revealed by the ongoing investigation.

                               Note: If further reportable situations are revealed by the ongoing investigation, they
                               must be reported to ASIC within 30 days unless the reportable situations have
                               underlying circumstances that are the same as, or substantially similar to,
                               underlying circumstances of the previously reported reportable situation. In such
                               cases, the licensee has up to 90 days to report the reportable situation to ASIC: see
                               RG 78.84.

 Example 6(c): Annual          An advice licensee undertakes an annual compliance audit of Adviser X and
 compliance audit              identifies five client files where Adviser X has failed to comply with the best
                               interests duty and related obligations in Div 2 of Pt 7.7A of the Corporations Act.
                               The main concern identified was that Adviser X recommended that these five
                               clients invest in complex products, using a ‘cookie-cutter’ advice approach, without
                               properly identifying or taking into account each client’s goals and objectives,
                               personal circumstances or risk profile.

                               The licensee undertakes a detailed review of Adviser X’s client files to further
                               investigate the concerns identified in the compliance audit, including whether there
                               was a potential breach of:
                                the licensee’s obligation under s961L of the Corporations Act to take all
                                 reasonable steps to ensure that during the relevant period its representative,
                                 Adviser X, has complied with the best interests duty and related obligations; and
                                the licensee’s core obligations to:
                                 − do all things necessary to ensure that the financial services covered under its
                                   licence are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly;
                                 − comply with the financial services laws (being s961L in this example); and
                                 − take reasonable steps to ensure that its representatives comply with the
                                   financial services laws (being s961B and 961G of the Corporations Act in this
                                   example).

                               If the licensee’s detailed review of Adviser X’s files continues for more than
                               60 days, it must be reported to ASIC as an investigation.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                Page 27
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 Example 6(d): Receipt         A licensee receives a customer complaint and promptly begins some factual
 of a customer                 inquiries in respect of the complaint in order to resolve it on the spot or send an
 complaint                     acknowledgement of receipt to the customer. In entering the complaint into its
                               internal systems, the licensee verifies basic information about the customer, and
                               has a preliminary conversation with staff of the licensee. Up to this point, there is no
                               reportable investigation.

                               In identifying that the complaint appears to involve a possible breach of the law, the
                               licensee takes steps towards ascertaining whether a significant breach has
                               occurred. This includes initial factual and legal analysis of the complaint, including a
                               request for further information from the customer, and further information gathering
                               to determine whether a breach has occurred.

                               In identifying that the complaint appears to involve a possible breach of the law,
                               and taking steps towards ascertaining whether a significant breach has occurred,
                               an investigation has commenced. If this investigation continues for more than
                               60 days, the licensee must report this to ASIC.


              RG 78.57       We expect that investigations into whether a reportable situation has arisen
                             will be commenced in a timely manner and without unreasonable delay.
                             Further, while there is no statutory timeframe for completion of an
                             investigation, we expect that investigations will be conducted in a timely
                             way. Delays in initiating, recording, escalating or conducting an
                             investigation may suggest inadequacies of a licensee’s compliance
                             arrangements (see s912D(5)(c) of the Corporations Act, s50A(5)(c) of the
                             National Credit Act), and may constitute a breach of s912A of the
                             Corporations Act or s47 of the National Credit Act.

              RG 78.58       Timely investigations reduce the risk of continuing breaches or breaches that
                             reoccur by helping to identify the root or systemic cause of the breach. If a
                             deficiency in a system or process is identified before the investigation is
                             completed, you should not wait for it to be completed to implement steps to
                             rectify the deficiency and limit its adverse impact: see Case study 1.

                               Case study 1: Remedying a breach before the completion of an
                               investigation

                               A licensee identified that nearly 200 consumer complaints received within
                               one year through their IDR process were about home loan offset
                               arrangements.

                               During the investigation, the licensee identified approximately 2,000 active
                               accounts with offset account linkage errors, resulting in a number of these
                               consumers not receiving the benefits of an offset account and paying too
                               much interest on their home loan.

                               While the investigation of the offset account linkage error was ongoing,
                               system enhancements were implemented to improve the overall consumer
                               experience, and show all consumers details of their linked offset account and
                               the amount of interest saved on their home loan through the offset
                               arrangement.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                               Page 28
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




              RG 78.59       Your policies and procedures should set out expectations for the completion
                             of investigations and circumstances when additional reporting or oversight is
                             required for ongoing investigations to ensure that they are progressing and
                             being appropriately prioritised.

                                  Note: See Section D for guidance on compliance systems and identifying, recording and
                                  reporting breaches.

              RG 78.60       If, before the end of an investigation, you are satisfied, or have reasonable
                             grounds to believe, based on the information at hand, that the breach was
                             significant and a reportable situation, you must not wait until the
                             investigation is complete to report the matter to ASIC: see Case study 2.

                             Case study 2: Unreasonable delay in reporting

                             An AFS licensee reported a significant breach relating to account opening
                             errors that occurred over an eight-year period. This systemic issue affected
                             over 100,000 clients who could not access the full benefits of their account.

                             The licensee had been receiving complaints for four years before making the
                             breach report to ASIC. An initial investigation identified only part of the root
                             causes and the complaints continued.

                             A second investigation revealed more account opening errors, and led to the
                             breach report to ASIC. However, by this stage the licensee had received over
                             120 complaints.

                             The licensee’s decision to report to ASIC should not have been delayed
                             while awaiting completion of the second investigation because there were
                             reasonable grounds to believe that a reportable situation had arisen after the
                             initial investigation.

                             As the two investigations had the same subject matter, the investigation
                             effectively commenced at the start of the initial investigation, and became a
                             reportable situation after 60 consecutive days.

              RG 78.61       In certain prescribed situations, you must commence an investigation into
                             the nature and extent of certain breaches and loss arising from a reportable
                             situation within set timeframes: see s912EB of the Corporations Act
                             (financial advisers), s51B of the National Credit Act (mortgage brokers).

                                  Note: For information about the investigation, notification and remediation obligations
                                  that apply to AFS licensees and credit licensees, see Information Sheet 259 Complying
                                  with the notify, investigate and remediate obligations (INFO 259).

              RG 78.62       Except for the circumstances described in RG 78.61, there is no express
                             requirement to investigate, and not all circumstances will require an
                             investigation before reporting to ASIC. In some cases, a reportable situation
                             should be clear to you without an investigation.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 29
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




What are additional reportable situations?
              RG 78.63       You must also report to ASIC certain additional reportable situations: see
                             s912D(2) of the Corporations Act, s50A(2) of the National Credit Act. If an
                             additional reportable situation arises, you must report it to ASIC irrespective
                             of whether or not it is ‘significant’. Additional reportable situations include
                             when you or your representative:
                             (a)   engage in conduct constituting gross negligence in the course of
                                   providing a financial service or engaging in a credit activity; or
                             (b)   commit serious fraud.

                                   Note: Section 9 of the Corporations Act and s5 of the National Credit Act define serious
                                   fraud as an offence involving fraud or dishonesty against an Australian law or any other
                                   law that is punishable by imprisonment for life or for a period, or maximum period, of
                                   at least three months.

              RG 78.64       As noted in the Explanatory Memorandum:
                                   Conduct that constitutes gross negligence or serious fraud must be reported
                                   to ASIC because of the potentially considerable detriment that could be
                                   caused to a person as a result of that conduct. This kind of conduct also
                                   goes to the licensee or representative’s character and suitability to engage
                                   in credit activities [or to provide financial services].

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.53 (AFS licensees) and
                                   paragraph 11.164 (credit licensees).

              RG 78.65       Additional reportable situations are intended to capture the ‘serious
                             compliance concerns’ identified by Recommendation 2.8 of the Financial
                             Services Royal Commission:
                                   Serious compliance concerns are where the licensee believes and has some
                                   credible information in support of the concerns identified that a financial
                                   adviser may have engaged in dishonest, illegal, deceptive and/or fraudulent
                                   misconduct or any misconduct that, if proven, would be likely to result in
                                   an instant dismissal or immediate termination; or deliberate non-
                                   compliance with financial services laws or gross incompetence or gross
                                   negligence.

                                   Note: See Financial Services Royal Commission, Final report, February 2019, p. 204.

              RG 78.66       Example 7 illustrates a situation where you may need to report an additional
                             reportable situation to us.

                              Example 7: Gross negligence

                              A consumer applies for a home loan using the services of a mortgage
                              broker. The lender requests further documentation from the mortgage
                              broker to enable the lender to complete the approval. The lender makes
                              repeated requests for the documentation, and the consumer has separately
                              been consistently pressing the broker to ask whether anything else is
                              required, telling the broker that any delay will result in them losing the
                              property.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                   Page 30
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                              The mortgage broker acknowledges the requests and is aware of the
                              impending deadline for finance approval. The consumer would qualify for
                              the loan; however, without the additional documentation, the lender will be
                              unable to process the approval.

                              The mortgage broker fails to take any action to obtain the required
                              documentation from the consumer or even inform the consumer of the
                              request. As the lender does not receive this information, the finance is not
                              obtained in the required period. Consequently, the consumer suffers loss
                              by losing the opportunity to purchase the property, and the property is
                              subsequently sold to another party.

                              The failure of the mortgage broker to act on the repeated requests by the
                              lender and respond to repeated contact from the consumer is conduct
                              constituting gross negligence that must be reported to ASIC.

              RG 78.67       Additional reportable situations may also arise in other circumstances as
                             prescribed by the regulations: see s912D(2)(c) of the Corporations Act,
                             s50A(2)(c) of the National Credit Act. You should check to see whether the
                             regulations have specified any further additional reportable situations.



Reportable situations about other licensees: Financial advisers
and mortgage brokers
              RG 78.68       In certain circumstances, under s912DAB of the Corporations Act or s50C
                             of the National Credit Act, you may be required to lodge a breach report in
                             relation to a reportable situation about another licensee.

              RG 78.69       This category of reportable situation relates to individuals who provide
                             personal advice to retail clients about relevant financial products (as defined
                             in the Corporations Act) or who are mortgage brokers.

              RG 78.70       You must report to ASIC if you have reasonable grounds to believe that a
                             reportable situation, other than a reportable situation arising from an
                             investigation conducted for more than 30 days, has arisen in relation to an
                             individual who:
                             (a)   provides personal advice to retail clients about relevant financial products
                                   (as defined in the Corporations Act) or is a mortgage broker; and
                             (b)   is any of the following:
                                   (i)     another AFS licensee or credit licensee;
                                   (ii)    an employee of another AFS licensee or credit licensee (or a
                                           related body corporate of another licensee), acting within the scope
                                           of the employee’s employment;
                                   (iii)   a director of another AFS licensee or credit licensee (or a related
                                           body corporate of another licensee), acting within the scope of the
                                           director’s duties as director; or




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                              Page 31
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                   (iv)   a representative of another AFS licensee or credit licensee, acting
                                          within the scope of the representative’s authority given by the licensee.

              RG 78.71       Table 7 sets out some examples of when a licensee must report to ASIC
                             reportable situations in relation to other licensees.

              RG 78.72       As discussed at RG 78.84, ‘reasonable grounds to believe’ that a reportable
                             situation has arisen is an objective standard. It exists when there are facts or
                             evidence to induce, in a reasonable person, a belief that a reportable situation
                             has arisen. In the context of reportable situations about other licensees, the
                             Explanatory Memorandum states:
                                   In practice, a reporting licensee will likely have [or a credit licensee will
                                   likely develop] reasonable grounds to believe that a reportable situation has
                                   arisen in relation to another financial adviser [about another mortgage
                                   broker] through a relationship of proximity between the two parties. For
                                   example, this may occur because of business dealings between the two
                                   parties or through mutual clients.

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraphs 11.94 (AFS licensees) and 11.202
                                   (credit licensees).

              RG 78.73       Although licensees do not need to proactively investigate any possible
                             misconduct of other licensees, they must not turn a blind eye to facts that are
                             before them. This may include, for example, if information comes to light
                             through usual practices or processes, such as a due diligence process as part
                             of a business transfer. To meet the threshold of ‘reasonable grounds to
                             believe’, you do not need facts or evidence amounting to certain proof that
                             there is a breach. The fact that other possible innocent explanations can be
                             thought of to explain a situation (e.g. customer mistake or misconduct) does
                             not automatically rule out the need to report. The test is whether you have
                             reasonable grounds to believe a reportable situation has arisen.

              RG 78.74       Except as set out in RG 78.80, within 30 days after you first know that, or
                             are reckless with respect to whether, there are reasonable grounds to believe
                             such a reportable situation has arisen, you must:
                             (a)   lodge a report with ASIC; and
                             (b)   provide a copy of the report to the other licensee.

                                   Note 1: For example, if a financial adviser or mortgage broker who is the subject of
                                   your report operates under their own AFS licence or credit licence, you should give a
                                   copy of the report directly to the financial adviser or mortgage broker. If the financial
                                   adviser or mortgage broker is a representative or employee of an AFS licensee or credit
                                   licensee, you should give a copy of the report to the licensee even if that financial adviser
                                   or mortgage broker is no longer involved with the licensee (e.g. previous employer).

                                   Note 2: For credit licensees, if a lender has reasonable grounds to believe that there is a
                                   reportable situation in relation to a mortgage broker and lodges a report with ASIC,
                                   there is no obligation to provide a copy of the report to the mortgage broker’s
                                   aggregator unless the mortgage broker is a representative of the aggregator.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                        Page 32
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




              RG 78.75       Licensees must report to ASIC in the prescribed form through the ASIC
                             Regulatory Portal. Table 8 sets out the content of the prescribed form, but with
                             respect to reports about other licensees, licensees are only required to include
                             information on the first seven items (the date of the reportable situation, the
                             nature of the reportable situation, description of the reportable situation, why
                             the breach is significant, how the reportable situation was identified, how long
                             the breach lasted, and information about representatives).

              RG 78.76       When the other licensee receives a copy of the report, we expect they will
                             make inquiries into whether a reportable situation has arisen, unless they have
                             already commenced an investigation. If that investigation continues for 60 days
                             or more or reveals that there are reasonable grounds to believe a reportable
                             situation has arisen, the other licensee will be required to report to ASIC.

                                  Note: Depending on the nature of the reportable situation, a licensee who is a financial
                                  adviser or mortgage broker and who receives the report may also have to consider their
                                  obligations to notify, investigate and remediate clients: see INFO 259.

              RG 78.77       Failure to lodge a report with ASIC in the circumstances set out in RG 78.70
                             and provide a copy to the other licensee can attract civil penalties: see
                             s912DAB(8) of the Corporations Act, s50C(1) and 50C(5) of the National
                             Credit Act.

              RG 78.78       If you are a reporting entity under the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-
                             Terrorism Financing Act 2006 (AML/CTF Act), the relevant conduct
                             underlying the reportable situation reported to ASIC may also trigger your
                             obligation to submit a suspicious matter report (SMR) to the Australian
                             Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) under s41(2) of the
                             AML/CTF Act. If a reporting entity is required to submit an SMR, they must
                             not disclose any information about the report, except in certain limited
                             circumstances: see s123(1) of the AML/CTF Act.

              RG 78.79       Relevantly, if a licensee provides a report to ASIC and a copy to the other
                             licensee in compliance with its obligations under s912DAB of the Corporations
                             Act or s50C of the National Credit Act, this will not breach s123 of the
                             AML/CTF Act. Providing this report under the licensee’s obligations at law
                             falls within the exemption in s123(9) of the AML/CTF Act (compliance with a
                             requirement under a law of the Commonwealth, state or territory).

              RG 78.80       If there are reasonable grounds to believe that ASIC is aware of the
                             reportable situation and all the information that is required in a report, you
                             do not need to lodge a report: see s912DAB(4) of the Corporations Act and
                             s50C(4) of the National Credit Act. The Explanatory Memorandum notes
                             this is a ‘high threshold’:
                                  This is a high threshold that is primarily intended to reduce reporting of
                                  matters to ASIC that are publicly well known about an individual financial
                                  adviser [mortgage broker] operating under another financial services
                                  licence.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                   Page 33
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                  Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.107 (AFS licensees) and
                                  paragraph 11.214 (credit licensees).

              RG 78.81       For example, if you know that the other licensee or another third-party
                             licensee has lodged a breach report with ASIC in relation to the reportable
                             situation, because for example you have noted a relevant ASIC media
                             release about an enforcement action, you are not required to lodge a further
                             report with ASIC.


                             Qualified privilege

              RG 78.82       In providing a copy of the report to ASIC or the other licensee as required,
                             you may have the benefit of qualified privilege under s1100A or 912DAB(6)
                             of the Corporations Act or s50C(6) of the National Credit Act in an action
                             for defamation if you had no malice. You may also not be liable for an action
                             based on breach of confidence in relation to that conduct: see s912DAB(7)
                             and 1100A of the Corporations Act, s50C(7) of the National Credit Act.

                                  Note: If you lodge a false report about another licensee with ASIC with ill will or an
                                  improper motive (e.g. to undermine a competitor), you will not have the benefit of
                                  qualified privilege in an action for defamation.


Table 7:    Examples of reportable situations about other licensees

 Example 8(a): Falsification of       A lender becomes aware of an individual mortgage broker falsifying
 loan application documents           information in their loan application documents after seeking to verify
                                      income statements used to support a client’s loan application. The client
                                      provides the lender with a copy of the income statement they had provided
                                      to the mortgage broker, which contains a lower figure than that provided by
                                      the mortgage broker to the lender.
                                      The lender conducts an audit of documents submitted by the same
                                      mortgage broker for several clients that identifies additional instances of
                                      falsified documents. On that basis, the lender has reasonable grounds to
                                      believe that a reportable situation has arisen because the mortgage broker
                                      has engaged in conduct that is likely to contravene s12DA of the ASIC Act
                                      (misleading or deceptive conduct), and the relief in s6 of ASIC Instrument
                                      2024/620 will not apply, and/or s160D(2) of the National Credit Act. Further,
                                      the mortgage broker may have engaged in serious fraud, which of itself is a
                                      reportable situation for the purposes of s50A(2)(b) of the National Credit
                                      Act.

                                      The licensee must lodge a report with ASIC and with the licensee of the
                                      individual mortgage broker within 30 days.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                   Page 34
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 Example 8(b): Advisers               Three advisers transfer from Licensee A to Licensee B on 15 October
 transfer from Licensee A to          2021. Licensee B has an onboarding policy for advisers, which includes,
 Licensee B                           among other things, training and a pre-vetting process of client files.

                                      Shortly after the transfer, Licensee B receives a client complaint about the
                                      conduct of Adviser X (one of the transferred advisers), in relation to
                                      conduct that occurred when Adviser X was authorised by Licensee A. As a
                                      result of this, Licensee B carries out an in-depth audit of that client file and
                                      becomes aware that Adviser X did not provide appropriate advice to the
                                      client (as is required under s961G of the Corporations Act), which occurred
                                      when the adviser was authorised by Licensee A.

                                      Licensee B undertakes a targeted audit of client files from the other
                                      advisers who transferred from Licensee A, and discovers similar conduct.
                                      As a result of the breaches that Licensee B has discovered in relation to all
                                      three advisers who transferred from Licensee A, Licensee B reasonably
                                      believes that a reportable situation may have arisen during the period in
                                      which the three advisers were authorised by Licensee A, and has a
                                      reasonable belief that Licensee A may not have met its core obligation to
                                      take reasonable steps to ensure that its representatives comply with
                                      financial services laws under s912A(1)(ca) of the Corporations Act.

                                      Licensee B must report this to ASIC and provide a copy to Licensee A.

                                      Licensee A investigates the possible reportable situation reported by
                                      Licensee B. As a result of this investigation, Licensee A confirms a
                                      reportable situation did occur, which it reports to ASIC.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                Page 35
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




C          When and how to report to ASIC

                              Key points

                              As a licensee, you must tell ASIC in writing within 30 calendar days after a
                              reportable situation has arisen or, in limited circumstances, you may tell
                              ASIC within 90 calendar days after a reportable situation has arisen if you
                              have already notified ASIC of a reportable situation.

                              The reporting period starts on the day you first know that, or are reckless
                              with respect to whether, there are reasonable grounds to believe that a
                              reportable situation has arisen.

                              You must report to ASIC in the prescribed form, through the ASIC
                              Regulatory Portal.

                              In certain circumstances, you may be able to notify us of multiple reportable
                              situations in one report and meet your reporting obligations under the law.

                              Failing to report to ASIC when a reportable situation has arisen can attract
                              both civil and criminal penalties.




When must you report a reportable situation?
              RG 78.83       You must report to ASIC within 30 days after you first know that, or are
                             reckless with respect to whether, there are reasonable grounds to believe a
                             reportable situation has arisen: see s912DAA of the Corporations Act, s50B of
                             the National Credit Act.

              RG 78.84       In limited circumstances, where you have already notified ASIC of a
                             reportable situation, you may notify ASIC of a further reportable situation
                             that has the same, or substantially similar, underlying circumstances as the
                             previous reportable situation within 90 days after you first know that, or are
                             reckless with respect to whether, there are reasonable grounds to believe that
                             the further reportable situation has arisen: see s7 of ASIC Instrument
                             2024/620.

                                  Note 1: ASIC retains a right to direct the reporting of a reportable situation that would
                                  otherwise qualify to be reported within 90 days, within a shorter period. For example,
                                  ASIC may take this approach where the further reportable situation is relevant to an
                                  active investigation.

                                  Note 2: In this guide, we use the term ‘reporting period’ to refer collectively to the
                                  standard 30 day period and the limited circumstances in which reports to ASIC may be
                                  made within 90 days.

              RG 78.85       ‘Reasonable grounds to believe’ that a reportable situation has arisen exist
                             when there are facts or evidence to induce, in a reasonable person, a belief
                             that a reportable situation has arisen.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                    Page 36
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




              RG 78.86       As stated in the Explanatory Memorandum, ‘reasonable grounds to believe’
                             ensures that the breach reporting obligation is clearly objective. This
                             objective standard gives effect to Recommendation 1 in the ASIC
                             Enforcement Review Taskforce, which describes a reasonable belief as
                             follows: ‘A “reasonable belief” will be formed if a reasonable person would
                             expect the matter to be reported to the regulator.’

                                  Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraphs 11.39, 11.40, 11.58 and 11.62;
                                  Treasury, ASIC enforcement review: Taskforce report, December 2017.

              RG 78.87       You must report to us if there are sufficient facts or information to found an
                             objectively reasonable belief. That is, you may have reasonable grounds to
                             believe a reportable situation has arisen when other possible explanations are
                             available, and this legal threshold does not require facts or evidence
                             amounting to certain proof that there is a breach: see Case study 3.

                              Case study 3: Reasonable grounds for a reportable situation

                              A licensee produced a progress report that was created during the course
                              of its investigation into whether a breach was significant.
                              The report noted that while the root causes of the breach were still being
                              determined, they included poor detective controls (lack of exception reporting),
                              multiple manual processes, multiple hand-off points, grandfathered packages,
                              complicated product design, and staff oversight and error.
                              The report also noted that the licensee was ‘currently sizing up the number
                              of affected clients and the dollar value of any remediation’. Preliminary
                              estimates indicated that affected clients made up 20% of all packages
                              distributed, with around $5 million overcharged.
                              In these circumstances, despite the fact that the licensee had not yet finally
                              determined the number of clients affected and the calculation of the total
                              loss, a reasonable person would be satisfied that a reportable situation had
                              arisen and must be reported to ASIC.

              RG 78.88       Subsections 912DAA(8), 912DAB(9), s912EA(6) and 912EB(12) of the
                             Corporations Act and s5(1) of the National Credit Act apply the Criminal
                             Code definitions of ‘recklessness’ (see s5.4 of the Criminal Code) and
                             ‘knowledge’ (see s5.3 of the Criminal Code) to the breach reporting
                             provisions.

                                  Note: The definitions are set out in the Criminal Code at the schedule to the Criminal
                                  Code Act 1995.

              RG 78.89       The definition of ‘knowledge’ is set out at s5.3 of the Criminal Code as
                             follows: ‘A person has knowledge of a circumstance or a result if he or she
                             is aware that it exists or will exist in the ordinary course of events.’

              RG 78.90       With respect to ‘recklessness’, the Explanatory Memorandum states:
                                  A licensee knows of reasonable grounds to believe a reportable situation
                                  has arisen if the licensee knows of facts and/or evidence sufficient to
                                  induce in a reasonable person a belief that a reportable situation has arisen.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 37
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                  The term ‘reckless’ is intended to capture circumstances where the licensee
                                  does not know that there are reasonable grounds to believe a reportable
                                  situation has arisen, but:
                                  • is aware of a substantial risk that there are reasonable grounds to believe
                                    a reportable situation has arisen; and
                                  • having regard to the circumstances known to the licensee, it is
                                    unjustifiable to take the risk that there are reasonable grounds to believe
                                    a reportable situation has arisen.
                                  While the licensee must have knowledge of, or be reckless with respect to
                                  whether, there are reasonable grounds to believe that a reportable situation
                                  has arisen for the reporting timeframe to commence, the question of
                                  whether those reasonable grounds exist remains objective.

                                  Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraphs 11.61–11.62.

              RG 78.91       Example 9 is an example of how we consider ‘recklessness’ to apply.

                              Example 9: Recklessness

                              Following a significant business continuity event leading to resourcing
                              constraints, the legal and compliance area of a licensee faced a significant
                              backlog of work. As a result, there were significant delays to process and
                              investigate suspected breaches. A memo was circulated to senior
                              management stating that matters that were being escalated to the legal and
                              compliance team were not being considered for at least six months.
                              A scheduled software review of new underwriting software finds a technical
                              error. A draft report is prepared, identifying significant overcharging of
                              some clients. It also finds that the full extent and impact of the error
                              (including the total number of clients affected and the amount of
                              overcharging per client) is unclear. The draft report is reviewed by the head
                              of the retail underwriting business unit. The report is shared with the legal
                              and compliance area. No further action is taken by the retail underwriting
                              business unit and the legal and compliance team do not consider the report
                              (or its findings). No further investigative action is taken.
                              Such conduct amounts to recklessness on the part of the licensee as to
                              whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the reportable
                              situation has arisen.


                             When does the licensee first know that a reportable
                             situation has arisen?

              RG 78.92       In determining when the licensee first knows that, or is reckless with respect
                             to whether, there are reasonable grounds to believe a reportable situation has
                             arisen—and whose knowledge within the licensee is attributable to the
                             licensee for the purposes of s912DAA(3) of the Corporations Act or s50B(4)
                             of the National Credit Act—licensees must consider s769B of the
                             Corporations Act or s324 of the National Credit Act.

                                  Note: The Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.81, states: ‘In accordance with
                                  section 769B(3) of the Corporations Act, for a licensee that is a body corporate, the state
                                  of mind of a director, employee or agent of the licensee (or certain other persons) will




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                    Page 38
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                  be attributed to the licensee where that person was engaged in the relevant conduct
                                  within the scope of their actual or apparent authority.’

              RG 78.93       Section 769B(3) of the Corporations Act states:
                                  If, in a proceeding under this Chapter in respect of conduct engaged in by a
                                  body corporate, it is necessary to establish the state of mind of the body, it
                                  is sufficient to show that a director, employee or agent of the body, being a
                                  director, employee or agent by whom the conduct was engaged in within
                                  the scope of the person’s actual or apparent authority, had that state of
                                  mind. For this purpose, a person acting as mentioned in paragraph (1)(b) is
                                  taken to be an agent of the body corporate concerned.

              RG 78.94       Section 324(3) of the National Credit Act states:
                                  If, for the purposes of this Act (other than the National Credit Code), it is
                                  necessary to establish the state of mind of the body corporate in relation to
                                  particular conduct, it is enough to show:
                                  (a) that the conduct was engaged in by a person referred to in paragraph
                                      (1)(a) or (b); and
                                  (b) that the person had that state of mind.

              RG 78.95       When an employee (or agent) may not have been granted actual authority
                             within their employment by the licensee to make a decision to lodge a breach
                             report, s769B of the Corporations Act or s324 of the National Credit Act can
                             still apply. If the employee knows (or is reckless) that there are reasonable
                             grounds to believe a reportable situation has arisen, provided that they
                             acquire this knowledge within the scope of their apparent authority within
                             their employment, the reporting period will commence.

              RG 78.96       The application of these principles is particularly relevant when a licensee
                             delegates the decision whether to lodge a breach report to a particular person
                             or committee as part of its breach reporting process. Regardless of any such
                             delegation under s769B of the Corporations Act or s324 of the National
                             Credit Act, if any employee (or agent) knows (or is reckless) that there are
                             reasonable grounds to believe a reportable situation has arisen, and they
                             acquire that knowledge within the scope of their actual or apparent authority
                             within their employment, the reporting period will commence.

              RG 78.97       Case study 4 demonstrates delays in escalating or reporting breaches due to
                             internal breach reporting processes that may lead to a contravention of
                             s912DAA(1) or (7) of the Corporations Act or s50B(1) or (2) of the National
                             Credit Act, especially when considered alongside s769B of the Corporations
                             Act or s324 of the National Credit Act.

                              Case study 4: Unreasonable delays due to inadequate processes

                              An AFS licensee had a three-step process that delayed reporting a breach
                              to ASIC until the chief executive level had been advised of the breach. After
                              the compliance area submits a report:
                              • the matter is considered at a meeting of the licensee’s breach
                                committee, which makes an informal recommendation;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 39
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                              • the informal recommendation is put to an email vote via a ‘circular
                                resolution’—each breach committee member is required to vote on
                                whether they agree or disagree with the recommendation; and
                              • if the vote passes, an email is sent to the licensee’s CEO seeking
                                confirmation that they are comfortable to confirm the recommendation.
                              The reporting period commences when the compliance area first knows
                              that there are reasonable grounds to believe a reportable situation has
                              arisen in relation to the licensee, not from when the CEO confirms the
                              recommendation.

              RG 78.98       When you have reasonable grounds to believe that a reportable situation has
                             arisen, you should not wait until after the following events to lodge your
                             report if to do so would take you beyond the reporting period:
                             (a)   consideration of the reportable situation by your board of directors;
                             (b)   receipt of legal advice on reportability;
                             (c)   you have rectified (when appropriate), or you have taken steps to
                                   rectify, the breach (or likely breach) of a core obligation or additional
                                   reportable situation; or
                             (d)   in the case of a likely breach, the breach has in fact occurred.

              RG 78.99       We consider that licensees are best placed to determine whether or not legal
                             advice is required before reporting to us. However, we expect that licensees
                             will not need to obtain legal advice for every case, and as stated in
                             RG 78.98(b), licensees should not wait for further sign-off from internal or
                             external legal advisers before reporting to ASIC if they have reasonable
                             grounds to believe a reportable situation has arisen.

              RG 78.100      The law allows 30 or 90 calendar days to complete any internal processes
                             before reporting to us (as discussed at RG 78.83–RG 78.84). We consider
                             that adopting an overly legalistic approach may lead to unnecessary delay
                             and failure to comply with the timeframes for reporting set out in
                             s912DAA(3) of the Corporations Act, s50B(4) of the National Credit Act (as
                             modified by s7 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620).

              RG 78.101      Avoiding delays is consistent with the concerns referred to in
                             paragraph 11.5 of the Explanatory Memorandum, that breach reporting is
                             largely inconsistent among licensees in terms of the timeliness of reports.

                             When must you report investigations to us?

              RG 78.102      In the case of investigations, you must lodge a report only in relation to
                             investigations that have continued for more than 60 days. The investigation
                             becomes a reportable situation on Day 61 of the investigation and you must
                             lodge a report within 30 days of this date: see s912DAA(3) of the
                             Corporations Act, s50B(4) of the National Credit Act (as modified by s7 of
                             ASIC Instrument 2024/620).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 40
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




              RG 78.103      At any stage, if the investigation identifies that a reportable situation has
                             arisen, you must report this to ASIC within the reporting period.

              RG 78.104      As noted at RG 78.53, the time at which an investigation commences is not
                             a subjective determination, but rather is a matter of fact in all the
                             circumstances. As discussed at RG 78.51(b), an investigation is reportable
                             irrespective of how the licensee labels the activity in its internal processes.
                             We recognise that compliance, risk and legal arrangements, and structures
                             may differ across licensees. Whether an investigation has started depends on
                             the nature of activities being conducted, and not where or by whom they are
                             conducted: see Example 10.

                              Example 10: Commencement of an investigation

                              A business division in a large insurance licensee notices a system error
                              that they believe may have resulted in customers not receiving their
                              insurance renewal documents. They log the incident in the licensee’s
                              incident management system.

                              The incident is escalated to a risk team in Line 1 who make some
                              preliminary inquiries as to the nature of the incident (what was the systems
                              issue, when they think this started happening, and how many customers
                              they believe may not have received their renewal documents).

                              Based on this information, the risk team escalates the matter to a
                              compliance team in Line 2 for further review.

                              The compliance team in Line 2 commences an assessment to consider
                              whether this type of incident could result in any breach of potential laws,
                              codes, or other applicable regulatory requirements. They also liaise with
                              the risk team and the relevant business division to understand more of the
                              facts around whether customers did not receive their documents at all, or
                              whether it was simply a delay. They make inquiries about the kinds of
                              insurance products or brands that may have been impacted.

                              The compliance team in Line 2 notifies the legal team of the incident and
                              asks them to conduct a ‘breach reporting investigation’. The legal team
                              considers the information available and determines that the business has
                              breached its obligations under s58 of the Insurance Contracts Act and may
                              have failed to comply with financial services laws.

                              In this scenario, when the compliance team in Line 2 commenced its
                              assessment, a reportable investigation arose, and the licensee must report
                              this to us if it continues for more than 60 days. The licensee must also
                              report to us if the investigation takes less than 60 days if, at any stage, the
                              licensee determines that a core obligation has been breached and that
                              breach is significant.

                              The licensee in this example has both Line 1 and Line 2 risk and
                              compliance functions. However, such structures are likely to vary
                              significantly across licensees, and the time at which an investigation
                              commences is not a subjective determination, but a matter of fact in all the
                              circumstances. What is critical is the nature of the activities being
                              conducted, not which team is conducting them.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 41
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




              RG 78.105      If the outcome of an investigation that continues for more than 60 days is
                             that there are no reasonable grounds to believe a reportable situation has
                             arisen, you must report this to ASIC: see s912D(1)(d) of the Corporations
                             Act, s50A(1)(d) of the National Credit Act. You must report to ASIC within
                             30 days after you first know that, or are reckless with respect to whether,
                             there are reasonable grounds to believe that the investigation disclosed there
                             is no breach (or likely breach) of a core obligation.

                              Example 11: Investigation that continues for more than 30 days

                              Licensee A suspects a reportable situation may have arisen in relation to
                              conduct by one of its authorised representatives. Licensee A commences an
                              investigation on 2 July 2023. On 31 August 2023 (60 days later) the
                              investigation is still ongoing.
                              On 21 September 2023, the investigation concludes and on that day Licensee A
                              determines that there is no reportable situation.
                              The investigation became a reportable situation on 1 September 2023.
                              Licensee A must lodge a report about the investigation within 30 calendar
                              days (i.e. by 1 October 2023). The outcome of the investigation that there is
                              no significant breach of a core obligation must also be reported to ASIC.
                              Licensee A must report this within 30 calendar days (i.e. by 21 October 2023).
                              Licensee A may notify ASIC of the commencement and outcome of the
                              investigation concurrently between 21 and 30 September 2023.

              RG 78.106      As noted at RG 78.60, if before the end of an investigation, you are satisfied,
                             or have reasonable grounds to believe, based on the information at hand, that
                             the breach was significant and a reportable situation, you must not wait until
                             the investigation is complete to report the matter to ASIC.



How do you report a reportable situation?
              RG 78.107      You must report to ASIC using the prescribed form, through the ASIC
                             Regulatory Portal: see s912DAA(2) of the Corporations Act, s50C(2) of the
                             National Credit Act. See Table 8 for an overview of the content of the
                             prescribed form, and Appendix 2 for guidance on specific questions in the
                             prescribed form.
                                      Note: For more details, see How to submit a reportable situation on the ASIC
                                      website.

              RG 78.108      ASIC’s prescribed form asks licensees a series of questions about the nature of
                             what is to be reported, as reflected in Table 8. Depending on your answers, it
                             generates questions that are relevant to what you are reporting to us.

              RG 78.109      If you are a licensee regulated by APRA, you may also comply with your
                             obligation by lodging a report with APRA: see s912DAA(5) of the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                Page 42
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                              Corporations Act, s50B(6) of the National Credit Act (as modified by s7A of
                              ASIC Instrument 2024/620). Your report must:
                              (a)     be lodged in the required timeframes in RG 78.83–RG 78.106; and
                              (b)     contain all the information required under s7A of ASIC Instrument
                                      2024/620.
                                      Note: Licensees can report to APRA, where relevant, through APRA’s website: see
                                      notify a breach.


Table 8:     Overview of content of the reportable situation prescribed form

 What to include               Description of content

 Date of the reportable        You must include:
 situation                      the date that the reportable situation arose or the date you anticipate that you
                                 will no longer be able to comply with your obligations; and
                                the date you first knew that there were reasonable grounds to believe that a
                                 reportable situation had arisen.
                                    Note 1: If there is a reportable situation, you must report it to ASIC within the reporting
                                    period from the date you first know that, or are reckless with respect to whether, there are
                                    reasonable grounds to believe a reportable situation arose. You will need to have a record
                                    of that date to ensure timely reporting.

                                    Note 2: Your breach register might also include the date that the breach was reported to
                                    ASIC and rectified.


 Nature of the reportable      You must state whether the report relates to:
 situation                      a significant breach of a core obligation;
                                a likely significant breach of a core obligation;
                                an additional reportable situation (serious fraud or gross negligence);
                                an investigation into whether a breach (or likely breach) of a core obligation has
                                 occurred that has continued for more than 30 days;
                                an investigation into whether a breach (or likely breach) of a core obligation has
                                 occurred that has continued for more than 30 days that discloses that no
                                 reportable situation has occurred; or
                                a reportable situation about another licensee.

 Description of the            You must describe the reportable situation, including the section of the relevant law
 reportable situation          that sets out the relevant obligation, including any relevant financial services law or
                               credit legislation and any relevant licence condition.

 The extent or magnitude       You must specify how many reportable situations relate to the breach or likely
 of the reported breach (if    breach you are reporting. In certain circumstances you may group related
 relevant)                     reportable situations in a single report.
                                    Note: See RG 78.110–RG 78.115 for guidance about grouping multiple reportable
                                    situations.


 Why the breach is             When relevant, you must identify why the breach is significant. This may involve
 significant (if relevant)     identifying:
                                that the reportable situation relates to a deemed significant breach; or
                                the factors in s912D(5) of the Corporations Act or s50A(5) of the National Credit
                                 Act that you consider apply in determining whether the breach (or likely breach)
                                 is significant and required to be reported to ASIC.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                         Page 43
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 What to include              Description of content

 How the reportable           You must provide details of how you found out about the reportable situation. For
 situation was identified     example, the reportable situation may have been identified through your
                              compliance arrangements, an audit or review, or as a result of a client complaint.

 How long the breach          You will need to include details as relevant, including whether the breach is still
 lasted                       continuing.

 Information about            If an authorised representative or credit representative is involved, you must include:
 representatives               that representative’s name and number;
                               if the representative’s authorisation has been revoked or suspended; and
                               if the representative’s work is being monitored or supervised.

 Whether and how the          If relevant, you must provide details of plans to rectify the breach (or likely
 reportable situation has     breach). This includes:
 been rectified                when you expect to complete the rectification (or complete a plan for rectifying
                                the breach); and
                               how the rectification will be achieved.
                              If ongoing steps are being taken to rectify the breach (or likely breach), indicate
                              when you expect to send ASIC a report on your progress in rectifying it, as well as
                              a notification that rectification is complete.

 Whether and when             You must provide details of any remediation program (including preventative
 affected clients have        measures) that has been or is being developed to compensate clients who have
 been compensated—            suffered a loss. Include relevant dates or expected dates for the start and
 Remediation                  conclusion of the remediation program.
                              You should also provide information about completion of remediation.

 Future compliance            You must describe any steps that have been, or will be, taken to ensure future
                              compliance with the obligation.




When can multiple reportable situations be grouped together in a
single report (the ‘grouping test’)?
              RG 78.110      In certain circumstances, you may be able to notify us of multiple reportable
                             situations in one report and meet your reporting obligations under the law.

                                  Note: Each individual reportable situation must be reported within the reporting period
                                  after you first know that, or are reckless with respect to whether, there are reasonable
                                  grounds to believe a reportable situation has arisen—see s912DAA of the Corporations
                                  Act, s50B of the National Credit Act and s7 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620. For
                                  example, if you choose to report 15 reportable situations (being separate contraventions
                                  of a civil penalty provision) that occurred over a 30-day period on various dates in one
                                  single report, you must ensure that you have met the reporting period for each
                                  individual reportable situation.

              RG 78.111      Reportable situations may be grouped and reported in a single report when
                             both limbs of the following ‘grouping test’ are met:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 44
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                             (a)   there is similar, related or identical conduct—this means conduct
                                   involving the same or very similar factual circumstances (e.g. similar
                                   representations made about the same type of product(s) and/or
                                   service(s)); and
                             (b)   the conduct has the same root cause—this means the underlying cause
                                   of the breach (e.g. a specific systems error or process deficiency).

                                   Note: Reportable situations that satisfy both limbs of this ‘grouping test’, will amount to
                                   reportable situations with ‘underlying circumstances that are the same as, or
                                   substantially similar to, the underlying circumstances relating to the reportable
                                   situation’ for the purposes of the relief in s7 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620.

              RG 78.112      You should exercise your professional judgement to determine what
                             situations are appropriate to report together. Table 9 provides examples that
                             apply the grouping test.

              RG 78.113      You may group individual reportable situations on the basis that they involve
                             similar, related or identical conduct even when each reportable situation
                             involves a separate occasion of staff negligence or human error as the root
                             cause. However, when there are multiple reportable situations attributable to
                             human error by different staff members, licensees should be satisfied that
                             there is no broader failure or other relevant root cause (e.g. relating to
                             training, policy, process and/or systems) that is the actual underlying cause
                             of the breach. For examples applying this approach, see Examples 12(a),
                             12(d) and 12(e) in Table 9.

              RG 78.114      If you are reporting a reportable situation on behalf of one or more related
                             entities, and provided that the conduct relates to the same root cause, there is
                             an opportunity in the prescribed form to identify and list the relevant
                             licensees and their licensee numbers. The related entities do not need to
                             separately report to us. Similarly, if you are reporting for both an AFS
                             licensee and a credit licensee, this can be specified in the form and two
                             separate reports are not required.

              RG 78.115      After you have lodged your breach report, you may identify further
                             reportable situations that relate to similar, related or identical conduct and
                             arise from the same root cause. These reportable situations may be reported
                             within 90 days after you first know, or are reckless with respect to whether,
                             there are reasonable grounds to believe a reportable situation has arisen.
                             Rather than submit a new report, you may report these to us in one update:
                             see Example 12(c) in Table 9.

              RG 78.116      You may provide us with this update using the update functionality available
                             on the ASIC Regulatory Portal provided that the original reportable situation
                             does not yet have an event status of complete. This update functionality is
                             accessible from the original reportable situation event created when you
                             lodged the initial report, and will prompt you for appropriate information
                             depending on what is being reported.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                     Page 45
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                    Note: For further information on other circumstances in which you should use the
                                    update functionality, see Q5 in Appendix 2.


Table 9:    Determining whether you may group multiple reportable situations in a single report

 Example 12(a): Reportable             A bank conducts a routine quality assurance process over its assessment
 situations identified by a            of home lending applications. It identifies 20 files (out of 1000 files
 quality assurance process             reviewed) where the bank failed to verify liabilities in line with the bank’s
 that involve similar, related or      policy. For each of those files, the failure was caused by staff members
 identical conduct                     missing a key detail provided in the customer’s documentation.

                                       The bank determines that 17 of these failures resulted in reportable
                                       contraventions of the licensee’s responsible lending obligations. The bank
                                       must report these 17 reportable situations to ASIC.

                                       This scenario may be grouped into a single report and reported to ASIC as
                                       both limbs of the grouping test are met.
                                       Similar, related or identical conduct

                                       The contravention in question relates to identical conduct—failure to verify
                                       a customer’s liabilities. Even if the 17 contraventions were made by
                                       different representatives at different points in time, this conduct would still
                                       be considered similar or related.

                                       Same root cause

                                       As above, the licensee investigated the root cause and determined that
                                       these 17 contraventions were caused by human error. Further investigation
                                       revealed that training provided to those staff members was adequate, the
                                       underlying policy and process in place was sound, and the errors were
                                       isolated mistakes.

 Example 12(b): Reportable             A fee for Product A is charged in error due to a system deficiency. The
 situations that involve               licensee identifies that the same fee-charging error occurs for Product B.
 different products but similar,
                                       The conduct can be grouped into a single report if both limbs of the
 related or identical conduct
                                       grouping test are met. The licensee should consider:
                                        whether it is similar, related or identical conduct—for example, does the
                                         fee-charging error relate to the same type of fee, and does the error
                                         occur in similar circumstances?
                                        whether it is the same root cause—for example, is the fee-charging error
                                         on Product B caused by the same system deficiency as Product A?

 Example 12(c): Using the              A licensee identifies a systems error that resulted in a customer being
 update functionality to report        overcharged a particular fee and reports this to ASIC. The licensee is not
 multiple additional reportable        able to immediately stop overcharging the fee and 25 additional customers
 situations related to an              are overcharged.
 ongoing or continuous breach
                                       The licensee determines based on the specific facts involved that each
                                       occasion of overcharging represents a reportable situation.

                                       As each subsequent reportable situation involves identical conduct, and
                                       has the same systems error as its root cause, both limbs of the grouping
                                       test are met.

                                       Similar, related or identical conduct

                                       The additional customers were overcharged the same fee in the same
                                       circumstances as the original reportable situation. It is therefore similar,
                                       related or identical conduct.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 46
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 Example 12(c): Using the            Same root cause
 update functionality to report
                                     The root cause for all of the additional customers being overcharged was
 multiple additional reportable
                                     the same systems error as for the original reportable situation, and
 situations related to an
                                     therefore involves the same root cause.
 ongoing or continuous breach
                                     As the licensee may group the 25 subsequent reportable situations (with
 (continued)
                                     each other, and with the initial reportable situation already reported to
                                     ASIC), the licensee may use the update functionality to notify us of these
                                     further 25 reportable situations in one update.

                                     In so doing, as the licensee has determined that each occasion of
                                     overcharging is a reportable situation with substantially similar underlying
                                     circumstances for the purposes of s7 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620, the
                                     licensee may report each subsequent situation within 90 days rather than
                                     the standard 30 days.

 Example 12(d): Reportable           A claims handling review is conducted by a licensee following a recent
 situations related to a claims      natural disaster event. The review finds several instances of staff members
 handling review                     incorrectly applying an additional excess, resulting in the customer paying a
                                     higher excess. The review also finds other instances of staff members
                                     incorrectly calculating the claim settlement amount, resulting in the
                                     customer being underpaid for their claim.

                                     The licensee determines that each instance represents a reportable
                                     situation (because they are deemed significant breaches that result, or are
                                     likely to result, in material loss or damage to clients).

                                     The licensee finds that these breaches were caused by human errors in the
                                     claims handling process. However, the licensee does not check whether
                                     there are other underlying causes.

                                     In this case, both limbs of the grouping test are not met (see details below).
                                     The collective findings from the claims handling review cannot, therefore,
                                     be grouped into a single report and reported to ASIC.

                                     Similar, related or identical conduct

                                     The review identified reportable situations involving different types of
                                     conduct (underpaid claims and incorrect application of excesses). These
                                     two types of conduct do not involve similar, related or identical conduct and
                                     cannot, therefore, be grouped.

                                     It is not sufficient that the breaches are related to policies and claims
                                     affected by the same disaster event. It is also not sufficient that they may all
                                     involve a failure to provide claims handling efficiently, honestly and fairly.

                                     However, depending on the circumstances, the individual instances that
                                     relate to underpaid claims and those that involve the incorrect application of
                                     excesses may be grouped.

                                     Same root cause

                                     It is not clear that there is the same root cause for all the findings of the
                                     review.

                                     In order for the licensee to group on the basis that human error is the root
                                     cause, then as stated above at RG 78.113, the licensee would need to be
                                     satisfied that there is no broader failure or other relevant root cause(s) that
                                     is the actual underlying cause of the breaches (e.g. some underpaid claims
                                     arising from staff not being appropriately trained, and others arising from a
                                     lack of clarity in supporting policies/procedures).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                Page 47
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 Example 12(e): Grouping             A licensee discovers five occasions where different staff members
 reportable situations where         mistakenly quoted incorrect information during calls with prospective
 there have been misleading          customers. The misrepresentations were in relation to the terms and
 statements                          conditions of their credit products. This included misrepresentations relating
                                     to the maximum loan amount, interest rate, the circumstances in which
                                     certain fees are payable, and eligibility criteria.

                                     The licensee’s investigation into the matter concluded that the
                                     misrepresentations were all attributable to human error.

                                     This scenario may be grouped into a single report and reported to ASIC as
                                     both limbs of the grouping test are met—see details below.
                                     Similar, related or identical conduct

                                     Although the representations are not identical, it is open to the licensee to
                                     determine that they involve ‘similar’ conduct because all of the
                                     misrepresentations were about the terms and conditions of their credit
                                     products.

                                     Same root cause

                                     In order for the licensee to group on the basis that human error is the root
                                     cause, then as stated above at RG 78.113, the licensee would need to be
                                     satisfied that there is no broader failure or other relevant root cause that is
                                     the actual underlying cause of the breaches (for example, a failure for the
                                     staff members to receive adequate training about the licensee’s products).

                                     In this scenario, the licensee determines that human error is the root cause
                                     for each of the five reportable situations, and after due consideration, is
                                     satisfied that there is no broader failure or other relevant root cause(s).




What will ASIC do after we receive your report?
              RG 78.117      Generally, we will take the following steps when we receive a report:
                             (a)   Confirmation—When you lodge the report, you will receive
                                   confirmation of your submission.
                             (b)   Request for more information—We may contact you if we need further
                                   information about the report that you have lodged. We will generally
                                   contact you through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.
                             (c)   Next steps—After we receive all the information we need, we will only
                                   contact you if we consider it necessary to do so.

              RG 78.118      We do not take action on all matters reported to ASIC. We will only contact
                             you if we consider it necessary to do so. While we may decide not to take
                             action in response to a single report, we may decide to take action in
                             circumstances where multiple reports lodged over a period of time suggest
                             more significant or systemic compliance issues.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                               Page 48
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                             Our regulatory and enforcement response to reports

              RG 78.119      We may contact you to discuss how to improve your compliance systems or
                             to determine how to remedy or minimise any damage resulting from the
                             breach. In appropriate circumstances, we may resolve outstanding compliance
                             concerns by conducting a formal surveillance to test your compliance
                             procedures or check whether there is a systemic compliance problem.

              RG 78.120      The legislation for which we have jurisdiction sets out the remedies available
                             to us, including criminal action, civil action and administrative action. We
                             can use these remedies in combination. Guidance about factors underlying
                             our decisions about whether to take enforcement action are set out in
                             Information Sheet 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement (INFO 151).

              RG 78.121      Reporting to ASIC in accordance with your legal obligations will not influence
                             the action we may take. However, we may take into account a situation where
                             a report should have been made to ASIC and you failed to do so, as this is a
                             further contravention and may indicate your general approach to compliance.

              RG 78.122      We may make further inquiries to ensure there is ongoing compliance with
                             your licence obligations and that you take reasonable steps to ensure that you
                             comply with the law. Depending on the outcome of any inquiries, we may
                             take administrative action. For example, we may seek to address any issues
                             identified by imposing additional conditions on your licence.

                                   Note: For guidance on procedures for monitoring, supervision and training of
                                   representatives, see RG 104 and RG 105 for AFS licensees and RG 205 for credit
                                   licensees. For further guidance about our approach to taking administrative action against
                                   financial services industry participants, see Regulatory Guide 98 ASIC’s powers to
                                   suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders (RG 98) and
                                   Regulatory Guide 218 Licensing: Administrative action against persons engaging in
                                   credit activities (RG 218).




What are the consequences of failing to report to ASIC?
              RG 78.123      If there are reasonable grounds to believe that a reportable situation has
                             arisen, you must lodge a report with ASIC. This is a legal obligation. Failing
                             to report to ASIC when a reportable situation has arisen can attract both civil
                             and criminal penalties.

              RG 78.124      The maximum civil penalty for not reporting a reportable situation in
                             accordance with your obligation as a licensee is:
                             (a)   for an individual—the greater of 5,000 penalty units, and three times
                                   the benefit derived and detriment avoided; and
                             (b)   for a body corporate—the greatest of 50,000 penalty units, three times
                                   the benefit derived and detriment avoided, and 10% of the annual
                                   turnover for the 12-month period ending at the end of the month in



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                     Page 49
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                   which the body corporate contravened, or began to contravene (capped
                                   at 2.5 million penalty units).
                                   Note: See Fines and penalties on the ASIC website for more information about
                                   penalties, including the value of a penalty unit.

              RG 78.125      Failure to report to ASIC in accordance with your obligation (except for the
                             obligation to notify ASIC of a reportable situation about another licensee) is
                             also a criminal offence.

              RG 78.126      The maximum penalties are:
                             (a)   a fine of 240 penalty units for an individual or 2,400 penalty units for a
                                   body corporate;
                             (b)   two years imprisonment; or
                             (c)   both (a) and (b).


What information will ASIC publish?
              RG 78.127      We have a statutory obligation to publish information about reports lodged
                             with ASIC each financial year. We must publish the information on our
                             website within four months after the end of the financial year: see s912DAD
                             of the Corporations Act, s50D of the National Credit Act.

              RG 78.128      The information we publish must include information about breaches and
                             likely breaches of core obligations reported to ASIC and APRA for the
                             financial year: see s912DAD(1) of the Corporations Act, s50D(1) of the
                             National Credit Act. We may also include the kinds of information stated in
                             the Explanatory Memorandum—for example, the name of the licensee and
                             the volume of reported breaches.

                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.225.

              RG 78.129      The information we publish may include or exclude information as
                             prescribed by the regulations. You should check to see whether the
                             regulations have specified any further factors.

              RG 78.130      In identifying the information we publish, we will take into consideration the
                             Parliamentary intent set out in the Explanatory Memorandum:
                                   This supplements ASIC’s existing reporting framework to enhance
                                   accountability and provide an incentive for improved behaviour. It will also
                                   assist industry and consumers to identify areas where significant numbers
                                   of breaches or likely breaches are occurring, and allow licensees to target
                                   their efforts to improve their compliance outcomes in those areas.
                                   Note: See Explanatory Memorandum, paragraph 11.233.

              RG 78.131      In publishing this information, we will include any important context to
                             understanding the data—for example, acknowledging that a large number of
                             reports does not necessarily suggest a higher incidence of non-compliance
                             (rather, it may reflect stronger compliance systems).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 50
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




D          Compliance systems and identifying, recording
           and reporting breaches


                              Key points

                              You should have a clear, well-understood and documented process for
                              identifying, recording and reporting breaches to ASIC in a timely manner.

                              Based on our experience, we have set out some examples of what we
                              consider is good practice for licensees in identifying, recording and
                              reporting breaches.



What arrangements should you have in place for recording and
reporting breaches?
              RG 78.132      Under your general obligations as a licensee, you must maintain adequate
                             risk management systems and have available adequate resources (including
                             financial, technological and human resources) to ensure compliance with
                             your licensee obligations: see s912A(1) of the Corporations Act, s47(1) of
                             the National Credit Act.
                                  Note 1: For further information on compliance with your general obligations, see
                                  RG 104 for AFS licensees and RG 205 for credit licensees.

                                  Note 2: If you are a body regulated by APRA, you are not required to comply with these
                                  general obligations for licensees. However, there are similar obligations in legislation
                                  administered by APRA and in prudential standards and rules determined by APRA under
                                  that legislation: see RG 78.150–RG 78.151.

              RG 78.133      Having robust breach reporting systems, processes and procedures in place
                             to meet the breach reporting obligation is a critical element of a licensee’s
                             compliance and risk management framework. We consider that failure to
                             report a significant breach (or likely breach) is likely, in itself, to be a
                             significant breach of your obligation to comply with the financial services
                             laws or credit legislation. This is because it indicates that your arrangements
                             to ensure compliance with your obligations may be inadequate: see
                             s912D(5)(c) of the Corporations Act, s50A(5)(c) of the National Credit Act.

              RG 78.134      In the case studies it considered, the Financial Services Royal Commission
                             found licensees did not always report within the time required. There were
                             failures to report issues, inadequate records of consideration whether to report,
                             and broader concerns about the adequacy of systems to ensure compliance
                             with breach reporting. In the final report, Commissioner Hayne stated:
                                  Unwillingness to recognise and to accept responsibility for misconduct
                                  explains the prolonged and repeated failures by large entities to make
                                  breach reports required by the law.
                                  Note: See Financial Services Royal Commission, Final report, vol. 1, p. 409.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                 Page 51
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




              RG 78.135      To ensure compliance with the breach reporting obligation, you should have
                             a clear, well-understood and documented process for:
                             (a)   identifying and recording incidents (e.g. suspected or possible reportable
                                   situations);
                             (b)   assessing and determining whether an identified incident is a reportable
                                   situation, including timely and appropriately resourced investigations as
                                   required;
                             (c)   reporting to ASIC all incidents identified as reportable situations within
                                   the reporting period in the form prescribed;
                             (d)   when appropriate, rectifying loss or damage as required; and
                             (e)   ensuring that arrangements are in place to prevent the recurrence of the
                                   breach (or likely breach).

              RG 78.136      Licensees must have robust arrangements in place with their authorised
                             representatives and credit representatives and persons acting on behalf of the
                             licensee that are effective in identifying, recording and escalating possible
                             breaches by an authorised representative or a credit representative, and
                             ensure appropriate supervision in respect of these arrangements.

                                   Note 1: See Appendix 4 of Report 515 Financial advice: Review of how large
                                   institutions oversee their advisers (REP 515), which provides practical guidance on
                                   ‘key risk indicators’ for monitoring advisers (including authorised representatives) in
                                   the personal advice context. We consider that these indicators are relevant for
                                   consideration by AFS licensees and credit licensees. As stated in REP 515, we expect
                                   that using these key risk indicators will help licensees to identify potentially high-risk
                                   advisers and non-compliant advice.

                                   Note 2: ASIC Corporations (Record-Keeping Requirements for Australian Financial
                                   Services Licensees when Giving Personal Advice) Instrument 2024/508 clarifies record-
                                   keeping obligations for AFS licensees in the context of personal advice. Authorised
                                   representatives who are advisers must keep records, and give the records to their
                                   authorising licensee if the licensee requests the records for the purposes of complying
                                   with financial services laws.

              RG 78.137      Whatever processes you adopt, you must ensure that breaches are escalated
                             promptly. To meet your obligations to report all reportable situations when
                             there are reasonable grounds to believe they have arisen, we expect that your
                             internal systems ensure that incidents, the findings of an investigation into
                             whether a breach has occurred, and reporting to ASIC, are all escalated to
                             the relevant people in a timely and efficient manner. Unreasonable delays
                             may be an indicator that you do not have adequate compliance processes,
                             systems and resources in place, and may suggest a breach of your obligations
                             under s912A of the Corporations Act or s47 of the National Credit Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                       Page 52
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Developing your approach to the breach reporting obligation: Some
practical insights
              RG 78.138      REP 594 sets out the findings of ASIC’s review of AFS licensees’
                             compliance with their breach reporting obligations, and some high-level
                             expectations in relation to the obligations.

              RG 78.139      What you need to do to comply with your breach reporting obligation will
                             vary according to the nature, scale and complexity of your business. We
                             consider that the high-level expectations outlined in REP 594 remain
                             relevant and should be considered by all licensees (including credit
                             licensees) as you develop or improve your approach to the breach reporting
                             obligation.

              RG 78.140      This includes that you:
                             (a)   fully comply with the breach reporting obligation;
                             (b)   have capacity and speed in identifying and investigating incidents, and
                                   reporting to ASIC;
                             (c)   demonstrate a sound breach management culture that makes:
                                   (i)     reporting a priority;
                                   (ii)    consumer remediation a priority; and
                             (d)   make the most of the lessons learned and opportunities that each breach
                                   presents.

                                   Note: For more information about our expectations, see REP 594, Table 4.

              RG 78.141      In relation to RG 78.135(c), and as stated in REP 594, this includes an
                             approach that will:
                             (a)   prioritise and support the ability of licensees to meet their breach
                                   reporting obligations, including clear end-to-end senior accountability
                                   of breach reporting processes and procedures; and
                             (b)   provide an environment where:
                                   (i)     staff can raise concerns about risks, including incidents (and are
                                           vigilant about these);
                                   (ii)    investigations, rectification and remediation are prioritised—and
                                           overseen and championed by senior management; and
                                   (iii)   transparent communication about breaches and incidents promotes
                                           identification, rectification and reporting.

              RG 78.142      In relation to RG 78.135(d), we consider that ensuring fair consumer outcomes
                             should be a priority across the organisation. When something goes wrong,
                             licensees should take responsibility for their actions—treating consumers in a
                             manner that is consistent with the licensee’s stated values and legal
                             requirements. The importance of remediation therefore should not only be a



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                              Page 53
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                             consideration within a licensee’s breach management culture, but should also
                             be a consideration across various aspects of a licensee’s business and
                             compliance processes.

                                  Note: See Regulatory Guide 277 Consumer remediation (RG 277) for further guidance
                                  on remediation.

              RG 78.143      Some other practices that we consider will help licensees in meeting the
                             breach reporting obligation are set out in Table 10.

Table 10: Other helpful practices for meeting the breach reporting obligation

 Practice                     Description

 Review                       A regular review or audit of breach reporting processes, including the operation of
                              the breach reporting process and internal benchmarking on:
                               the number of incidents assessed and their outcomes;
                               any trends; and
                               timeliness, including for ongoing investigations, remediation and incident
                                identification.

 Oversight of lengthy         A process for oversight of lengthy investigations that enables:
 investigations                an understanding of the investigation to date;
                               reasons for any current delays, if applicable;
                               appropriate management of the investigation moving forward; and
                               consideration of the significance of the breach.

 Analysis                     Robust systems and processes for analysing root causes and systemic issues to
                              proactively detect significant or emerging issues and ensure that existing issues
                              are adequately addressed.

 Accountability               Appropriate accountability checks after a significant breach is recorded and
                              reported to ASIC, including:
                               considering appropriate ‘consequence management’ (i.e. learning opportunities
                                to stop a breach continuing or recurring, involving real and meaningful
                                consequences for staff and management responsible for oversight); and
                               prioritising the mitigation of consumer detriment once a breach is identified.

 Governance structures        Robust governance and accountability structures around the breach reporting
                              obligation, including (where relevant) harmonised breach reporting practices and
                              procedures across the organisation to mitigate institutional silos and promote
                              information and intelligence sharing across the whole organisation.

 Resourcing                   Sound resourcing forecasts for the breach reporting framework, including
                              consideration of the adequacy of IT platforms and, where relevant, challenges
                              associated with legacy systems.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                             Page 54
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Do you need a breach register?
              RG 78.144      A breach register records actions in identifying, reporting and resolving
                             breaches. As a licensee, you are not expressly required to maintain a breach
                             register under the Corporations Act or the National Credit Act. However, we
                             consider that, in practice, you will need a breach register to ensure that you
                             have adequate arrangements in place to comply with your obligation to
                             identify and report all reportable situations. This includes your obligation
                             under s912D(5)(a) of the Corporations Act or s50A(5)(a) of National Credit
                             Act to have regard to the number or frequency of similar breaches when
                             determining whether a breach (or likely breach) of a core obligation is
                             significant: see RG 78.45–RG 78.47.

              RG 78.145      To ensure that you can satisfy yourself and ASIC that you have done all
                             things necessary to properly identify, record and report to ASIC reportable
                             situations, including systemic breaches, we consider that your breach register
                             should contain the information in the reportable situations prescribed form
                             (as summarised in Table 8).
                                  Note: For a discussion of breach registers, including the types of information they might
                                  include and good compliance practices for breach registers, see REP 594.

              RG 78.146      You will need to consider how best to keep these documents or records.
                             Keeping documents and records helps you to demonstrate to ASIC and to
                             yourself that you know whether or not you are complying with your obligations
                             as a licensee, including the obligation to report all reportable situations to
                             ASIC.
                                  Note: For more information, see RG 104 and RG 105 for AFS licensees and RG 205 for
                                  credit licensees.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 55
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Appendix 1: Summary of core obligations for
licensees

              RG 78.147      You must report to ASIC any significant breach (or likely significant breach) of
                             your ‘core obligations’ which are defined in s912D(3) of the Corporations Act
                             (for AFS licensees) or s50A(3) of the National Credit Act (for credit licensees).


What are the core obligations for AFS licensees?
              RG 78.148      If you are an AFS licensee, the following are core obligations under s912D(3)
                             (a)   your general obligations under s912A or 912B other than the obligation
                                   under s912A(1)(c) of the Corporations Act, which are your obligations to:
                                   (i)     do all things necessary to ensure that the financial services covered
                                           by your licence are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly;
                                   (ii)    have in place adequate arrangements for the management of
                                           conflicts of interest;
                                   (iii)   comply with the conditions of your AFS licence;
                                   (iv)    take reasonable steps to ensure that your representatives comply
                                           with the financial services laws;
                                   (v)     if you are the operator of an Australian passport fund, or a person
                                           with responsibilities in relation to an Australian passport fund—
                                           comply with the law of each host economy for the fund;
                                   (vi)    comply with the ASIC reference checking and information sharing
                                           protocol;
                                   Note: See Information Sheet 257 ASIC reference checking and information sharing
                                   protocol (INFO 257) and ASIC Corporations and Credit (Reference Checking and
                                   Information Sharing Protocol) Instrument 2024/647.

                                   (vii) have adequate resources to provide the financial services covered
                                           by your AFS licence and to carry out supervisory arrangements
                                           (unless you are a body regulated by APRA—see RG 78.150–
                                           RG 78.151);
                                   (viii) be competent to provide the financial services;

                                   (ix)    have trained and competent representatives;
                                   (x)     have an IDR procedure for retail clients that complies with
                                           standards and requirements made or approved by ASIC in
                                           accordance with the regulations;
                                   Note 1: This includes a licensee’s IDR obligations in s912A(1)(g), which through the
                                   operation of ASIC Corporations, Credit and Superannuation (Internal Dispute
                                   Resolution) Instrument 2020/98 includes the enforceable parts of RG 271 (IDR Standards).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                 Page 56
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                   Note 2: This obligation has been modified by s5 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620.

                                   (xi)    give ASIC information relating to your IDR procedure for retail
                                           clients and the operation of the procedure specified in the ASIC
                                           Corporations (Internal Dispute Resolution Data Reporting)
                                           Instrument 2022/205;
                                   (xii) have adequate risk management systems (unless you are a body
                                           regulated by APRA—see RG 78.150–RG 78.151);
                                   (xiii) have compensation arrangements in accordance with s912B; and

                                   (xiv) comply with any other obligations prescribed by Corporations
                                           Regulations, including the requirement to cooperate with AFCA;
                             (b)   the obligation upon the AFS licensee or its representative under
                                   s912A(1)(c) of the Corporations Act to comply with the ‘financial
                                   services laws’ as defined in s9 of the Corporations Act, but only those
                                   parts that are set out in s912D(3)(b) and s912D(3)(e), which are as
                                   follows:
                                   (i)     Ch 5C of the Corporations Act (managed investment schemes);
                                   (ii)    Ch 5D of the Corporations Act (licensed trustee companies);
                                   (iii)   Ch 6 of the Corporations Act (takeovers);
                                   (iv)    Ch 6A of the Corporations Act (compulsory acquisitions and buy-
                                           outs);
                                   (v)     Ch 6B of the Corporations Act (rights and liabilities about Ch 6
                                           and 6A matters);
                                   (vi)    Ch 6C of the Corporations Act (information about ownership of
                                           listed companies and managed investment schemes);
                                   (vii) Ch 6D of the Corporations Act (fundraising);

                                   (viii) Ch 7 of the Corporations Act (financial services and markets)

                                   (ix)    Ch 8A of the Corporations Act (Asia Region Funds Passport);
                                   (x)     Ch 8B of the Corporations Act (corporate collective investment
                                           vehicles)
                                   (xi)    Ch 9 of the Corporations Act (miscellaneous), but only as it
                                           applies to the chapters of the Corporations Act listed above;
                                   (xii) a provision of the Passport Rules for this jurisdiction; and

                                   (xiii) Div 2 of Pt 2 of the ASIC Act (unconscionable conduct and
                                           consumer protections for financial services; and
                             (c)   in relation to financial services, other than traditional trustee company
                                   services provided by a licensed trustee company, the obligations under
                                   the Commonwealth legislation administered by APRA and specified in
                                   reg 7.6.02A of the Corporations Regulations, which are as follows:
                                   (i)     Australian National Registry of Emissions Units Act 2011;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 57
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                   (ii)    Banking Act 1959;
                                   (iii)   Carbon Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative Act) 2011;
                                   (iv)    Financial Sector (Collection of Data) Act 2001;
                                   (v)     Financial Sector (Shareholdings) Act 1998;
                                   (vi)    Financial Sector (Transfer and Restructure) Act 1999;
                                   (vii) Insurance Acquisitions and Takeovers Act 1991;

                                   (viii) Insurance Act 1973;

                                   (ix)    Insurance Contracts Act 1984;
                                   (x)     Life Insurance Act 1995;
                                   (xi)    RSA Act;
                                   (xii) SIS Act; and

                             (d)   in relation to traditional trustee company services provided by a
                                   licensed trustee company, the obligation under s912A(1)(c) of the
                                   Corporations Act to comply with financial services laws so far as they
                                   are Commonwealth, state or territory legislation or the common law or
                                   equity that relate to the provision of financial services and traditional
                                   trustee company services (see paragraphs (e) and (f) of the definition of
                                   ‘financial services law’).



What are the core obligations for credit licensees?
              RG 78.149      If you are a credit licensee, the following are core obligations under s50A(3)
                             of the National Credit Act:
                             (a)   your general obligations under s47 of the National Credit Act other than
                                   the obligation under s47(1)(d), which are your obligations to:
                                   (i)     do all things necessary to ensure that the credit activities covered by
                                           your licence are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly;
                                   (ii)    have in place adequate arrangements to ensure that clients of the
                                           licensee are not disadvantaged by any conflict of interest that may
                                           arise wholly or partly in relation to credit activities engaged in by
                                           the licensee or its representatives;
                                   (iii)   comply with the conditions of your licence;
                                   (iv)    take reasonable steps to ensure that your representatives comply
                                           with the credit legislation;
                                   (v)     comply with the ASIC reference checking and information sharing
                                           protocol;
                                   Note: See INFO 257 and ASIC Instrument 2024/647.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                              Page 58
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                   (vi)   be competent to engage in the credit activities covered by your
                                          credit licence;
                                   (vii) have trained and competent representatives;

                                   (viii) have an IDR procedure that complies with standards and
                                          requirements made or approved by ASIC in accordance with the
                                          regulations;
                                   (ix)   give ASIC information relating to your IDR procedure for retail
                                          clients and the operation of the procedure specified in ASIC
                                          Instrument 2022/205;
                                   (x)    be a member of AFCA;
                                   (xi)   have compensation arrangements in accordance with s48 of the
                                          National Credit Act;
                                   (xii) have adequate arrangements and systems to ensure compliance
                                          with your obligations under s47 of the National Credit Act, and a
                                          written plan that documents those arrangements and systems;
                                   (xiii) have adequate resources available to engage in the credit activities
                                          covered by your credit licence and carry out supervisory
                                          arrangements (unless you are a body regulated by APRA—see
                                          RG 78.150–RG 78.151);
                                   (xiv) have adequate risk management systems (unless you are a body
                                          regulated by APRA—see RG 78.150–RG 78.151); and
                                   (xv) comply with any other obligations prescribed by the National
                                          Credit Regulations;
                             (b)   your obligation under s47(1)(d) of the National Credit Act to comply
                                   with the ‘credit legislation’ (as defined in s5) so far as it relates to all
                                   provisions of the National Credit Act (including the National Credit
                                   Code), National Consumer Credit Protection (Transitional and
                                   Consequential Provisions) Act 2009 (Transitional Act), and Div 2 of Pt
                                   2 of the ASIC Act (unconscionable conduct and consumer protections
                                   for financial services) and related regulations under the Australian
                                   Securities and Investments Commission Regulations 2001 (ASIC
                                   Regulations); and
                             (c)   your obligation under s47(1)(d) of the National Credit Act to comply with
                                   Commonwealth legislation that:
                                   (i)    is covered by paragraph (d) of the definition of ‘credit legislation’,
                                          being legislation that covers conduct relating to credit activities, but
                                          only in so far as it relates to such conduct; and
                                   (ii)   is specified in ASIC Instrument 2024/620, which are as follows:
                                          (A)   Banking Act 1959;
                                          (B)   Corporations Act;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                             Page 59
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                                        (C)   Financial Sector (Collection of Data) Act 2001;
                                        (D)   Financial Sector (Shareholdings) Act 1998;
                                        (E)   Financial Sector (Transfer and Restructure) Act 1999; and
                             (d)   an obligation of your representative under the National Credit Act
                                   (including the National Credit Code), Transitional Act, and Div 2 of Pt 2 of
                                   the ASIC Act (unconscionable conduct and consumer protections for
                                   financial services) and related regulations under the ASIC Regulations.



Bodies regulated by APRA
              RG 78.150      Under Commonwealth legislation regulated by APRA and in accordance
                             with APRA’s prudential standards and rules, if you are a body regulated by
                             APRA, you must have adequate resources and risk management systems.
                             The obligations in s912A(1)(d) and (h) of the Corporations Act and s47(1)(l)
                             of the National Credit Act will not, or are unlikely to, apply to you.

              RG 78.151      The obligation to comply with Commonwealth legislation, including
                             legislation administered by APRA, constitutes a core obligation insofar as
                             the legislation covers conduct relating to the provision of financial services
                             and is specified in regulations: see s912D(3)(c) of the Corporations Act,
                             s50A(3)(c) of the National Credit Act. This is part of your obligation to
                             comply with financial services laws: see s912A(1)(c) of the Corporations
                             Act, s47(1)(d) of the National Credit Act.

                                   Note: For AFS licensees, see RG 78.148(c) for a list of the Commonwealth legislation
                                   specified in reg 7.6.02A of the Corporations Regulations. For credit licensees, see
                                   RG 78.149(c) for a list of Commonwealth legislation specified in ASIC Instrument
                                   2024/620.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                 Page 60
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Appendix 2: Frequently asked questions about how
to complete ASIC’s reportable situations form


              RG 78.152      ASIC has prescribed a form that licensees must use when reporting
                             reportable situations to ASIC: see RG 78.107. The form is available via the
                             ASIC Regulatory Portal. The information gathered through this prescribed
                             form provides regulatory intelligence to ASIC, and is used to consider what
                             action, if any, will be taken in response to the report: see RG 78.117–
                             RG 78.122. This appendix addresses some FAQs about how to answer
                             questions on this form.



Q1: What information am I required to provide to ASIC as part of a
reportable situation?
              RG 78.153      Conditional logic in the ASIC Regulatory Portal generates only relevant
                             questions depending on the nature and type of reportable situation being
                             lodged. AISC requires minimal free text information and does not require
                             additional attachments.

              RG 78.154      The following ‘wireframes’ contain all the questions that appear in the
                             prescribed form available from the ASIC Regulatory Portal together with the
                             conditional logic that is applied:
                             (a)   Reportable situation by licensee (PDF 1.4 MB)
                             (b)   Reportable situation by another licensee (PDF 767 KB).

              RG 78.155      There is also information available from the ASIC Regulatory Portal,
                             including step-by-step guidance, FAQs and videos.



Q2: Does the ASIC Regulatory Portal have bulk/batch upload
capability?
              RG 78.156      Yes, ASIC has released the Reportable Situations Application Programming
                             Interface (API), which provides a machine-to-machine interface solution to
                             submit reportable situation transactions: See Application Programming
                             Interface (API) for Reportable Situations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 61
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Q3: What information should I provide in the free-text field
‘Describe the reportable situation’?
              RG 78.157      You should adopt an approach that:
                             (a)   takes into account the impact, nature and complexity of the reportable
                                   situation, including by providing a greater level of detail for reportable
                                   situations involving customer loss or other client or market integrity
                                   impact that are not one-off or isolated breaches; and
                             (b)   considers whether further or more detailed information, beyond what is
                                   captured through the structured data fields in the prescribed form,
                                   would assist ASIC’s understanding of the reportable situation.

                                   Note: For an overview of the content of ASIC’s prescribed form, see Table 8.

              RG 78.158      Taking into account the principles in RG 78.157, you should consider
                             including the following information in the ‘describe the reportable situation’
                             field:
                             (a)   details about what happened;
                             (b)   an explanation of how the reportable situation is a breach of your
                                   obligations, serious fraud or gross negligence;
                             (c)   details of how the reportable situation was identified;
                             (d)   details about why the reportable situation occurred (including the root
                                   cause);
                             (e)   details about impact to clients and/or licensees (including non-financial
                                   impact);
                             (f)   any information about remediation or rectification not otherwise
                                   covered by structured data fields;
                             (g)   what steps have been or will be taken to address the underlying root
                                   cause and ensure a similar issue does not occur;
                             (h)   details about anything unusual about the report—for example, why it
                                   took an extended time to identify the issue, commence an investigation;
                                   and
                             (i)   any other relevant context that is not otherwise provided in the
                                   structured data fields.



Q4: How should I respond to the question ‘Have any similar
reportable situations previously occurred’?
              RG 78.159      You will need to apply professional judgement to both determine whether
                             two or more reportable situations are similar, and the length of the time you
                             should look back to identify similar reportable situations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                  Page 62
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




              RG 78.160      Factors that you should take into account when determining whether a
                             reportable situation is similar include:
                             (a)   the nature of the issue and/or breach;
                             (b)   the legislative provisions contravened (if applicable);
                             (c)   the underlying root cause of the reportable situation;
                             (d)   the compliance arrangements or controls involved; and
                             (e)   the nature of any client impact.

              RG 78.161      When considering the length of time to look back, licensees should consider
                             the purpose of the question, specifically, whether there may be a repeat issue
                             or a broader systemic issue. We expect that licensees will consider the
                             impact, nature and complexity of the reportable situation(s) in undertaking
                             this task. You can provide further contextual information for your response
                             in the free-text ‘Describe the reportable situation’ field.



Q5: When does ASIC expect an update to a report that I have
lodged?
              RG 78.162      We expect that you will provide an update to a report if:
                             (a)   six months have passed and no other update has been provided to
                                   ASIC—in this case, you should provide a status or progress update (e.g.
                                   on your investigation, rectification and/or remediation activities);
                             (b)   there are any material changes to your understanding of the nature,
                                   impact or extent of the reportable situation(s)—in this case, you should
                                   provide details about the relevant changes. These changes could
                                   include, for example, your becoming aware of a different underlying
                                   root cause, or a revised expected completion date of remediation or
                                   rectification activities. This also includes updates to estimates
                                   previously provided to ASIC on the amount of financial loss and
                                   number of clients affected;
                             (c)   you have completed:
                                   (i)     your investigation (i.e. when you have determined the root cause(s)
                                           of the reportable situation and you are satisfied that you have
                                           identified all affected clients and all instances of the reportable
                                           situation);
                                   (ii)    rectification of the root cause or causes; and
                                   (iii)   your consumer remediation process.

              RG 78.163      If you have notified ASIC of a continuous or ongoing breach (i.e. after the
                             initial report, further reportable situations are likely to arise), you can use the
                             update functionality to notify ASIC of these further reportable situations,



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                              Page 63
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                             rather than lodging a new report: see Example 12(d) in Table 9 and
                             RG 78.115.

                                  Note: As these are new reportable situations, licensees must report them to ASIC within
                                  the reporting period unless the change is in relation to something that does not amount
                                  to a new ‘reportable situation’ so the reporting period does not apply.

              RG 78.164      In addition to this general guidance, you may use the update functionality in
                             any other way as you consider appropriate to keep ASIC informed on the
                             progress of reportable situations.



Q6: How should I respond to the question ‘What are the root causes
of the breach—or likely breach’?
              RG 78.165      The root cause refers to the underlying cause of a reportable situation. The
                             prescribed form asks you to report the root cause by selecting from a number
                             of common root cause categories.

              RG 78.166      You should select categories corresponding with the root cause you have
                             identified. You may select one or more, and you should select all root cause
                             options that are applicable. For example, you may determine that the root
                             cause of a breach was that you failed, as part of a regulatory change
                             program, to update an internal policy or process to reflect a new regulatory
                             requirement. In this instance, the most appropriate options may include
                             ‘policy or process deficiency’ and ‘failed change initiative’.

              RG 78.167      We expect that you will have robust processes in place to investigate and
                             determine the root cause of a breach.

              RG 78.168      You will need to apply professional judgement to determine which root
                             cause categories to select. Where the root cause is unclear from the options
                             that you select, or if you have further information about the root cause, you
                             should provide that additional information in the free-text field ‘Describe the
                             reportable situation’: see RG 78.157.

              RG 78.169      Table 11 provides guidance on how to interpret each of the root cause
                             category options in the prescribed form.

Table 11: Guidance on root cause category options

 What to select              Description of root cause

 Policy or process           The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by a gap or error
 deficiency                  in a licensee’s internal policies, processes and/or procedures.

                             This includes, for example, when a staff member correctly follows each step of a
                             process, but due to an error or gap in the design of that policy or process, the client
                             is incorrectly charged a fee.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                 Page 64
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 What to select              Description of root cause

 System deficiency           The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by an error in
                             either the design or the operation of a technology system.

                             This includes, for example:
                              a system logic error leading to clients being mischarged interest; or
                              a system outage leading to a failure to provide disclosure documents.
                             There may be circumstances when a reportable situation is caused by a system
                             deficiency in conjunction with other root causes. For example, if the system
                             requires manual ‘workarounds’ to be applied for the correct outcome to be
                             achieved, and the policy, processes and management controls do not exist or do
                             not support this to be undertaken consistently.

 Staff—negligence or         The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by a mistake
 error                       made by a staff member (e.g. a well-trained staff member who fails to read a
                             general advice warning, or makes a keying error when issuing a client a product
                             that leads them to be overcharged).

                             This should be reported as the sole category of root cause only when the licensee
                             is satisfied that there is no broader failure or other relevant root cause (e.g. relating
                             to training, policy, process and/or systems) that is the actual underlying cause of
                             the breach, particularly for repeat reportable situations.

                             For example, if there are multiple breaches involving staff error associated with the
                             execution of a specific step in a policy or process, we expect that the licensee will
                             consider whether there is one or more underlying cause for the execution errors
                             (e.g. a review of the specific policy/process step to identify issues with the policy,
                             process or training).

 Staff—inadequate            The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by a staff member:
 supervision or lack of       not being subject to adequate supervision (particularly for staff members new to a
 training                      particular task or process); or
                              not receiving training or adequate training.

 Staff—fraud and/or          The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by an intentional
 misappropriation            act by a staff member to obtain an unjust or illegal advantage (usually by deception).

 Staff—misconduct            The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by a staff member
                             deliberately or recklessly failing to follow a policy, process or procedure, or
                             otherwise engaging in misconduct (e.g. acting outside of company values or
                             policies).

                             This should be selected instead of ‘Staff—fraud and/or misappropriation’ if the staff
                             member did not engage in that misconduct to obtain an unjust or illegal advantage.

 Failure to comply with      The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by a failure to
 breach reporting            meet any requirement(s) under the breach reporting obligation.
 requirements to ASIC

 Failure to comply with      The reportable situation was caused wholly by a licensee’s failure to comply with
 other statutory reporting   one or more of their statutory requirements to ASIC (other than breach reporting).
 requirements to ASIC




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                Page 65
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 What to select              Description of root cause

 Misunderstanding of         The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by a licensee’s
 obligation(s)               failure to be aware of obligations that apply, or their failure to correctly interpret how
                             the obligations apply to a business. This would include when the reportable
                             situation was caused by reliance on outdated or incorrect legal advice.

                             Other root causes that may be relevant instead of (or in addition to) this option
                             include:
                              ‘failed change initiative’ (e.g. if the misunderstanding occurred as part of a
                               regulatory change program); and
                              ‘inadequate compliance measures’ (e.g. if you do not have adequate measures in
                               place to enable you to identify and understand your compliance obligations).

 Inadequate                  The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by:
 management controls          a lack of controls in relation to a process, risk or obligation;
                              a gap in those controls; or
                              an issue with the adequacy of the controls (e.g. detective controls where
                               preventative ones were needed, or manual controls where automated ones were
                               needed).
                             Depending on the nature and extent of the controls’ inadequacy, you should
                             consider whether there are inadequate risk management arrangements.

 Inadequate risk             The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by inadequate risk
 management                  management, compliance measures, human resources or technological resources.
 Inadequate compliance       The licensee does not need to form the view that there has been a breach of a
 measures                    corresponding licence obligation or condition.
 Inadequate human
                             What we mean by adequacy of risk management arrangements, compliance
 resources
                             measures, human resources, and technological resources for AFS licensees is
 Inadequate
                             covered by RG 104 and for credit licensee is covered by RG 205.
 technological resources

 Inadequate financial        The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by inadequate
 resources                   financial resources.

                             What we mean by adequacy of financial resources is covered by Regulatory
                             Guide 166 AFS licensing: Financial requirements (RG 166) and in Regulatory
                             Guide 207 Credit licensing: Financial requirements (RG 207).

 Failed change initiative    The reportable situation was caused, wholly or in significant part, by a change
                             initiative. This includes all types of change initiatives, large and small, including:
                              regulatory change programs;
                              technology change (e.g. system migration or update);
                              organisation change (e.g. restructures); and
                              business process changes.

 Other                       The root cause of the reportable situation cannot be explained by any one or
                             combination of the other root cause categories in this list. To further explain any
                             one or more root cause categories selected from this list, you should provide that
                             additional information in the free-text field ‘Describe the reportable situation’: see
                             RG 78.157.

                             Selecting this option will provide a free-text field for your response.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                 Page 66
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Q7: How should I calculate and report the number of clients
affected by a reportable situation?
              RG 78.170      You should include the number of clients that, at the time of lodging the
                             report, you believe have been or are likely to have been impacted. This includes
                             financial and non-financial loss or damage (e.g. inconvenience, distress).

              RG 78.171      When calculating the number of affected clients, you should count each
                             holder of a joint account individually. If your systems do not allow you to
                             disaggregate joint account holders in this way, you may count joint accounts
                             as a single client. However, this should be disclosed in the free-text field
                             ‘Describe the reportable situation’, along with a description of why you are
                             not able to disaggregate joint account holders.

              RG 78.172      Examples 13–14 show our expectations of how the number of clients
                             affected should be calculated.

                              Example 13: Broadly advertised incorrect offer

                              A licensee advertises an incorrect discount offer for motor vehicle
                              insurance on their website for one week. Once the licensee becomes
                              aware of the issue, they immediately publish a correction on their website.

                              The licensee identifies that:
                              • there were 1,000 views of the webpage containing the incorrect discount
                                offer during the period; and
                              • 200 people applied for motor vehicle insurance during the period.

                              Due to the location of the offer on the website and the limits of the
                              underlying technology in monitoring website user behaviour, the licensee
                              has no way of knowing which customers viewed the discount before
                              applying for a product.
                              Based on its investigation, the licensee has reasonable grounds to believe
                              that there was no financial or non-financial impact to customers who may
                              have accessed the webpage containing the incorrect information but did
                              not apply for motor vehicle insurance.
                              The licensee should report the total number of clients affected as 200,
                              being the number of customers that it believes have been or are likely to
                              have been affected (in this case, financially).
                              The number of views of the incorrect discount offer are the number of
                              instances to be reported (1,000). Any other relevant contextual information
                              can be provided in the free-text field ‘Describe the reportable situation’.

                              Example 14: An error in a disclosure document

                              An AFS licensee providing superannuation services sent an annual
                              statement to members that disclosed how fees had been charged in
                              relation to its products. Several months later, the licensee identified that the
                              disclosure was potentially misleading, as it failed to include a certain type of
                              fee. The licensee found the error in statements sent to 5,000 members.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 67
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                              The licensee identified that there was no direct financial impact on any
                              members as a result of the statement because the fee had been correctly
                              charged in accordance with the Product Disclosure Statement and terms
                              and conditions. However, they considered that the issue affected
                              customers non-financially by causing them to misunderstand what fees
                              were being charged. They also considered that there was an impact on any
                              customers who may otherwise have decided to change product or provider
                              if the fee information had been presented correctly.

                              As all 5,000 members were affected by the disclosure error, the licensee
                              should report the total number of clients affected as 5,000. The number of
                              instances to be reported will also be 5,000.




Q8: How should I respond to the question ‘What triggered the
investigation or made you aware of the matter’?
              RG 78.173      You should select the option that corresponds with how you (or one of your
                             staff members or representatives) first became aware of the matter, or how
                             the investigation first started (the investigation trigger). This may be earlier
                             than the date on which you commenced a reportable investigation (see
                             RG 78.48–RG 78.62).

              RG 78.174      Table 12 provides guidance on each of the investigation triggers in the
                             prescribed form.

Table 12: Investigation trigger definitions

 What to select              Description of investigation trigger

 Internal—audit function     The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of inquiries
                             made, work undertaken, or a finding by a licensee’s internal audit function.

 Internal—compliance         The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of inquiries
                             made, work undertaken, or a finding as part of the licensee’s compliance and
                             assurance activities (except audit or adviser assurance). This would include issues
                             identified as a result of quality assurance activities and compliance reviews.

 Internal—adviser            The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of inquiries
 assurance                   made, work undertaken, or a finding as part of the licensee’s activities to monitor
                             the compliance of financial advice given by the licensee and/or its representatives.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 68
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 What to select              Description of investigation trigger

 Internal—staff report or    The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of work
 Business unit report        undertaken or inquiries made by staff not undertaking a compliance or assurance
                             function (e.g. staff involved in the design or delivery of financial products and
                             services).

                             This includes where a staff member is servicing a customer and identifies an issue
                             that is not the subject of a complaint (e.g. a customer calls to ask for a lower
                             interest rate, and a staff member identifies issues with the way interest or fees are
                             being charged to the account).

                             This option does not apply if the issue was raised or identified through a licensee’s
                             whistleblower processes, or the issue was identified by staff following a complaint.

 Internal—whistleblower      The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of a disclosure
                             by a whistleblower under s1317AA of the Corporations Act.

 External—client             The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of a client
 complaint(s)—internal       making a complaint to the licensee.
 dispute resolution
                             This includes where a client makes a complaint that causes a staff member to
                             make further inquiries into the cause of the issue, which leads to discovery of the
                             underlying reportable situation.

                             A complaint should be interpreted broadly in line with the definition outlined in
                             RG 271: ‘An expression of dissatisfaction made to or about an organisation—
                             related to its products, services, staff or the handling of a complaint—where a
                             response or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected or legally required.’

 External—client             The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of a customer
 complaint(s)—external       making a complaint to an EDR body (e.g. AFCA).
 dispute resolution (EDR)
                             This should be used where a complaint to a licensee’s IDR function does not lead
                             to identification of or investigation into a reportable situation, but a follow-up
                             complaint made to the EDR body is accepted and investigated.

 External—audit              The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of inquiries
                             made, work undertaken or findings by an external audit or review. This includes
                             audits undertaken under Pt 2M of the Corporations Act, as well as any other audits
                             undertaken by someone external to the licensee (e.g. a professional services firm).

 External—media              The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of media
                             coverage (traditional media or social media), or media making inquiries of the
                             licensee (e.g. requests for comment before release of a story).

 External—industry           The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of inquiries
 Codes                       made, work undertaken or findings by a body whose function includes monitoring
                             compliance with an industry code.

 External—committee or       The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of inquiries
 industry association        made, work undertaken or findings by an industry association or similar body (but
                             not while carrying out the function of monitoring compliance with an industry code).

 External—AFCA               The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of inquiries
 systemic                    made, work undertaken or findings by AFCA in relation to a potential systemic issue
                             or definite systemic issue (within the meaning of AFCA’s Rules of Complaint
                             Resolution Scheme).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                 Page 69
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




 What to select              Description of investigation trigger

 Regulator—ASIC              The issue was identified or an investigation commenced as a result of inquiries
 Regulator—APRA              made, work undertaken or findings by a regulator.
 Regulator—AUSTRAC
                             This includes where a regulator requests that a licensee undertake a review in
 Regulator—other
                             relation to a particular matter, and that review results in the licensee becoming
                             aware of or commencing an investigation into the reportable situation.

 Other                       The issue was identified or an investigation commenced for reasons that cannot be
                             explained by any one or combination of the other investigation trigger categories in
                             this list.

                             Selecting this option will provide a free-text field for your response.




Q9: Can I withdraw or correct a report that I have submitted to ASIC?
              RG 78.175      Once you submit a breach report to ASIC, there are limited circumstances in
                             which you may withdraw or correct that report. The ASIC Regulatory Portal
                             does not allow you to correct a submitted report. These limits are intentional.
                             We expect licensees to lodge complete and accurate reports.

              RG 78.176      For examples of breach report correction requests that we will consider, see
                             Table 13–Table 14. When we correct a report, we will remove it from the
                             ASIC Regulatory Portal view. While information from the transaction that
                             was originally submitted will not be published (see RG 78.127–RG 78.131),
                             the original, uncorrected version of reports will be retained in ASIC’s systems.

              RG 78.177      If the limited circumstances for correction apply to your situation, you may
                             request a correction by emailing feedback.breach@asic.gov.au. These
                             requests are considered on a case-by-case basis and, if approved, will be
                             processed manually.

              RG 78.178      To minimise delays, a request for correction must include the:
                             (a)   submission ID of the report;
                             (b)   date of submission; and
                             (c)   basis for the correction request, in line with the examples listed in Table 13,
                                   with specific details of the nature of any errors that have been made.

              RG 78.179      Typically, we will acknowledge such request(s) within three business days,
                             and if approved, we will endeavour to process such request(s) within two
                             weeks.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                             Page 70
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Table 13: When ASIC may approve a request to correct a report

 Example 15(a): Material      This includes scenarios such as:
 factual errors on a           the incorrect licensee has been selected;
 report
                               duplicate notifications have been submitted; and
                               an incorrect selection on a key field has been made (e.g. specifying the type of
                                reportable situation)
                              We will not process a change to a discrete field. Rather, we may remove the
                              incorrect report from the ASIC Regulatory Portal view and ask the licensee to
                              submit a new report with the correct information. If the error is minor in nature, see
                              Example 16(b).

 Example 15(b): A             The update functionality is available on the ASIC Regulatory Portal in certain
 change is required to a      circumstances. However, there are a range of fields that will appear ‘greyed out’
 field that has been          (unavailable for selection) and licensees will not be able to make amendments to
 greyed out                   these fields. These limits are intentional. We consider them to be appropriate
                              controls reflecting our expectations regarding information that licensees should be
                              aware of at the time of reporting.

                              If you would like to view all of the questions and their response options in the
                              sequence they appear on the form, together with the conditional logic (which
                              includes the sequencing of the questions that will be posed), see the wireframes at
                              RG 78.154.

                              If you require an amendment to a field that is now locked and inaccessible via the
                              update functionality, you may request this in the manner set out above in
                              Example 15(a).

 Example 15(c):               Licensees should not mark their investigations as ‘complete’ until all required
 Additional or more           information is available and provided to ASIC.
 accurate information
                              If after your investigation is marked complete, you uncover additional or more
 comes to light
                              accurate information, and you are unable to access the update functionality, you
                              will need to make a correction request to ASIC to notify us of these changes. In
                              these circumstances, we may cancel the most recent transaction from the ASIC
                              Regulatory Portal view and ask you to submit an update with the correct
                              information.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                              Page 71
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Table 14: When ASIC may not approve a request to correct a report

 Example 16(a): A matter      We will not approve a request to withdraw a report on the basis that the licensee
 is determined as no          later deemed the matters reported to not be a reportable situation.
 longer reportable
                              Licensees must report to ASIC when they first know that, or are reckless with
                              respect to whether, there are reasonable grounds to believe a reportable situation
                              has arisen. They must report based on the facts available to them at the time of
                              reporting. For guidance on when reasonable grounds might arise, see RG 78.83–
                              RG 78.106. Subsequent factual findings do not remove this legal obligation and
                              are not a basis for withdrawing a report.

 Example 16(b): Minor         If licensees discover minor factual errors in submitted reports (e.g. typographical
 factual error                errors), a request to withdraw or amend a report is not necessary. In these
                              circumstances, if the update functionality is available, licensees may amend the
                              free-text field ‘Describe the reportable situation’ to note the error. Licensees must
                              determine whether or not the error is ‘minor’.

                              If the update functionality is not available to licensees, or the error is not minor in
                              nature, licensees can submit a request to ASIC to correct the report: see
                              Example 15(a).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                Page 72
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Key terms


                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              additional reportable     A reportable situation as set out in s912D(2) of the
                              situation                 Corporations Act or s50A(2) of the National Credit Act,
                                                        including when the licensee or its representative:
                                                         engages in conduct constituting gross negligence in the
                                                          course of providing a financial service or engaging in a
                                                          credit activity; or
                                                         commits serious fraud

                              AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                        the Corporations Act that authorises a person who
                                                        carries on a financial services business to provide
                                                        financial services
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9 of the Corporations Act.

                              AFCA                      Australian Financial Complaints Authority

                              AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                        Corporations Act

                              AML/CTF Act               Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing
                                                        Act 2006

                              APRA                      Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

                              ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                              ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                        2001

                              ASIC Instrument           An ASIC instrument (in this example numbered 2024/620)
                              2024/620 (for
                              example)

                              ASIC Regulations          Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                                                        Regulations 2001

                              authorised                A person authorised by an AFS licensee, in accordance
                              representative            with s916A or 916B of the Corporations Act, to provide a
                                                        financial service or services on behalf of the licensee
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9 of the Corporations Act.

                              Ch 7 (for example)        A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                        numbered 7)

                              client                    May refer to a retail client of financial services, a
                                                        consumer of credit products or a member of a
                                                        superannuation fund

                              consumer                  Includes an existing, potential or prospective client




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                      Page 73
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              core obligation           A core obligation has the meaning given to it by s912D(3)
                                                        of the Corporations Act or s50A(3) of the National Credit
                                                        Act. For a summary of the core obligations for AFS
                                                        licensees and credit licensees, see Appendix 1 to this
                                                        guide

                              Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                        purposes of that Act

                              Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                              Regulations

                              Credit Guide              A document that must be provided to a consumer by a
                                                        credit provider, credit service provider, credit representative
                                                        or debt collector under the National Credit Act

                              credit licence            An Australian credit licence under s35 of the National
                                                        Credit Act that authorises a licensee to engage in
                                                        particular credit activities

                              credit licensee           A person who holds an Australian credit licence under
                                                        s35 of the National Credit Act

                              credit representative     A person authorised to engage in specified credit
                                                        activities on behalf of a credit licensee under s64(2) or
                                                        65(2) of the National Credit Act

                              Criminal Code             Schedule to the Criminal Code Act 1995

                              deemed significant        A breach or likely breach of a core obligation that is taken
                              breach                    to be significant under s912D(4) of the Corporations Act
                                                        or s50A(4) of the National Credit Act

                              Explanatory               Explanatory Memorandum to the Financial Sector Reform
                              Memorandum                (Hayne Royal Commission Response) Bill 2020

                              Financial Sector          Financial Sector Reform (Hayne Royal Commission
                              Reform Act                Response) Act 2020

                              Financial Services        Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking,
                              Royal Commission          Superannuation and Financial Services Industry

                              FSG                       A Financial Services Guide—a document required by
                                                        s941A or 941B to be given in accordance with Div 2 of
                                                        Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9 of the Corporations Act.

                              grouping test             Refers to the test described at RG 78.111 to help
                                                        licensees identify the circumstances in which multiple
                                                        reportable situations may be grouped together in a single
                                                        report

                              IDR                       Internal dispute resolution

                              INFO 151                  An ASIC information sheet (in this example numbered
                                                        151)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                      Page 74
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              Insurance Contracts       Insurance Contracts Act 1984
                              Act

                              licensee                  An AFS licensee or credit licensee

                              likely breach             The situation where a licensee or a representative of the
                                                        licensee is no longer able to comply with a core obligation
                                                        and the breach, if it occurs, will be significant
                                                          Note: See s912D(1)(b) of the Corporations Act or s50A(1)(b)
                                                          of the National Credit Act.

                              National Credit Act       National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009

                              National Credit Code      National Credit Code at Sch 1 to the National Credit Act

                              National Credit           National Consumer Credit Protection Regulations 2010
                              Regulations

                              PI insurance              Professional indemnity insurance

                              reg 7.6.04(1)(i) (for     A regulation of the Corporations Regulations or National
                              example)                  Credit Regulations (or other regulations) as specified (in
                                                        this example numbered 7.6.04(1)(i))

                              registered scheme         A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                        s601EB of the Corporations Act

                              regulations               Corporations Regulations and National Credit
                                                        Regulations

                              REP 594 (for              An ASIC report (in this example numbered 594)
                              example)

                              reportable situation      Has the meaning given by s912D of the Corporations Act
                                                        or s50A of the National Credit Act

                              reporting period          Means the 30 or 90 day period that a licensee has to tell
                                                        ASIC in writing after first knowing that, or being reckless
                                                        with respect to whether, there are reasonable grounds to
                                                        believe a reportable situation has arisen.
                                                          Note: See s912DAA(3) of the Corporations Act, s50B(4) of the
                                                          National Credit Act and s7 of ASIC Instrument 2024/620.

                              representative (of an     Means:
                              AFS licensee)              an authorised representative of the licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of the licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of a related body corporate of
                                                          the licensee; or
                                                         any other person acting on behalf of the licensee
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9 of the Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                      Page 75
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              representative (of any    Means:
                              other person)              an employee or director of the person;
                                                         an employee or director of a related body corporate of
                                                          the person; or
                                                         any other person acting on behalf of the first person
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9 of the Corporations Act.

                              responsible entity        A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined in
                                                        s9 of the Corporations Act

                              RSA Act                   Retirement Savings Account Act 1997

                              RG 104 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered
                                                        104)

                              s912A (for example)       A section of the Corporations Act or the National Credit
                                                        Act, unless otherwise specified (in this example
                                                        numbered 912A)

                              s912D(3)                  Means the Corporations Act section numbered 912D(3),
                                                        including modifications that s7 of ASIC Instrument
                                                        2024/620 makes

                              serious fraud             Has the meaning given by s9 of the Corporations Act and
                                                        s5 of the National Credit Act

                              significant breach        Means:
                                                         a deemed significant breach; or
                                                         a breach or likely breach of a core obligation that is
                                                          significant having regard to the factors in s912D(5) of
                                                          the Corporations Act or s50A(5) of the National Credit
                                                          Act

                              SIS Act                   Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993

                              the misleading or         Means s1041H(1) of the Corporations Act or subsection
                              deceptive conduct         12DA(1) of the ASIC Act
                              provisions

                              Transitional Act          National Consumer Credit Protection (Transitional and
                                                        Consequential Provisions) Act 2009




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                                      Page 76
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




Related information


                             Headnotes

                             AFS licensee, breach, breach reporting, compensation, core obligations,
                             credit licensee, deemed significant breach, financial services, likely breach,
                             reportable situation, self-reporting, significant breach


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 34 Auditor obligations: Reporting to ASIC

                             RG 98 ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make
                             banning orders

                             RG 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general obligations

                             RG 105 AFS licensing: Organisational competence

                             RG 132 Funds management: Compliance and oversight

                             RG 166 AFS Licensing: Financial requirements

                             RG 205 Credit licensing: General conduct obligations

                             RG 207 Credit licensing: Financial requirements

                             RG 218 Licensing: Administrative action against persons engaging in credit
                             activities

                             RG 265 Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for participants of
                             securities markets

                             RG 266 Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for participants of futures
                             markets

                             RG 271 Internal dispute resolution

                             RG 274 Product design and distribution obligations


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 135 Annual compliance certificates for credit licensees

                             INFO 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement

                             INFO 257 ASIC reference checking and information sharing protocol




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 77
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                             INFO 259 Complying with the notify, investigate and remediate obligations


                             Reports

                             REP 515 Financial advice: Review of how large institutions oversee their
                             advisers

                             REP 594 Review of selected financial services groups’ compliance with the
                             breach reporting obligation


                             Legislation

                             AML/CTF Act, s123

                             ASIC Act, Pt 2, Div 2; s12DA, 12DI

                             ASIC Regulations

                             Corporations Act, Ch 5C, 5D, 6, 6A, 6B, 6C, 6D, 7, 8A, 9; Pt 7.6, Div 3;
                             Pt 7.7A, Div 2; s9, 311, 324CA–CC, 324CE–CG, 601FC, 601HG, 761A, 769B,
                             798G, 798H, 910A, 912A, 912B, 912D, 912DAA, 912DAB, 912DAD, 912EB,
                             941B, 961B, 961G, 961L, 990K, 994G, 1017G, 1041H, 1100A, 1226H, 1317E,
                             1671A

                             Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018, s12

                             Corporations Regulations, regs 7.6.02A, 7.6.04

                             Criminal Code Act 1995, Criminal Code, s5.3, 5.4

                             Financial Sector Reform Act

                             Financial Sector Reform (Hayne Royal Commission Response) Bill 2020

                             Financial Sector Reform (Hayne Royal Commission Response—Breach
                             Reporting and Remediation) Regulations 2021

                             Insurance Contracts Act, s33C, 58

                             National Consumer Credit Protection (Transitional and Consequential
                             Provisions) Act 2009

                             National Credit Act, Ch 2; Pt 2-2, Div 5; s5, 47, 48, 50A, 50B, 50C, 50D,
                             51B, 53, 104, 113, 160D, 324

                             National Credit Code, s23, 85, 111

                             National Credit Regulations, regs 9, 12A, 12B

                                  Note: See also the legislation listed in RG 78.148(c).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 78
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 78: Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees




                             Retirement Savings Accounts Act 1997, s47

                             Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993, s101


                             ASIC legislative instruments

                             ASIC Corporations and Credit (Reference Checking and Information
                             Sharing Protocol) Instrument 2024/647

                             ASIC Corporations, Credit and Superannuation (Internal Dispute
                             Resolution) Instrument 2020/98

                             ASIC Corporations and Credit (Breach Reporting–Reportable Situations)
                             Instrument 2024/620

                             ASIC Corporations (Internal Dispute Resolution Data Reporting) Instrument
                             2022/205

                             [CO 14/923] Record-keeping obligations for Australian financial services
                             licensees when giving personal advice


                             ASIC market integrity rules

                             ASIC Market Integrity Rules (Securities Markets) 2017, Rules 5.6.1, 5.6.3,
                             5.7.1, 5.11.1

                             ASIC Market Integrity Rules (Futures Markets) 2017, Rules 3.1.2, 3.6.1


                             Pro formas

                             PF 209 Australian financial services licence conditions


                             Other references

                             Financial Services Royal Commission, Final report, 4 February 2019

                             Treasury, ASIC enforcement review: Taskforce report, December 2017

                             Treasury, Update on the breach reporting regime, 6 September 2021




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2023                                            Page 79
