REGULATORY GUIDE 87

Charitable schemes and
school enrolment deposits

September 2016




About this guide
This is a guide for charities that wish to raise funds by issuing debentures or
interests in a managed investment scheme to help them meet their
objectives. It sets out our policy on giving relief to those charities from the
fundraising, managed investment, debenture and licensing provisions of the
Corporations Act.

It also covers our exemption for schools accepting enrolment deposits from
the fundraising provisions of the Corporations Act.
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in September 2016 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. On 27 July 2020, we updated the process
                             for lodging an application for an ASIC approval, consent, statement,
                             nomination and exemption in RG 87.47–RG 87.48, RG 87.133, RG 87.136–
                             RG 87.137 and RG 87.153.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 87, issued December 2004, rebadged as
                                     a regulatory guide on 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                          Page 2
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Charities and charitable investment fundraisers................................ 4
                                    Application of the Corporations Act provisions .................................. 5
                                    Relief for charitable investment fundraising....................................... 6
                                    Application of the requirements ......................................................... 8
                             B      What exemptions apply................................................................. 11
                                    Overview of exemptions .................................................................. 11
                                    Associates........................................................................................ 12
                                    Exclusion.......................................................................................... 13
                             C      Requirements of relief for charitable investment fundraisers
                                    relying on ASIC’s exemptions ...................................................... 15
                                    Identification statements .................................................................. 15
                                    Disclosure ........................................................................................ 21
                                    Investor acknowledgment statements ............................................. 22
                                    Lodge financial report ...................................................................... 23
                                    Breach reporting .............................................................................. 24
                             D      Product restrictions for charitable investment fundraisers
                                    relying on ASIC’s exemptions ...................................................... 25
                                    Products repayable in less than 31 days ......................................... 25
                                    Transactional facilities ..................................................................... 26
                                    Allowing short-term repayment ........................................................ 27
                                    Use of restricted terms and misleading comparisons ...................... 28
                             E      School enrolment deposits exemption ....................................... 29
                             Appendix: Transitional requirements.................................................. 30
                                What this appendix is about............................................................. 30
                                Our general policy ............................................................................ 31
                                The ‘group charities’ exemption ....................................................... 34
                                The ‘individual charities’ exemption ................................................. 39
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 44
                             Related information ............................................................................... 48




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                                     Page 3
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              This section provides an overview of our regulatory approach to charitable
                              investment fundraisers. It explains:
                              • what ASIC means by the terms ‘charity’ and ‘charitable investment
                                fundraiser’;
                              • how the fundraising, managed investment, debenture and licensing
                                provisions in the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) apply to
                                charitable investment fundraisers; and
                              • the types of conditional relief available to charitable investment
                                 fundraisers from those provisions.

                              A staged implementation of the requirements in this guide applies: see
                              RG 87.19–RG 87.21 and Table 1.

                              Schools that require a deposit to be lodged as a condition of enrolment
                              may come within a separate exemption from the fundraising provisions of
                              the Corporations Act: see Section D.




Charities and charitable investment fundraisers

                             What is a ‘charity’?

              RG 87.1        In this guide, we use the definitions of ‘charity’ and ‘charitable purpose’
                             from s5 and 12, respectively, of the Charities Act 2013. Broadly, charities
                             are religious, educational, community and other types of organisations or
                             bodies that are recognised in law as being formed for religious, educational,
                             community or other charitable purposes.


                             What is a ‘charitable investment fundraiser’?

              RG 87.2        In this guide the term ‘charitable investment fundraiser’ is used to describe a
                             charity that raises funds to support its purposes by issuing:
                             (a)   debentures (other than by way of certain limited offers); and/or
                             (b)   interests in a managed investment scheme.

                                   Note: We use the definitions of these terms from s9 of the Corporations Act. A
                                   managed investment scheme run by a charitable investment fundraiser is known as a
                                   ‘charitable scheme’.

                             These financial products are issued on the basis that the money will be
                             repaid to, or a monetary return will be delivered to, holders of the debentures
                             or interests in a registered scheme (investors).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                Page 4
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




              RG 87.3        Debentures and interests in a managed investment scheme generally
                             constitute a financial product: see s92 and 764A(1)(a) and (ba). Charitable
                             investment fundraisers that conduct fundraising using a managed investment
                             scheme in this manner are likely to be providing a financial service: see
                             s766A.

              RG 87.4        This guide and the fundraising, managed investment, debenture and
                             licensing provisions in the Corporations Act do not apply to fundraising
                             undertaken by charities that is limited to the solicitation or acceptance of
                             donations.



Application of the Corporations Act provisions

                             Fundraising, managed investment and debenture
                             provisions

              RG 87.5        Various provisions of the Corporations Act may apply to charities that seek
                             to raise funds using a charitable scheme, including:
                             (a)   the debenture provisions, set out in Pts 2L.1–2L.5;
                             (b)   the managed investment provisions, set out in Ch 5C; and
                             (c)   the fundraising provisions, set out in:
                                   (i)     Pts 6D.2–6D.3 (securities fundraising);
                                   (ii)    s992A and 992AA (anti-hawking); and
                                   (iii)   Div 2 and 4 of Pt 7.9, and s1017B and 1017G (financial product
                                           disclosure).

              RG 87.6        For the purposes of this guide, these provisions are collectively referred to as
                             the ‘fundraising, managed investment and debenture provisions’.

              RG 87.7        The particular provisions that will apply to a charity or charitable investment
                             fundraiser will vary depending on whether the charitable investment
                             fundraiser raises funds through the issue of debentures or interests in a
                             charitable scheme, or both: see RG 87.8.

              RG 87.8        A charity that operates a charitable investment fundraiser may be subject to a
                             number of requirements in the Corporations Act. For example, if they offer:
                             (a)   debentures, they may be required to:
                                   (i)     have a trust deed and trustee (Ch 2L); and
                                   (ii)    issue a prospectus and comply with certain fundraising
                                           requirements, including the prohibition on securities hawking
                                           (Pts 6D.2 and 6D.3);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                            Page 5
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (b)   interests in a charitable scheme, they may be required to:
                                   (i)     comply with the managed investment scheme provisions (Ch 5C);
                                   (ii)    comply with the anti-hawking prohibitions (s992A and 992AA);
                                   (iii)   issue a Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) (Div 2 of Pt 7.9) and
                                           provide ongoing disclosure of material changes and significant
                                           events (s1017B);
                                   (iv)    comply with the dispute resolution requirements (s1017G); and
                                   (v)     comply with certain restrictions on advertising (Div 4 of Pt 7.9); or
                             (c)   both debentures and interests in a charitable scheme, they may be
                                   subject to all of these requirements.


                             Licensing provisions

              RG 87.9        A charity that issues debentures or interests in a charitable scheme may be
                             required to comply with the licensing provisions, which would require them
                             to hold an Australian financial services (AFS) licence and to meet
                             obligations as an AFS licensee: s911A(1) and 912A.


                             Application to ‘exempt bodies’

              RG 87.10       Some provisions in the Corporations Act will not apply in certain
                             circumstances to charities that are an ‘exempt body’, as defined in s66A. An
                             exempt body is a body corporate that is not a company and is incorporated
                             by or under a law of a state or territory. For example, an exempt body that
                             limits itself to:
                             (a)   offering debentures within the state or territory where it is incorporated
                                   may be exempt from certain fundraising provisions (see s708(20)); and
                             (b)   certain conduct in relation to interests in a charitable scheme may be
                                   exempt from certain financial product disclosure provisions (see
                                   s1012D(8)) and consequently may also be exempt from the requirement
                                   to register the scheme.



Relief for charitable investment fundraising

                             Fundraising, managed investment and debenture
                             provisions

              RG 87.11       Conditional relief is available for charitable investment fundraisers from the
                             fundraising, managed investment and debenture provisions. Relief is not
                             available under this policy for a charitable investment fundraiser that issues
                             financial products that are not debentures or interests in a charitable scheme.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                            Page 6
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




              RG 87.12       Unless the charitable investment fundraiser has the benefit of a licensing
                             exemption or exclusion under the Corporations Act, all operators or
                             promoters of a charitable investment fundraiser will generally need to hold
                             an AFS licence with appropriate authorisations: see RG 87.25–RG 87.26.


                              Examples of exemptions and exclusions under the Corporations Act

                              Exemption

                              A charitable investment fundraiser that issues financial products through an
                              intermediary who holds an AFS licence with appropriate authorisations may
                              be exempt from the licensing provisions: s911A(2)(b).

                              Exclusion

                              Issuing debentures is not generally a financial service, although it may be if
                              the funds are invested in an investment business of the issuer, following an
                              offer to the public or a section of the public on terms that this will be done.


                             Licensing and product disclosure provisions

              RG 87.13       We have given conditional relief to charitable investment fundraisers from
                             the licensing provisions for certain activities. The relief does not apply if any
                             debenture or interest in a charitable scheme is issued to a person as a retail
                             client, except if all retail clients are associates of the charitable investment
                             fundraiser (associated retail clients).

                                   Note: See RG 87.27 for the definition of ‘associate’.

              RG 87.14       We have also given conditional relief from the licensing and product
                             disclosure provisions to persons involved in arranging the issue of, or
                             providing financial product advice about, the debentures or interests in a
                             charitable scheme issued by a charitable investment fundraiser.


                             Underlying principles of exemption

              RG 87.15       Our exemptions for charitable investment fundraisers recognise that
                             investors are likely to want to assist a charity to fulfil its purpose and, either
                             through personal or common knowledge of the charity, believe the charity
                             will use its funds for that purpose. For many of those investors, financial
                             benefit is not the primary consideration in choosing to invest with the
                             charitable investment fundraiser. Therefore, the investor is not likely to
                             expect or seek disclosures in complete compliance with the Corporations Act
                             or the full protection of the fundraising, managed investment and debenture
                             provisions or (where there are no non-associated retail clients) the licensing
                             provisions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                           Page 7
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




              RG 87.16       On this basis we have given charitable investment fundraisers relief from
                             significant parts of the regulatory burden applicable to other debenture
                             issuers or operators of managed investment schemes. Investors in charitable
                             investment fundraisers are not likely to lose confidence in participation in
                             the financial system more broadly on the basis of experience with charitable
                             investment fundraisers. The relief is limited to certain financial products
                             with characteristics that make the investor protections that would apply, if
                             not for the exemption, less necessary—such as a restriction on accepting
                             short-term investments.

              RG 87.17       Nevertheless, we do not consider that the licensing provisions are
                             unreasonably burdensome. They set a minimum regulatory standard that
                             helps ensure compliance with the requirement of the relief and the financial
                             services laws that do apply, including the prohibition on misleading and
                             deceptive conduct under the Australian Securities and Investments
                             Commission Act 2001.

              RG 87.18       It is important that retail clients are not misled about whether the financial
                             product offerings of a charitable investment fundraiser are comparable to
                             those provided by issuers to whom our exemptions do not apply. Requiring
                             that offerings are made through an AFS licensee, together with the
                             requirements of the relief such as investor acknowledgement statements,
                             help ensure this.



Application of the requirements
              RG 87.19       A staged implementation of the requirements applies: see Table 1. All
                             requirements apply from 1 January 2018, except:
                             (a)   the restriction on the issue of at-call or short-term investments to non-
                                   associated retail clients, which applies to debentures or interests in a
                                   charitable scheme issued from 1 January 2017; and
                             (b)   having an identification statement accepted for lodgement by ASIC or a
                                   sponsor for the purposes of the ASIC Corporations (Charitable
                                   Investment Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813, which applies from
                                   1 March 2017.

              RG 87.20       In this guide:
                             (a)   a ‘wholesale charitable investment fundraiser’ is a charitable investment
                                   fundraiser that has not issued any debentures or interests in a charitable
                                   scheme to non-associated retail clients after 31 December 2016; and
                             (b)   a ‘retail charitable investment fundraiser’ is a charitable investment
                                   fundraiser that is not a wholesale charitable investment fundraiser.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                           Page 8
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




               RG 87.21        This means that a retail charitable investment fundraiser can become a
                               wholesale charitable investment fundraiser when it repays or redeems all
                               investments held by non-associated retail clients. Table 1 sets out what
                               requirements apply and to whom, and where we have provided guidance.


Table 1:     Application of the requirements

 Requirement of relief             Who it applies to                                         Guidance

 Identification statement          All charitable investment fundraisers (from 1 March       RG 87.37–RG 87.61
 accepted for lodgement            2017).

 Disclosure requirements           All charitable investment fundraisers that issue to       RG 87.62–RG 87.67
                                   retail clients (including associated retail clients).

 Avoid indicating product          All charitable investment fundraisers.                    RG 87.64
 regulated

 Investor acknowledgement          Retail charitable investment fundraisers.                 RG 87.68–RG 87.71
 statement

 Lodge and publish financial       All charitable investment fundraisers. If they issue:     RG 87.72–RG 87.73
 report                             debentures, the report must be for the charitable
                                     investment fundraiser; and
                                    interests in a charitable scheme, the report must be
                                     for the scheme.

 Breach reporting                  All charitable investment fundraisers.                    RG 87.74–RG 87.78

 Prohibition on issue of at-call   Retail charitable investment fundraisers, for issues to   RG 87.80–RG 87.84
 or short-term investments         non-associated retail clients (from 1 January 2017).

 Prohibition on short-term         All charitable investment fundraisers where the short-    RG 87.81
 investments                       term investment is held by a non-associated retail
                                   client.

 Payments to investors by          Retail charitable investment fundraisers.                 RG 87.85–RG 87.86
 cheque or transfer to an
 authorised deposit-taking
 institution (ADI) account only

 Restriction on the terms of       Retail charitable investment fundraisers                  RG 87.87-RG 87.92
 issue, repayment and
 redemption

 Prohibition on the use of ‘at-    Retail charitable investment fundraisers.                 RG 87.93–RG 87.95
 call’, ‘deposit’ or derivatives
 of those terms




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                           Page 9
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             Transitional requirements

              RG 87.22       Transitional requirements apply until 1 January 2018. This means that
                             charitable investment fundraisers that do not meet the requirements set out in
                             Sections C and D can continue to rely on the pre-existing relief (contained in
                             Part 3 of ASIC Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising) Instrument
                             2016/813), but must meet the conditions of that relief. They must also
                             comply with the requirements set out in RG 87.19.

              RG 87.23       The conditions in the pre-existing relief are discussed in the former version
                             of RG 87, which is reproduced in the appendix. It contains different
                             conditions for exemption from the fundraising, managed investment,
                             debenture and licensing provisions of the Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 10
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




B          What exemptions apply

                              Key points

                              This section provides an overview of relief exemptions available for
                              charitable investment fundraisers. It explains:
                              • the conditional relief provided under ASIC Corporations (Charitable
                                Investment Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813;
                              • the definition of ‘associate’; and
                              • what exclusions from the relief apply.




Overview of exemptions
              RG 87.24       We have given conditional relief to charitable investment fundraisers from
                             the fundraising, managed investment and debenture provisions and certain
                             relief from the licensing provisions of the Corporations Act: see ASIC
                             Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813. A
                             charitable investment fundraiser is eligible for this exemption only if:
                             (a)   either we or a sponsor have accepted for lodgement the charitable
                                   investment fundraiser’s identification statement; and
                             (b)   the charitable investment fundraiser complies with the breach reporting
                                   requirement under the relief (see RG 87.74–RG 87.78).


                             Licensing exemption

              RG 87.25       Under the relief, wholesale charitable investment fundraisers will not need
                             an AFS licence to:
                             (a)   deal in financial products by issuing debentures or interests in a
                                   charitable scheme that relate to the scheme;
                             (b)   deal in financial products that are assets held for investors in the course
                                   of the operation of a scheme;
                             (c)   provide a custodial or depository service by holding financial products
                                   on behalf of investors in a scheme in the course of operating the
                                   scheme; and
                             (d)   provide financial product advice that is general advice in an offer
                                   document issued in connection with the scheme. The offer document
                                   must be supplied, in place of a PDS or a prospectus, as a condition of
                                   our product disclosure relief. We have treated this offer document as if
                                   it were an exempt document.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 11
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




              RG 87.26       Charitable investment fundraisers cannot rely on this exemption after
                             31 December 2017 if they issue any financial product to a non-associated
                             retail client from 1 January 2018.



Associates
              RG 87.27       For the purposes of this guide and our policy, we consider an ‘associate’ of a
                             charitable investment fundraiser to be:
                             (a)   a body constituted by or under the authority of a decision of the charity,
                                   or which is controlled by the charity;
                             (b)   a person or body that constituted the charity or under whose authority
                                   the charity was constituted or that controls the charity;
                             (c)   a charity with related charitable purposes that is the same as or similar
                                   to the charity;
                             (d)   a person acting as a trustee of a trust for the charity or for a charity with
                                   a related charitable purpose;
                             (e)   a member of the clergy, an employee or a voluntary staff member who
                                   works for any person mentioned in RG 87.27(a)–RG 87.27(d); or
                             (f)   a person undertaking training or education to enable them to be a person
                                   under RG 87.27(e) and who receives money or money’s worth from any
                                   person mentioned in RG 87.27(a)–RG 87.27(e).


                             Underlying principles for treatment of associates

              RG 87.28       We do not treat retail clients who qualify as ‘associates’ like other retail
                             clients for the purpose of determining:
                             (a)   the application of our exemption from the licensing provisions; and
                             (b)   whether and how certain conditions or requirements apply to the
                                   exemptions provided to charitable investment fundraisers.

              RG 87.29       We understand that associated retail clients may not be sophisticated and,
                             indeed, may face a heightened risk due to the concentration of exposure to
                             the charitable investment fundraiser both as an investor and an associate.
                             However, we consider that associates are more likely than non-associated
                             retail clients to appreciate that the charitable investment fundraiser is not
                             being regulated as an issuer of debentures or interests of a managed
                             investment scheme.

              RG 87.30       Investments in charitable investment fundraisers can also provide an
                             advantageous way of remunerating certain associates, where remuneration is
                             provided by a charity that is not subject to fringe benefits tax. Applying




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 12
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             regulatory requirements that could discourage the use of this mechanism
                             may disadvantage staff.

              RG 87.31       If offers may be made to people who are associates because they are
                             voluntary staff members, this must be stated in the identification statement.
                             It must also be stated what criteria will be applied when determining if a
                             person is to be treated as a voluntary staff member (and therefore an
                             associate).

              RG 87.32       We expect that appropriate criteria, such as number of hours regularly
                             worked, will be included to ensure that this category is limited to persons
                             who are genuinely and substantially involved in the organisation of the
                             charity. For example, in the case of a religious charity this would not include
                             members of the religious group that contribute to specific tasks—such as
                             agreeing to be included in a roster from time to time for performing such
                             functions as welcoming, social organisation, music, reading, assisting
                             celebrants of religious services, counting collections, cleaning premises or
                             decorating places where religious services occur—as distinct from persons
                             performing an identifiable staff role as a minister or leader.

              RG 87.33       We will, and we expect that any sponsor will, assess any such criteria in an
                             identification statement to ensure that offers that are not intended to be
                             treated as being made to an associate are not so classified as on the basis of
                             an a broad criteria for identifying voluntary staff members.



Exclusion
              RG 87.34       We may exclude a charitable investment fundraiser from relying on ASIC
                             Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813 if,
                             for example, we consider that the charitable investment fundraiser:
                             (a)   will not, or will not be engaged in activities that, meet the underlying
                                   principles of our relief;
                             (b)   has a sponsor that is not an associate;
                             (c)   has not complied with the conditions of the exemption or is not likely to
                                   comply with those conditions; or
                             (d)   has engaged in false or misleading conduct in relation to debentures or
                                   interests in a charitable scheme offered, or purportedly offered, in
                                   reliance on the exemption.

                             If we decide to exclude a charitable investment fundraiser from our relief,
                             we will notify them in writing.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 13
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             No relief from s1017E or 1017F

              RG 87.35       Even though relief may be available from the requirements to issue a PDS or
                             prospectus, we will not provide relief from s1017E and 1017F. Charitable
                             investment fundraisers must:
                             (a)   ensure that until interests in a charitable investment scheme are issued,
                                   the charity holds any money paid to acquire the products in a separate
                                   account, where required by s1017E; and
                             (b)   confirm all transactions when a retail client acquires or disposes of a
                                   financial product or when the charity varies the terms of the financial
                                   product, where required by s1017F.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 14
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




C          Requirements of relief for charitable investment
           fundraisers relying on ASIC’s exemptions

                              Key points

                              This section explains the requirements of relief that will apply to charitable
                              investment fundraisers that seek to rely on exemptions from the
                              fundraising, managed investment, debenture and licensing provisions.

                              The conditions cover the requirement for charitable investment fundraisers
                              to:
                              • to have an identification statement accepted for lodgement by a sponsor
                                or ASIC (see RG 87.37–RG 87.61);
                              • give disclosure to persons acquiring financial products offered under the
                                exemptions (see RG 87.62–RG 87.66);
                              • seek a specific investor acknowledgement statement from non-
                                associate retail clients when they acquire financial products offered
                                under the exemptions, and take reasonable steps to ensure that the
                                product is only likely to be acquired by those who understand the
                                disclosures (see RG 87.68–RG 87.69);
                              • lodge an audited financial report with ASIC, unless it has been lodged
                                with the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission (ACNC)
                                (see RG 87.72–RG 87.73); and
                              • report breaches of the conditions to ASIC (see RG 87.74–RG 87.78).


              RG 87.36       Some conditions apply to all charitable investment fundraisers who seek to
                             rely on this relief and others will apply only to retail charitable investment
                             fundraisers. Some conditions apply only in relation to retail clients and
                             others apply more generally, as indicated in Table 1.

                                   Note: For the commencement dates for the requirements in this section, see Table 1.




Identification statements
              RG 87.37       Our exemptions only apply to charitable investment fundraisers that have an
                             identification statement accepted for lodgement by ASIC or a sponsor. This
                             is to ensure that ASIC and current and potential investors can ascertain who
                             may be relying on the exemption, and that there is sufficient information to
                             understand the scope and purpose of the reliance. The identification
                             statement must be publicly available, but it is not required to be used as an
                             offer document.

              RG 87.38       This process of accepting an identification statement for lodgement is
                             intended to reduce the extent of any inappropriate reliance on the relief, and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                 Page 15
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             the potential for revocation of acceptance provides a means of excluding
                             charitable investment fundraisers from relief where appropriate.


                             Benefit of a sponsor

              RG 87.39       A sponsor establishes an arrangement under which it accepts identification
                             statements of charitable investment fundraisers for which it is an associate
                             for the purpose of ASIC Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising)
                             Instrument 2016/813. We expect the sponsor to assess whether the
                             identification statement meets the content requirements set out in Table 2
                             and confirm that it is dated and signed on behalf of the charitable investment
                             fundraiser by a named and identified signatory. We also expect a sponsor to
                             assess whether the charitable investment fundraiser is likely to comply with
                             the conditions of the exemption it is seeking to rely on.

              RG 87.40       A sponsorship arrangement can promote confidence in investment in the
                             charitable investment fundraisers the sponsor accepts identification
                             statements from. This is because the associated entity is likely to have more
                             direct knowledge of the charitable investment fundraisers that is relevant to
                             assessing whether they meet the criteria for an identification statement, both
                             at the time of acceptance and on an ongoing basis.

              RG 87.41       The sponsor will guarantee the charitable investment fundraiser will meet its
                             obligations for the debentures and interests issued, or purportedly issued,
                             under the exemption by a charitable investment fundraiser (whose
                             identification statement it has accepted and not revoked). This ensures that
                             the sponsor has an interest in properly performing its functions in accepting
                             identification statements. This sponsorship will be provided by covenants,
                             set out in a deed, to make payments to the charity up to the amount needed to
                             meet the claim against the charitable investment fundraiser of any holder of
                             any relevant debenture or interests for their entitlements in relation to the
                             investment.

              RG 87.42       A prospective sponsor must make inquiries to ensure that stamp duty
                             obligations for the deed are met and provide adequate evidence to ASIC that
                             any stamp duty needed to ensure the deed is enforceable has been paid.

              RG 87.43       Any entity that is to be a sponsor will need to be accepted by ASIC. The
                             entity must execute a deed in favour of:
                             (a)   ASIC; and
                             (b)   each person that holds any debentures or interests in a charitable
                                   scheme issued in reliance on the exemptions.

              RG 87.44       The sponsor must ensure that the deed poll is published on a website
                             maintained by the sponsor or its associate. The deed poll must be easy to
                             find for persons who have access to the internet. The sponsor must also




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 16
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             provide us with any information or assistance that we request to ensure
                             compliance by:
                             (a)   the sponsor with the deed; or
                             (b)   the charitable investment fundraiser with the Corporations Act,
                                   including the conditions of exemption, or the Australian Securities and
                                   Investments Commission Act 2001.

              RG 87.45       An entity that is interested in being a sponsor should first discuss its proposal
                             and the process that will apply with ASIC. The proposed sponsor will need
                             to explain what steps it will take to ensure it adequately performs its
                             functions.


                             Withdrawal of acceptance of sponsor

              RG 87.46       We will consider notifying the sponsor that it is no longer able to act as a
                             sponsor if they:
                             (a)   do not meet any of the expectations in this guide; or
                             (b)   accept identification statements when they do not reasonably believe
                                   that:
                                   (i)     the identification statements are compliant;
                                   (ii)    the charitable investment fundraiser is likely to comply with the
                                           conditions for the exemption on which it seeks to rely;
                                   (iii)   the charitable investment fundraiser is their associate; and
                                   (iv)    the issue of the debentures or interests is intended by the charitable
                                           investment fundraiser to promote its charitable purpose.


                             Application for ASIC to accept identification statements

              RG 87.47       For ASIC to accept identification statements for lodgement, the charitable
                             investment fundraiser must provide to ASIC:
                             (a)   an application for the charitable investment fundraiser’s identification
                                   statement to be accepted by ASIC for the purposes of ASIC
                                   Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813,
                                   and
                             (b)   an identification statement meeting the content requirements set out in
                                   Table 2. The identification statement must be dated and signed on
                                   behalf of the charitable investment fundraiser by a named and identified
                                   signatory.

                                   Note: A person who makes a false or misleading statement in a document either
                                   required by or for the purposes of the Corporations Act or lodged or submitted to ASIC
                                   is guilty of an offence: s1308(2)–(3).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                 Page 17
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




               RG 87.48       The charitable investment fundraiser should lodge the application through
                              the ASIC Regulatory Portal using the transaction named ‘Apply for an ASIC
                              approval, consent, statement, nomination, or other’. The fundraiser will need
                              to pay fees for their application. We have provided details about payment
                              options in the portal. For more information, see how you apply for relief.

                                   Note: You can also contact ASIC on 1300 300 630 for information and assistance.


                              Content requirements of identification statements

               RG 87.49       Identification statements must include the information set out in Table 2.

Table 2:     Content requirements for identification statements

 Information                   Explanation

 Identification information    Information necessary to identify the charitable investment fundraiser—including,
                               as applicable:
                                its Australian Business Number;
                                particulars of its corporate status, including any legislation under which the
                                 charitable investment fundraiser was incorporated and, where relevant, an
                                 incorporation number;
                                the full name and date of birth of any natural person who is or is a part of the
                                 charitable investment fundraiser; and
                                its address.

 Compliance                    Which exemptions the charitable investment fundraiser intends to rely on and
                               information demonstrating how the charitable investment fundraiser meets, or may
                               be expected to meet, all the conditions for the exemptions.

 Financial year                The start and end dates of the financial year of the charitable investment
                               fundraiser, if it is to issue debentures or interests in a charitable scheme.

 AFS licence                   Whether the operator of the charitable investment fundraiser is or will be required
                               to hold an AFS licence and, if so, the AFS licence number of the licensee.

 Charitable purpose            The charitable purpose of the charity, a statement that the issue of the relevant
                               debentures or interests in a charitable scheme will promote that charitable
                               purpose, and information about how the issue of the debentures or interests will do
                               so.

 Method of fundraising         Whether investment funds will be raised by issue of debentures or interests in a
                               charitable scheme or both, together with clear identification of any charitable
                               scheme.

 Key terms                     The key terms of the product, including how the rate of return will be determined,
                               the fees and costs payable by the investor and, for a charitable scheme, any fees
                               and costs payable from the scheme assets.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                 Page 18
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




 Information                  Explanation

 Investors                    To whom and through what means the debentures or interests will be offered,
                              including whether any offers are to be made to non-associated retail clients and
                              wholesale investors and associated retail clients.

                              If offers may be made to persons who are associates because they are voluntary
                              staff members, what criteria will be applied in determining if a person is to be
                              treated as a voluntary staff member (and therefore an associate).

 Audited financial reports    Whether the charitable investment fundraiser will be required to lodge an audited
                              financial report with the ACNC and, if issuing interests in a charitable scheme,
                              whether the charitable investment fundraiser will be required to lodge the
                              scheme’s audited financial report with the ACNC.

 Guarantees or                The identity of the provider and the terms of any guarantees or obligations to
 obligations                  holders of interests or debentures by any person other than the charitable
                              investment fundraiser that are to apply.

 Asset types                  What types of assets the charitable investment fundraiser will hold or, if there is to
                              be a charitable scheme, are to be held under the scheme. Also, particulars of the
                              extent to which any of those assets are outside Australia.

 Acceptance of                If the identification statement is to be accepted by a sponsor, a statement to that
 identification statement     effect, specifying the sponsor and where a copy of the deed poll required of the
 by a sponsor                 sponsor can be found.



                             Acceptance of identification statement

               RG 87.50      Before we accept an identification statement we will check some or all of its
                             contents. We may ask the charitable investment fundraiser for further
                             evidence of information. If we consider that the information is likely to be
                             false, incomplete or misleading, we will not accept the identification statement.

               RG 87.51      We will also refuse to accept an identification statement if it appears to us
                             that the scheme does not fall within the underlying principles of our policy,
                             or we consider it is likely that the charitable investment fundraiser will not
                             comply with the conditions of relief.

               RG 87.52      If we accept an identification statement, this does not imply that we have
                             reviewed all the information in the statement or formed any view on it. We
                             may at any time check that any part of the identification statement is true and
                             not misleading and that the statement meets the content requirements. A
                             charitable investment fundraiser must provide any information or assistance
                             that we ask for to enable us to do this.

               RG 87.53      We expect a sponsor to only accept an identification statement if the sponsor
                             reasonably believes that it is true, complete and not misleading, and that the
                             charitable investment fundraiser is likely to comply with the conditions of
                             relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                              Page 19
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             Changes to information in an identification statement
              RG 87.54       The charitable investment fundraiser must take all reasonable steps to ensure
                             that the identification statement is up to date, complete and not misleading at
                             all times while it is being relied on to comply with the conditions of the
                             exemption. If the identification statement will not be current, the charitable
                             investment fundraiser must lodge an application for acceptance of a
                             replacement identification statement before the change and, if practicable,
                             lodge in sufficient time to ensure that the new identification statement is
                             accepted before the change has taken effect.

              RG 87.55       If a charitable investment fundraiser has not lodged an application for
                             acceptance of a replacement identification statement with ASIC 28 days
                             before the change, we are not likely to accept the replacement identification
                             statement before the change. If less than 28 days is provided, the application
                             should explain why it was not practicable to make an earlier application.

              RG 87.56       If a sponsor has accepted a charitable investment fundraiser’s identification
                             statement, the charitable investment fundraiser should (where practicable)
                             arrange for the sponsor to accept a replacement identification statement to
                             ensure that while the exemption is relied on the identification statement is
                             current.

                             Revocation of acceptance of an identification statement
              RG 87.57       We may revoke acceptance of an identification statement at any time. We
                             will notify the charitable investment fundraiser if we do so. We will consider
                             revoking acceptance if we suspect that:
                             (a)   the identification statement is untrue, incomplete, misleading or not up
                                   to date; or
                             (b)   the charitable investment fundraiser has not complied with all the
                                   conditions that apply to the exemption.

              RG 87.58       We will give the charitable investment fundraiser a reasonable opportunity
                             to satisfy us that:
                             (a)   we should not suspect deficiencies with either the identification
                                   statement or their compliance; or
                             (b)   it is not appropriate in the circumstances to revoke acceptance of the
                                   identification statement.

              RG 87.59       A sponsor may also revoke acceptance of an identification statement at any
                             time. We expect that the sponsor will consider revoking acceptance if they
                             suspect that:
                             (a)   the identification statement is untrue, incomplete, misleading or not up
                                   to date; or
                             (b)   the charitable investment fundraiser has not complied with all the
                                   conditions that apply to the exemption.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 20
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




              RG 87.60       If we or a sponsor revoke acceptance of an identification statement, the
                             exemption will no longer apply to the charitable investment fundraiser and
                             the charitable investment fundraiser must then comply with the relevant
                             fundraising, managed investment, debenture and licensing provisions.


                             Public access

              RG 87.61       Each charitable investment fundraiser must maintain, or arrange for an
                             associate to maintain, a website on which it publishes its identification
                             statement, as accepted by ASIC or a sponsor, for five years after the
                             charitable investment fundraiser relied on or purported to rely on it. The
                             identification statement must be easy for members of the public who have
                             access to the internet to find.



Disclosure
              RG 87.62       Charitable investment fundraisers must not issue a debenture or interest in a
                             charitable scheme under the exemption unless they have given certain disclosures to
                             retail clients (including any associated retail clients). This also applies if the
                             charitable investment fundraiser accepts an additional investment under:
                             (a)   a debenture that was issued under a previous exemption given by ASIC; or
                             (b)   an interest in a charitable scheme in relation to which any interest has
                                   been or is to be issued under a previous exemption given by ASIC.

                                   Note: If the disclosures have already been provided to a client, they need not be
                                   provided again for an additional investment, whether it involves the issue of a new
                                   financial product or not.

              RG 87.63       We do not propose to prescribe the form of the disclosures provided, other
                             than in relation to the content requirements set out in RG 87.25–RG 87.66.
                             The charitable investment fundraiser may wish to conduct consumer testing
                             on the structure and promotion of the product so it is unlikely to be acquired
                             by persons who do not understand the required disclosures, and to otherwise
                             ensure that the prospective investor understands the product.


                             Avoid indicating that the product is regulated

              RG 87.64       There must be no reference in any promotional material or offer document
                             that states or implies that ASIC has approved or examined the charitable
                             investment fundraiser, the financial products, or any promotional material or
                             offer document.

                                   Note: A charitable investment fundraiser may be under additional disclosure
                                   requirements under the conditions of an exemption provided by the Australian
                                   Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) from the Banking Act 1959 (Banking Act).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                  Page 21
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             Additional disclosure required for retail clients

              RG 87.65       The charitable investment fundraiser must disclose to each retail client:
                             (a)   how the investment funds are used to support the charitable purpose.
                                   For example, it may be the yield on the investments made by the
                                   charitable investment fundraiser or charitable scheme (less costs and
                                   income payable to investors), rather than the investment itself, that is
                                   directed towards promoting the charitable purpose;
                             (b)   where the identification statement may be viewed;
                             (c)   that the charitable investment fundraiser is required by law to notify
                                   investors that the debenture or interest and their offering is not subject
                                   to the usual protections for investors under the Corporations Act and is
                                   not regulated by ASIC; and
                             (d)   if the charitable investment fundraiser does not hold an AFS licence, a
                                   statement of that fact.

              RG 87.66       Certain disclosures must be made in each offer document and promotional
                             material given to retail clients in connection with the debentures or interests
                             in a charitable scheme. These documents and materials must incorporate
                             clear and prominent statements that the charitable investment fundraiser is
                             required by law to notify investors that:
                             (a)   the investment is only intended to attract investors whose primary
                                   purpose for making their investment is to support the charitable purpose;
                             (b)   the investment is not comparable to investments that are issued by
                                   banks, finance companies or fund managers; and
                             (c)   the investor may be unable to get some or all of their money back when
                                   they expect to or at all.

              RG 87.67       In addition to meeting mandatory disclosure requirements, we expect the
                             charitable investment fundraiser to clearly disclose to retail investors:
                             (a)   the identity of the charity; and
                             (b)   the terms and conditions of the offer (or a summary of those terms and
                                   conditions).



Investor acknowledgment statements
              RG 87.68       Charitable investment fundraisers must not issue a debenture or interest in a
                             charitable scheme under the exemption to a non-associated retail client
                             unless the client has provided an investor acknowledgement statement to the
                             charitable investment fundraiser. This also applies if the charitable
                             investment fundraiser accepts an additional investment under:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 22
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (a)   a debenture that was issued under the exemption or a previous
                                   exemption given by ASIC; or
                             (b)   an interest in a charitable scheme in relation to which any interest has
                                   been or is to be issued under the exemption or a previous exemption
                                   given by ASIC.

                                   Note: If the investor acknowledgement statement has already been provided by the
                                   client, it need not be provided again for an additional investment, whether it involves
                                   the issue of a new financial product or not.

              RG 87.69       The investor acknowledgement statement must state that the retail client
                             understands the matters set out at RG 87.65–RG 87.66. The writing need not
                             include the matters but can refer to them in another document that is part of
                             the document containing the acknowledgement.

              RG 87.70       The statement must be separate from any other agreement or acceptance by
                             the client. It cannot be part of an application for the investment or document
                             containing other representations.

              RG 87.71       The investor acknowledgement statement is ‘signed’ if the client is identified
                             and their intention indicated. The statement can be signed physically or
                             electronically—for example, by appending the client’s name to an email that
                             is intended to demonstrate acceptance of the content or by typing their name
                             into the signature field on an electronic form.



Lodge financial report
              RG 87.72       A charitable investment fundraiser must, if it has issued debentures or
                             interests under the exemptions:
                             (a)   prepare a financial report in accordance with the Australian accounting
                                   standards:
                                   (i)    for itself, if it issues debentures; or
                                   (ii)   for the charitable scheme, if it issues interests in the charitable
                                          scheme.
                                   The report must be in accordance with the recognition and management
                                   standards that apply to a reporting entity, even if it is not a reporting
                                   entity;
                             (b)   arrange for a registered company auditor to prepare an audit report on
                                   the financial report within six months after the end of its financial year;
                             (c)   publish the financial report on the internet, accessible by a link from
                                   where the relevant identification statement is or was most recently
                                   published for at least three years after they were first published; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                    Page 23
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (d)   lodge the audited financial report with:
                                   (i)    the ACNC, if required by law to do so; or
                                   (ii)   ASIC.

                                          Note: The Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission Act 2012 (ACNC
                                          Act) provides that financial reporting requirements that apply depend on the size
                                          of the registered charity, measured by its annual revenue. Some charities
                                          (including small-sized and medium-sized charities and charities that are ‘basic
                                          religious charities’, irrespective of size) may not be required to lodge an audited
                                          financial report with the ACNC. However, if the charity is not required to lodge
                                          the financial report with the ACNC, it will be required to lodge it with ASIC.

              RG 87.73       The requirements are to ensure that certain information is available to ASIC
                             and current and prospective investors. It also supports accountability of the
                             charitable investment fundraiser.



Breach reporting
              RG 87.74       Charitable investment fundraisers must submit a written report to ASIC of
                             the full particulars of each breach, or likely breach, of a condition of relief.
                             The charitable investment fundraiser must report within 15 business days of
                             becoming aware of the breach.

              RG 87.75       We may exclude certain kinds of breaches from these requirements if we
                             consider that, based on our experience, the nature and materiality of these
                             breaches mean that the burden of compliance outweighs the benefit of
                             disclosure.

              RG 87.76       The requirement is in addition to any breach reporting obligation those
                             entities that hold an AFS licence with authorisations to offer investments to
                             retail clients have under the Corporations Act.

              RG 87.77       If a charitable investment fundraiser becomes aware of a breach of a
                             condition of relief and does not notify ASIC, the relief will no longer apply
                             unless and until we confirm in writing that the fundraiser may continue to
                             rely on our exemptions. We may impose conditions for providing such
                             confirmation.

              RG 87.78       In light of the potential implications, we strongly encourage a charitable
                             investment fundraiser to report to ASIC if in any doubt. The fact that a
                             breach is reported to ASIC does not imply that we will take any further
                             action. See Regulatory Guide 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees (RG 78)
                             for more information.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                    Page 24
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




D          Product restrictions for charitable investment
           fundraisers relying on ASIC’s exemptions

                              Key points

                              This section explains the product restrictions that will apply to charitable
                              investment fundraisers that seek to rely on exemptions from the
                              fundraising, managed investment, debenture and licensing provisions.

                              The conditions cover the restrictions on:
                              • investments that are repayable or redeemable within 31 days, except on
                                expiry of a fixed term of at least 31 days (see RG 87.80–RG 87.84);
                              • certain modes of discharging, in whole or in part, the entitlements of a
                                client that may enable financial products offered under the exemptions
                                to be used as transaction facilities (see RG 87.85–RG 87.86);
                              • allowing repayment or redemption if there are grounds for concern
                                about the ability to meet all investors’ entitlements (see RG 87.87–
                                RG 87.92); and
                              • the use of certain terms that imply financial products offered under the
                                exemptions can be used as transaction facilities (see RG 87.93–
                                RG 87.95);

              RG 87.79       Some conditions apply to all charitable investment fundraisers who seek to
                             rely on this relief and others will apply only to retail charitable investment
                             fundraisers. Some conditions apply only in relation to retail clients and
                             others apply more generally, as indicated in Table 1.

                                   Note: For the commencement dates for the requirements in this section, see Table 1.




Products repayable in less than 31 days

                             Products issued from 1 January 2017

              RG 87.80       From 1 January 2017, a retail charitable investment fundraiser relying on the
                             exemptions must not issue to any non-associated retail clients debentures or
                             interests in a charitable scheme that are short-term investment products—
                             that is, products that:
                             (a)   have a fixed term of less than 31 days (from the time of a payment
                                   made by the investor under the product) within which the investor
                                   cannot require that they be repaid or have their rights redeemed in
                                   whole or part;
                             (b)   have a fixed term of 31 days or more but do not require the investor to
                                   be promptly paid at the expiry (e.g. they require a request for
                                   repayment), unless the investor’s entitlement if they do not get paid


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                 Page 25
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                                   becomes a right that would not be prohibited if originally made on that
                                   basis; or
                             (c)   do not have a fixed term and the investor can be repaid or have the
                                   rights acquired from the payment redeemed in less than 31 days of
                                   request of the investor.


                             Products held from 1 January 2018

              RG 87.81       By January 2018, all charitable investment fundraisers that rely on the
                             exemptions must ensure that no non-associated retail client holds a short-
                             term investment product.


                             Underlying principles for short-term investment
                             restrictions

              RG 87.82       We consider that the circumstances in which relief is appropriate should be
                             limited by the restriction on retail clients acquiring products that could be
                             used on a very short-term basis, to ensure that the financial products offered
                             are not being used by non-associated retail clients as transactional facilities.

              RG 87.83       Transactional facilities imply a strong expectation of availability of funds; if
                             present, these facilities should be subject to regulation under the fundraising,
                             debenture and managed investment provisions. These provisions would be
                             more appropriate for products involving transactional facilities, as they can
                             help ensure that investors understand the risks and also require arrangements
                             that can help ensure the liquidity risks are managed.

              RG 87.84       Our requirements are similar to those that APRA has indicated it will apply
                             to religious charitable development funds to be exempted from the Banking
                             Act from 1 January 2017 and 1 January 2018. Most major charitable
                             investment fundraisers rely on the exemption under the Banking Act. Our
                             exemption condition ensures this applies to all charitable investment
                             fundraisers.



Transactional facilities
              RG 87.85       Retail charitable investment fundraisers must only issue debentures and
                             interests to non-associated retail clients if these clients can only be paid or
                             repaid for the debenture or interest by cheque to the client or to an account of
                             the client with an Australian ADI.

              RG 87.86       This requirement helps ensure that from 1 January 2018, existing retail
                             clients are less likely to treat as transactional facilities financial products that
                             could affect the liquidity of the financial products held by the non-associated
                             retail clients that are receiving new issues.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 26
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




Allowing short-term repayment
              RG 87.87       Retail charitable investment fundraisers that rely on the exemption must only
                             allow any repayment or redemption of debentures or redemption of interests:
                             (a)   on a winding up;
                             (b)   if the charitable investment fundraiser has reasonable grounds to believe
                                   that all holders of debentures or interests will be repaid on that day and
                                   at all future times in accordance with their entitlements:
                                   (i)    if all repayments and redemptions that the charitable investment
                                          fundraiser may be required to pay on the relevant day were made;
                                          and
                                   (ii)   if all repayments and redemptions that may reasonably be expected
                                          to be due on each future day were made on that future day; and
                             (c)   if the debenture or interest is held by an individual and the charitable
                                   scheme is satisfied the repayment or redemption would alleviate
                                   financial hardship that the individual is suffering or would suffer.

              RG 87.88       Except when relieving financial hardship or on a winding up, it is not
                             appropriate that repayment or redemptions occur where it creates an
                             unreasonable risk of other clients not being paid. This applies especially
                             when there are non-associated clients who will not have short-term
                             investment products, and therefore be unable to act even when a liquidity
                             issue affecting the investment has arisen.

              RG 87.89       In assessing investors’ entitlements, the charitable investment fundraiser
                             must consider entitlements created by the marketing of the debentures or
                             interests—that is, if the marketing has created an expectation about
                             repayment—as well as the entitlements derived from the terms of issue of
                             the debentures or interests.

              RG 87.90       We expect charitable investment fundraisers to ensure that debentures or
                             interests are not marketed (especially to retail clients), in a way that creates
                             expectations about repayment or redemption being available if these may not
                             be fulfilled. If any representation, express or implied, is made that the
                             charitable investment fundraiser will have the ability to make repayments or
                             redemptions and there are not reasonable grounds for the representation, we
                             will treat the representation as misleading: s728(2) and 769C.

              RG 87.91       We understand that on any day, many of the payments that holders of
                             debentures or interests may be entitled to may not have to be paid because
                             the holder rolls over their investment. A charitable investment fundraiser can
                             establish cut-off times for requests for repayment or redemption so as to be
                             in a position to know that, when the cut-off time has passed, the amounts
                             that have been rolled over and not requested for repayment or redemption
                             will not have to be paid on that day. This cut-off process would enable




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 27
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             repayments and redemptions to be permitted by RG 87.87(b) on the basis of
                             the amount that will actually need to be paid on that day, disregarding other
                             amounts that could have been required to be paid on that day.

              RG 87.92       We expect charitable investment fundraisers to not avoid the restrictions by
                             establishing feeder structures that provide unrestricted access to repayments
                             and redemptions from the fund for wholesale investors or associated retail
                             clients, and channel the money of non-associated retail clients into the fund
                             through a separate charitable investment fundraiser or charitable scheme. We
                             will consider excluding any charitable investment fundraiser that uses such
                             structures from being able to rely on the exemptions.



Use of restricted terms and misleading comparisons
              RG 87.93       Retail charitable investment fundraisers must not in any offer document,
                             promotional material or other investor communication about any debenture
                             or interest that it offers or has issued in reliance on the exemption use:
                             (a)   ‘at call’;
                             (b)   ‘deposit’; or
                             (c)   derivatives of these terms.

              RG 87.94       If this requirement does not apply, the charitable investment fundraiser
                             should consider whether using the restricted terms may be misleading, taking
                             into account any restrictions on withdrawal rights,

              RG 87.95       A charitable investment fundraiser should ensure that all references to the
                             debentures or interests in a charitable scheme are consistent with the
                             underlying principles for relief and not misleading. In particular, a charitable
                             investment fundraiser should not imply any comparison with regulated
                             financial products such as banking products, debentures to which a
                             debenture trust deed is in place under Ch 2L or a registered managed
                             investment scheme.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                            Page 28
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




E          School enrolment deposits exemption

                              Key points

                              Schools that require a deposit to be lodged as a condition of enrolment
                              may come within a separate exemption from the fundraising provisions,
                              provided that they meet the eligibility requirements.


              RG 87.96       Schools that require a deposit to be lodged as a condition of enrolment may
                             come within a separate exemption from the fundraising provisions of the
                             Corporations Act: see ASIC Corporations (Charitable Investment
                             Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813.

              RG 87.97       The exemption for school enrolment deposits recognises that a financial
                             benefit to the depositor is not likely to be a consideration in acquiring these
                             products. Therefore, the holder is not likely to expect or seek the disclosure
                             required by the fundraising provisions, nor the protections set out in the
                             managed investment or debenture provisions nor the licensing provisions.

              RG 87.98       A school will only be eligible for this exemption if:
                             (a)   the deposit is required as a condition for the enrolment of a child in the
                                   school; and
                             (b)   any rights or interests attaching to the deposit are merely incidental to
                                   the enrolment.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 29
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




Appendix: Transitional requirements

              RG 87.99       As noted in Section A, if you are a charitable investment fundraiser that has
                             pre-existing relief, you can continue until 1 January 2018 to rely on that
                             relief and you must comply with the conditions of that relief. However,
                             failure to comply will not necessarily result in the relief ceasing to apply. For
                             your relief to continue, you must also:
                             (a)   comply with the short-term investment restriction for any new
                                   debenture or interest in a charitable scheme you issue from 1 January
                                   2017; and
                             (b)   have an identification statement accepted for lodgement by 1 March
                                   2017.

                             While you are relying on the pre-existing relief, the former version of RG 87
                             applies to you. This version of RG 87 is reproduced in this appendix.

              RG 87.100      From 1 January 2018, this appendix will no longer apply, and all
                             requirements and relief will be contained within the updated RG 87 and the
                             relevant instruments.

              RG 87.101      This appendix is not intended to state any new policy. It merely replicates
                             the requirements that applied under the previous version of RG 87.

                                   Note: A copy of the previous version of RG 87 is also available from the ASIC Digest
                                   or by calling ASIC on 1300 300 630.




What this appendix is about
              RG 87.102      This appendix sets out our policy on relief from the fundraising, managed
                             investment, debenture and licensing provisions of the Corporations Act that
                             we may give to charities and schools that wish to raise funds to assist them
                             meet their objectives.

                                   Note: In this appendix, ‘charity’ means a person who is or a body or fund that is:
                                   •   exempt from income tax by virtue of s50–5 or s50–30 of the Income Tax
                                       Assessment Act 1997, or provisions that correspond to them;
                                   •   a person, body or fund to whom a gift is an allowable deduction for the purposes of
                                       calculating the taxable income of a person making the gift by virtue of s30–15,
                                       Item 1 or 2 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 or provisions that correspond to
                                       them; or
                                   •   otherwise recognised in law as being constituted for religious, educational,
                                       community or other charitable purposes.

              RG 87.103      It gives guidance on:
                             (a)   our general policy on relief for charities and for school enrolment
                                   deposits (see RG 87.104–RG 87.118);


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                     Page 30
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (b)   what relief is available for groups of charities for which there is a
                                   sponsor accepted by ASIC (the ‘group charities’ exemption) (see
                                   RG 87.119–RG 87.133); and

                                   Note: In this appendix, ‘sponsor’ means a person that we have accepted as a sponsor
                                   under this policy, having made a deed poll in the form of Pro Forma 96 Sponsor deed
                                   poll (PF 96).

                             (c)   what relief is available for an individual charity that has registered an
                                   identification statement with us (the ‘individual charities’ exemption)
                                   (see RG 87.134–RG 87.153).



Our general policy

                             Our policy

                             Charitable investment schemes

                                   Note 1: In this appendix, ‘charitable investment scheme’ means a scheme operated by a
                                   charity that involves offering and issuing debentures or interests in a managed
                                   investment scheme.

                                   Note 2: In this appendix, ‘debenture’ means, in general terms, a chose in action that
                                   includes an undertaking to repay as a debt money deposited with or lent to the body
                                   with certain exceptions.

              RG 87.104      We will give two types of relief (provided various lodgement and
                             registration requirements are met) that will conditionally exempt charities
                             from certain fundraising, managed investment, debenture and licensing
                             provisions of the Corporations Act.

                                   Note: In this appendix, ‘fundraising provisions’ means Pt 6D.2, Pt 6D.3, s992AA, Div 2
                                   and Div 4 of Pt 7.9 and s1017G of the Corporations Act.

              RG 87.105      The first type of relief (i.e. exemption) applies to groups of charities that
                             have common or related charitable objectives and for which there is a
                             ‘sponsor’. This type of exemption is referred to in this appendix as a ‘group
                             charities’ exemption. ASIC must agree that this relief applies to the sponsor
                             and the sponsor must agree to undertake certain duties.

                                   Note: See RG 87.119–RG 87.133 for details of the ‘group charities’ exemption for charities.

              RG 87.106      The second type of exemption applies to individual charities if ASIC agrees
                             that the relief should apply. This type of exemption is referred to in this
                             appendix as an ‘individual charities’ exemption. This relief was contained in
                             Superseded Class Order [SCO 02/184] Charitable investment schemes—
                             fundraising and is continued by section 8 of ASIC Corporations (Charitable
                             Investment Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813 until 31 December 2017.

                                   Note: See RG 87.134–RG 87.153 for details of the ‘individual charities’ exemption.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                     Page 31
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




              RG 87.107      We will not provide relief under this policy to a charitable investment
                             scheme that involves the issue of financial products other than debentures or
                             interests in a managed investment scheme.


                             Underlying principles

                             Charitable investment schemes

              RG 87.108      Our exemptions for charitable investment schemes recognise that some
                             investors may want to assist a charity to fulfil its purpose and, either through
                             personal or common knowledge of the charity, believe the charity will use its
                             funds for that purpose. For some of those investors, financial profit to the
                             investor is not the primary consideration in making the investment and
                             therefore the investor does not expect or seek point-of-sale disclosures in
                             compliance with the Corporations Act or the protection of the fundraising,
                             managed investment, debenture or licensing provisions normally required by
                             the Corporations Act.

              RG 87.109      We will give relief from the fundraising, managed investment and debenture
                             provisions and some limited relief from the licensing provisions that would
                             otherwise apply as a result of the offer. However, we will generally not
                             provide relief other than that directly required to facilitate investment in the
                             charitable scheme. This is because wider relief may allow fundraisers and
                             service providers to obtain an unfair commercial advantage from the use of a
                             charitable scheme.

                             What is a charity?

              RG 87.110      In this appendix the term ‘charity’ is used to describe religious, educational,
                             community and other organisations that are recognised in law as being
                             formed for religious, educational, community or other charitable purposes.
                             This includes charities recognised under statutory provisions such as relevant
                             provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 and those recognised
                             under common law.

                             Application of the Corporations Act

                             Fundraising, managed investments and debentures

              RG 87.111      The Corporations Act regulates some fundraising activities of charities
                             because they seek to raise money on the basis that the money will be repaid
                             or a monetary return will be paid on it. When they do this, the charities are
                             likely to be offering and issuing debentures or interests in managed
                             investment schemes, as defined in s9. Schemes of this kind are referred to in
                             this appendix as ‘charitable investment schemes’. However, the fundraising,
                             managed investment, debenture and licensing provisions do not apply:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 32
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (a)   when a charity seeks donations; or
                             (b)   to school enrolment deposits covered by our relief (see Part 2 of ASIC
                                   Corporations (School Enrolment Deposits) Instrument 2016/812).

                                   Note: See also ‘Exempt bodies’ at RG 87.117.

              RG 87.112      The Corporations Act may require a charity that operates a charitable
                             investment scheme (that is not otherwise exempt) to meet a number of
                             requirements, including requirements to:
                             (a)   have a trust deed and trustee if offering debentures (Ch 2L);
                             (b)   comply with the managed investment scheme requirements if operating
                                   a managed investment scheme (Ch 5C);
                             (c)   comply with the hawking requirements (s736, s992A and s992AA);
                             (d)   issue a prospectus if offering debentures and comply with certain
                                   fundraising requirements (Pts 6D.2 and 6D.3);
                             (e)   issue a PDS if offering financial products that are not securities (Div 2
                                   of Pt 7.9) and provide disclosure of certain material changes and
                                   significant events to certain holders of financial products that are not
                                   securities (s1017B);
                             (f)   comply with the dispute resolution requirements if offering financial
                                   products that are not securities (s1017G); and
                             (g)   comply with certain restrictions on advertising under s734 for securities
                                   and Div 4 of Pt 7.9 for financial products that are not securities.

                             These provisions are referred to in this appendix as the ‘fundraising,
                             managed investment and debenture provisions’.

                             Licensing

              RG 87.113      The Corporations Act may also require a person who provides financial
                             services to hold an AFS licence: s911A(1). These provisions are referred to
                             in this appendix as the ‘licensing provisions’.

              RG 87.114      Our relief to the charitable body and the trustee of the charitable body from
                             the requirement to hold an AFS licence for the provision of financial
                             services is limited.

              RG 87.115      If we grant relief from the fundraising, managed investment and debenture
                             provisions, we will also use ASIC’s exemption powers in s911A(2)(l) to
                             grant relief from the requirement to hold an AFS licence for the following
                             activities:
                             (a)   dealing in financial products by issuing the products offered under the
                                   charitable investment scheme;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 33
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (b)   dealing in financial products that are scheme assets on behalf of
                                   investors other than by issuing financial products; and
                             (c)   holding scheme assets that are financial products or beneficial interests
                                   in financial products (i.e. providing a custodial or depository service)
                                   under the charitable investment scheme.

              RG 87.116      We will also use ASIC’s exemption power in s911A(2)(l) to give relief to an
                             operator of a charitable investment scheme from the requirement to hold an
                             AFS licence in order to provide general advice about the charitable scheme
                             in an offer document that must be supplied, in place of a PDS or a
                             prospectus, under our relief for product disclosure. We will treat the offer
                             document as if it were an exempt document (e.g. a PDS).

                             Exempt bodies

              RG 87.117      The fundraising provisions do not apply when a charity that is an exempt body
                             (as defined in s66A of the Corporations Act, namely incorporated bodies
                             under state or territory law that are not companies) in certain circumstances.
                             These circumstances are when the exempt body limits itself to:
                             (a)   in the case of a debenture—offers of debentures within the state or
                                   territory where it is incorporated (see s708(20)); or
                             (b)   in the case of a managed investment scheme, offers and issues of, and
                                   recommendations to acquire, interests in the scheme (see s1012D(8)).
                                   Where the fundraising provisions do not apply to any issues of interests
                                   in a managed investments scheme, generally the scheme is not required
                                   to be registered under Ch 5C of the Corporations Act and the operator
                                   of the scheme does not need an AFS licence as a responsible entity.

                             Public access to information

              RG 87.118      We will not regard any documents lodged with us under both types of
                             exemption (including any applications for relief) as confidential. Any person
                             may search our database for, and request a copy of, such documents. We will
                             also make a list of sponsors available for search by any person.



The ‘group charities’ exemption
                                   Note: RG 87.119–RG 87.133 does not deal with school enrolment deposits.


                             Our policy

              RG 87.119      We give conditional relief to a sponsored charity and the trustee of a
                             sponsored charity from the fundraising, managed investment and debenture
                             provisions for the charity’s charitable investment schemes. The sponsor must
                             enter a deed poll in the form of PF 96, and comply with the requirements set



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                            Page 34
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             out in the deed: see RG 87.127. This type of exemption is referred to in this
                             appendix as a ‘group charities’ exemption.

                                   Note: The form of this relief will be based on Pro Forma 97 Sponsor exemption (PF 97).

              RG 87.120      If you are a body or organisation wishing to become a sponsor, you must
                             apply to us. We will consider your application against the criteria outlined
                             below. You must provide sufficient detail to demonstrate how you meet the
                             criteria. The criteria are:
                             (a)   The charities you will register have the same or related charitable
                                   objectives. We may direct you to cancel the registration of a specified
                                   sponsored body if we think it does not have common or related objectives.
                             (b)   The number of charities you will register is large enough to need a
                                   ‘group charities’ exemption. If you think there are other good reasons
                                   why the exemption is appropriate, you must give the reasons.
                             (c)   You can adequately monitor the liability that may arise under the
                                   sponsor deed poll set out in PF 96.
                             (d)   You have and will continue to have the means to promptly discharge any
                                   liability that may reasonably be expected to arise under the sponsor deed poll.
                             (e)   Your intention is to assist the charitable aims of members of the group
                                   and not make material profits for yourself as a result of being a sponsor.
                             (f)   Despite RG 87.120(e), if you may receive remuneration or financial
                                   benefits as a result of being a sponsor, you will take reasonable steps to
                                   ensure that the sponsored charities include in their offer documents a
                                   statement from you informing prospective investors of the terms and
                                   arrangements under which you may receive the remuneration or
                                   financial benefits. For this purpose you can disregard remuneration or
                                   other financial benefits that are trivial or reimbursement of costs and
                                   expenses you have or will incur because you are a sponsor.
                             (g)   You can adequately monitor that the offer documents issued by
                                   sponsored bodies comply with the conditions of our relief. These
                                   conditions set out certain requirements to be disclosed in the offer
                                   documents or promotional material of a sponsored body.

                                   Note: See conditions 1 and 2 of PF 97.

              RG 87.121      Under the ‘group charities’ exemption, we will also give certain relief to
                             people other than the charity and the trustee of a sponsored charity. This will
                             be relevant to other persons involved in arranging the issue of, or providing
                             financial product advice about, the debentures or interests to which the
                             charitable investment scheme relates. This relief from the licensing
                             provisions and from the product disclosure provisions (in Pt 7.9) applies to
                             the person if:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                Page 35
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (a)   the conditions attached to PF 97 appear to be met; and
                             (b)   the person is not aware nor should be aware that those conditions have
                                   not been met.


                             Underlying principles

              RG 87.122      A charity that makes adequate disclosure about its charitable investment
                             schemes and is sponsored by a body or organisation that meets certain
                             criteria and accepts liability for any loss or damages to investors arising from
                             the conduct of that charity should not have to deal with us on an individual
                             basis to gain relief under our policy.


                             Explanation

                             Who can use the ‘group charities’ exemption?

              RG 87.123      The ‘group charities’ exemption is for groups of charities that have common
                             or related charitable objectives where there is a sponsor accepted by us. A
                             ‘group charities’ exemption also supports any statement by a member charity
                             that an investment in or with it is an investment that is supported by or
                             benefits the group as a whole.

              RG 87.124      As a guide, a group of 20 or more member charities may need the ‘group
                             charities’ exemption. Smaller numbers may be considered if there is good
                             reason.

                             No relief from s1017E and s1017F

              RG 87.125      We will not require a sponsored charity to issue a PDS or prospectus and we
                             will give relief from the requirement in s1017B to inform investors of certain
                             material changes and significant events. However, we will not give relief
                             from certain other obligations. Charities must ensure that until financial
                             products (other than debentures) are issued, they hold any money paid to
                             acquire the products in a separate account: s1017E. Charities must also
                             confirm, or provide the investor with a facility to confirm, all transactions
                             when a retail client acquires or disposes of a financial product or when it
                             varies the terms of the financial product where required by s1017F.

                                   Note: In this appendix, ‘retail client’ means a client defined as such under s761G and
                                   Ch 7, Pt 7.1, Div 2 of the Corporations Regulations 2001.


                             General criteria for group charities exemptions

              RG 87.126      In brief, a charity is exempt if it:
                             (a)   is registered and remains registered by a sponsor who complies with its
                                   deed poll; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                   Page 36
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (b)   makes certain disclosures as set out in PF 97 to ensure that investors are
                                   made aware that:
                                   (i)     the charity’s investment scheme is not subject to the usual
                                           fundraising, managed investment, debenture and licensing
                                           provisions;
                                   (ii)    the sponsor is liable to make payments to the charity up to the
                                           amount needed to repay investments under the charitable
                                           investment scheme and any interest or other income payable on
                                           those investments if investors claim against the charity; and
                                   (iii)   the investment is designed for investors who wish to promote the
                                           charitable purposes of the charity and for whom the considerations
                                           of profit are not the primary consideration in the investment
                                           decision.

                             Your duties as sponsor—PF 96

              RG 87.127      To have our acceptance as a sponsor, you must make a deed poll in the form
                             set out in PF 96. In brief, the deed obliges you to:
                             (a)   maintain a register of those charities and their investment schemes for
                                   which you unconditionally accept liability;
                             (b)   indemnify the relevant charity against claims by investors in the
                                   charitable investment scheme (the liability may be limited to the
                                   amount of money subscribed by investors plus any interest accrued up
                                   to the date the liability is met);
                             (c)   continue to provide the indemnity for claims by those who invested
                                   while the charity or scheme was on the register, although you may
                                   remove a charity or charitable investment scheme from the register; and
                             (d)   allow any person to inspect the register.

                             Stamp duty

              RG 87.128      You should make your own enquiries to ensure that stamp duty obligations
                             for the deed (described at RG 87.127) are met and provide adequate
                             evidence to us that this has occurred.

                             Deregistration at ASIC’s direction

              RG 87.129      Under the terms of the deed, we may direct the sponsor to deregister a
                             charity. We may do this if, for example, we consider that:
                             (a)   the relevant charitable investment scheme does not meet the underlying
                                   principles of our relief (see RG 87.108) or if the charitable purposes of
                                   the body are not related to other members of the group;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                           Page 37
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (b)   the charity has not complied with the conditions of the exemption; or
                             (c)   the charity has engaged in false or misleading conduct in relation to its
                                   charitable investment scheme.

                             Withdrawal of acceptance of sponsor

              RG 87.130      We may withdraw our acceptance of a sponsor at any time. If we intend to
                             do this we will give reasonable notice to the sponsor. We will consider this
                             action if, for example, we no longer have confidence that the sponsor will
                             fulfil its obligations under the deed poll, or if we believe the sponsor has not
                             given us adequate and accurate information. We may publish the notice
                             given to the sponsor. If our acceptance is withdrawn, all charities registered
                             by the sponsor fall outside the ‘group charities’ exemption. Therefore, those
                             charities will:
                             (a)   have to comply with the fundraising, managed investment, debenture
                                   and licensing provisions of the Corporations Act that otherwise apply;
                                   or
                             (b)   obtain an ‘individual charities’ exemption.

                             Application to be sponsor

              RG 87.131      We will consider an application to be a sponsor only if the application
                             includes consent to allow any person to examine the application on request
                             to us. We may seek more information about the application. The deed poll
                             must be lodged with us before we will give relief based on PF 97.

              RG 87.132      A sponsor wanting relief for its own fundraising activities can include itself
                             within a ‘group’ exemption.

              RG 87.133      To apply for approval as a sponsor:
                             (a)   prepare a statement that addresses all the matters set out in RG 87.120;
                             (b)   ensure that the statement includes a consent to allow a person to
                                   examine the application on request to ASIC;
                             (c)   complete PF 96;
                             (d)   lodge the statement and PF 96 through the ASIC Regulatory Portal
                                   using the transaction named ‘Apply for an ASIC approval, consent,
                                   statement, nomination, or other’; and
                             (e)   pay the fees that apply to your application. We have provided details
                                   about payment options in the portal. For more information, see how you
                                   apply for relief.

                                   Note: You can also contact ASIC on 1300 300 630 for information and assistance.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                               Page 38
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




The ‘individual charities’ exemption
                                   Note: RG 87.134–RG 87.153 does not deal with school enrolment deposits.


                             Our policy

              RG 87.134      We will give conditional relief from the fundraising, managed investment
                             and debenture provisions and the licensing provisions of the Corporations
                             Act to individual charities and their trustee for the charity’s charitable
                             investment schemes without the need for a sponsor: see section 8 of ASIC
                             Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813. A
                             charity and its trustee are eligible for this exemption only if we have first
                             registered the charity’s identification statement.

                                   Note: An officer or employee of a charitable body is exempt from the requirement to
                                   hold an AFS licence for the provision of these financial services on behalf of the body
                                   by s911B(1)(e).

              RG 87.135      We will give relief from the licensing provisions and the fundraising
                             provisions in Pt 7.9 to other people who provide financial services for the
                             financial products issued under a charitable investment scheme provided:
                             (a)   the conditions of the relief for the individual charity appear to be met;
                                   and
                             (b)   the person is not aware nor should be aware that the conditions of relief
                                   applying to the charity have not been met.

                             Lodging an identification statement

              RG 87.136      If you are an individual charity seeking relief, you must lodge an
                             identification statement with us. You should lodge the identification
                             statement through the ASIC Regulatory Portal using the transaction named
                             ‘Apply for an ASIC approval, consent, statement, nomination, or other’. You
                             will need to pay fees for your application. We have provided details about
                             payment options in the portal. For more information, see how you apply for
                             relief.

                                   Note: You can also contact ASIC on 1300 300 630 for information and assistance.

              RG 87.137      The transaction in the portal will allow you to set out:
                             (a)   the identity of the charity;
                             (b)   your Australian Company Number (ACN) if you are a company or, if
                                   not, your Australian Business Number (ABN) if you have one;
                             (c)   details of incorporation if you are an incorporated body other than a
                                   company (e.g. the legislation under which you were incorporated and,
                                   where relevant, an incorporation number);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                   Page 39
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (d)   the names and addresses of all members if you are an unincorporated
                                   body (other than an unincorporated registrable body for which an
                                   Australian Registered Body Number (ARBN) is provided);
                             (e)   a brief description of the scheme and its intended purpose; and
                             (f)   the guarantees or promises, if any, made to or proposed to be made to
                                   holders of interests or debentures in your scheme.

              RG 87.138      In describing the charitable investment scheme to us, you should also
                             include information on:
                             (a)   what types of assets the scheme will invest in or, for a debenture issue,
                                   the charity will hold to enable it to satisfy any liability;
                             (b)   what countries those assets will be located in; and
                             (c)   how you will ensure you will comply with the conditions attached to
                                   section 7 of ASIC Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising)
                                   Instrument 2016/813.

                             Registering an identification statement

              RG 87.139      If you want to rely on the ‘individual charities’ exemption, you must ensure
                             that your registered identification statement is completely accurate and
                             adequate in all material respects.

              RG 87.140      We will register an identification statement unless we are concerned that the
                             information in a material particular is, in content or by omission, misleading
                             or deceptive in the form or context in which it appears or fails to include the
                             information required by RG 87.136–RG 87.138.

              RG 87.141      We will refuse to register an identification statement if it appears that the
                             charitable investment scheme does not fall within the underlying principles
                             of our policy: see RG 87.108.

                             Updating an identification statement

              RG 87.142      When the identification statement needs correcting or updating, you must
                             lodge a supplementary or replacement statement with us as soon as possible.
                             If the terms of the investment relate to variable interest rates and the
                             identification statement and the offer document sets out how rate changes are
                             to be notified to persons who are offered the investment, the identification
                             statement need not be updated each time rates change.

                             Cancelling registration of an identification statement

              RG 87.143      We may withdraw the registration of an identification statement at any time.
                             We will tell you of the withdrawal. We will consider withdrawing
                             registration if:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 40
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             (a)   as a result of changed circumstances, the identification statement may
                                   no longer be accurate and adequate in all material respects, and you fail
                                   to lodge a supplementary statement setting out the changed
                                   circumstances;
                             (b)   as a result of our own inquiry or new information, we are not satisfied
                                   that the statement is accurate and adequate in all material respects; or
                             (c)   we are not satisfied that:
                                   (i)    financial reports you have lodged with us are true and fair and
                                          comply with any applicable requirements as to the financial reports
                                          under any law requiring them to be prepared; or
                                   (ii)   you have fulfilled all conditions of the ‘individual charities’ exemption.

                             Information given to investors

              RG 87.144      You must ensure that every offer document given to investors contains or is
                             accompanied by the following information:
                             (a)   the identity of the charity;
                             (b)   the terms and conditions of the offer (or a summary of those terms and
                                   conditions);
                             (c)   a statement that the normal protections that would apply under the
                                   Corporations Act do not apply; and
                             (d)   other information required to be disclosed under section 8 of ASIC
                                   Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813.

                             There must be no reference in any promotional material or offer document
                             that the charitable investment scheme has been approved or examined by
                             ASIC.

                             Lodgment of financial report

              RG 87.145      You must lodge with ASIC certain financial information within six months
                             of the end of each financial year. If you are under an obligation under a
                             Commonwealth, state or territory law to lodge the financial report with the
                             Crown or a statutory body, you must provide the financial report to ASIC. If
                             you have the financial report audited, you must give ASIC a copy of the
                             audit report. If you are not required to lodge a financial report in that way,
                             you can choose to give ASIC:
                             (a)   audited annual financial report for that financial year (with an audit
                                   report if you have one); or
                             (b)   a statement that sets out the funds outstanding under the charitable
                                   investment scheme at the end of the financial year.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                           Page 41
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             Underlying principles

              RG 87.146      We consider that investors do not expect or rely on the same level of
                             regulatory protection otherwise required under the Corporations Act when
                             the investment in the charity is to promote the charitable purposes of the
                             charity and not to make a financial profit for the investor.

                             Explanation

                             No relief from s1017E or s1017F

              RG 87.147      We will not require a charity with an ‘individual charities’ exemption to
                             issue a PDS or prospectus and we will give relief from the requirement in
                             s1017B to inform investors of certain material changes and significant
                             events. However, we will not give relief from certain other obligations.
                             Charities must ensure that until financial products (other than debentures)
                             are issued they hold any money paid to acquire the products in a separate
                             account: s1017E. Where required by s1017F, charities must also confirm all
                             transactions when a retail client acquires or disposes of a financial product or
                             when it varies the terms of the financial product.

                             Registering an identification statement

              RG 87.148      If we register an identification statement, this does not imply that we have
                             confirmed the accuracy and adequacy of the statement. We may, from time
                             to time, seek to verify the accuracy and adequacy of the identification
                             statement after its registration. We may do this as a matter of course or in
                             response to concerns we may have about the statement.

                             Cancelling registration of an identification statement

              RG 87.149      If we cancel the registration of an identification statement then you fall
                             outside the ‘individual charities’ exemption. You must then comply with the
                             relevant fundraising, managed investment, debenture and licensing
                             provisions of the Corporations Act as applicable.

                             Information given to investors

              RG 87.150      The offer document given to investors must include the information required
                             by section 8 of the ASIC Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising)
                             Instrument 2016/813. This information may well be more detailed than the
                             information required in the identification statement lodged with ASIC. You
                             do not have to lodge a copy of the offer document or any subsequent
                             document updating the offer although you may have to update your
                             identification statement: see RG 87.142.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 42
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                             Application for exemption

              RG 87.151      To obtain relief under section 8 of ASIC Corporations (Charitable
                             Investment Fundraising) Instrument 2016/813 you must apply to register an
                             identification statement as required by the instrument. The identification
                             statement must address each of the issues set out in RG 87.136–RG 87.138.
                             It must also include a consent to allow any person to examine your
                             application on request to ASIC.

              RG 87.152      You must include a statutory declaration from an authorised officer or
                             trustee of your organisation that states that your organisation is a charity as
                             defined for this policy.

              RG 87.153      To apply for an ‘individual charities’ exemption:
                             (a)   prepare an identification statement that addresses all the matters listed
                                   in RG 87.136–RG 87.138;
                             (b)   ensure that the identification statement includes a consent to allow a
                                   person to examine the application on request to ASIC (see RG 87.151);
                             (c)   include a statutory declaration that states that your organisation is a
                                   charity as defined for the purpose of this policy (see the note to
                                   RG 87.102);
                             (d)   apply through the ASIC Regulatory Portal using the transaction named
                                   ‘Apply for an ASIC exemption, declaration or order’; and
                             (e)   pay the fees that apply to your application. We have provided details
                                   about payment options in the portal. For more information, see how you
                                   apply for relief.

                                   Note: You can also contact ASIC on 1300 300 630 for information and assistance.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                               Page 43
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




Key terms


                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              ACNC                      Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission

                              ACNC Act                  The Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission
                                                        Act 2012

                              ADI                       Authorised deposit-taking institution

                              AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B that
                                                        authorises a person who carries on a financial services
                                                        business to provide financial services
                                                          Note: There is a definition contained in s761A.

                              AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                        Corporations Act
                                                          Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the
                                                          Corporations Act.

                              APRA                      Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

                              associate                 Any of the following:
                                                        (a) a body constituted by or under the authority of a
                                                            decision of the charity, or which is controlled by the
                                                            charity;
                                                        (b) a person or body that constituted the charity or under
                                                            whose authority the charity was constituted or that
                                                            controls the charity;
                                                        (c) a charity with related charitable purposes which is the
                                                            same as or similar to the charity;
                                                        (d) a person acting as a trustee of a trust for the charity
                                                            or for charitable purposes that are related to the
                                                            purposes of the charity;
                                                        (e) a member of clergy, an employee or a voluntary staff
                                                            member who regularly works for a person referred to
                                                            in any of paragraphs (a)–(d);
                                                        (f) a person undertaking training or education to enable
                                                            them to be a person under paragraph (e) who
                                                            receives money or money’s worth from a person
                                                            mentioned in any of paragraphs (a)–(e)

                              associated retail         A retail client considered an associated of the charitable
                              client                    investment fundraiser

                              Banking Act               Banking Act 1959

                              charity                   Has the meaning given in s5 of the Charities Act 2013

                              charitable purpose        Has the meaning given in s12 of the Charities Act 2013




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                Page 44
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              charitable investment     A charity that issues debentures or operates a charitable
                              fundraiser                scheme (including by promoting the scheme)

                              charitable scheme         A managed investment scheme that operates to promote
                                                        charitable purposes operated by a charitable investment
                                                        fundraiser

                              Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                        purposes of that Act

                              debenture                 A security that represents a body promising an investor to
                                                        repay money at a future point in time
                                                          Note: See s9 of the Corporations Act for the exact definition.

                              debenture provisions      The requirement in Pts 2L.1–2L.5 of the Corporations
                                                        Act.

                              financial product         A facility through which, or through the acquisition of
                                                        which, a person does one or more of the following:
                                                         makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                         manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                         makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                          Note: This is a definition contained in s763A of the
                                                          Corporations Act: see also s763B–765A.

                              fundraising provisions    The requirements in Pts 6D.2–6D.3, Div 2 and Div 4 of
                                                        Pt 7.9, s992A, 992AA, 1017A, 1017B and s1017G of the
                                                        Corporations Act.

                              licensing provisions      The requirement in s911A(1) for a person who carries on
                                                        a financial services business to hold an AFS licence and
                                                        comply with the obligations of holders of an AFS licence
                                                        in Pts 7.6–7.8 of the Corporations Act.

                              managed investment        In general terms, a scheme that has the following
                              scheme                    features:
                                                         people contribute money or money’s worth as
                                                          consideration to acquire rights (interests) to benefits
                                                          produced by the scheme (whether the rights are actual,
                                                          prospective or contingent and whether they are
                                                          enforceable or not);
                                                         any of the contributions are to be pooled, or used in a
                                                          common enterprise, to produce financial benefits, or
                                                          benefits consisting of rights or interests in property, for
                                                          the people (the members) who hold interests in the
                                                          scheme (whether as contributors to the scheme or as
                                                          people who have acquired interests from holders); and
                                                         the members do not have day-to-day control over the
                                                          operation of the scheme (whether or not they have the
                                                          right to be consulted or to give directions)
                                                          Note: See s9 of the Corporations Act for the exact definition.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                                  Page 45
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              managed investment        The requirements in Ch 5C of the Corporations Act
                              provisions

                              non-associated retail     A retail client not considered an associate of the
                              client                    charitable investment fundraiser

                              offer document            Any document that contains an offer or invitation to
                                                        subscribe or buy interests in a charitable scheme or
                                                        debentures in connection with a charitable investment
                                                        fundraiser

                              PF 96 (for example)       An ASIC pro forma (in this example numbered 96)

                              Product Disclosure        A document that must be given to a retail client in relation
                              Statement (PDS)           to the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance
                                                        with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: See s761A of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                           definition.

                              retail charitable         A charitable investment fundraiser that is not a wholesale
                              investment fundraiser     charitable investment fundraiser

                              retail client             An investor who would be regarded as acquiring financial
                                                        products as a retail client under s761G or 761GA of the
                                                        Corporations Act and Ch 7, Pt 7.1, Div 2 of the
                                                        Corporations Regulations

                              RG 78 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 78)

                              s912A (for example)       A provision of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                        numbered 912A), unless otherwise specified

                              short-term investment     A debenture or interest in a charitable scheme issued by
                                                        a charitable investment fundraiser that is a short-term
                                                        investment as defined by RG 87.80.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                              Page 46
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              sponsor                   In relation to a charitable investment fundraiser, a person
                                                        who:
                                                         has entered into and given to ASIC a deed poll:
                                                          − in favour of each holder of a debenture or interest in
                                                            a managed investment scheme issued by each
                                                            charitable investment fundraiser for which the
                                                            sponsor has accepted an identification statement;
                                                            and
                                                           − under which the sponsor covenants to guarantee the
                                                             performance of the charitable investment fundraiser
                                                             of its obligations under any debenture or interest in a
                                                             managed investment scheme to which the
                                                             identification statement relates, except any
                                                             debentures or interest issued after revocation of the
                                                             acceptance of lodgement; and
                                                         we have not subsequently notified in writing is no
                                                          longer a sponsor for the purposes of Corporations
                                                          (Charitable Investment Fundraising) Instrument
                                                          2016/813, unless we have revoked the notification in
                                                          writing

                              wholesale charitable      A charitable investment fundraiser that has not issued
                              investment fundraiser     any debentures or interests in a charitable scheme to
                                                        non-associated retail clients after 31 December 2016

                              wholesale investor        An investor who would be regarded as acquiring financial
                                                        products as a wholesale client under s761G or 761GA of
                                                        the Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                             Page 47
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 87: Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             charitable investment fundraisers, charitable purpose, charitable schemes,
                             charities, debentures, identification statement, interests, exemptions,
                             financial products, fundraising, licensing, managed investment schemes,
                             sponsors


                             Instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Charitable Investment Fundraising) Instrument
                             2016/813

                             ASIC Corporations (School Enrolment Deposits) Instrument 2016/812

                             ASIC Corporations Repeal Instrument 2016/810

                             ASIC Corporations Repeal Instrument 2016/819


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 78 Breach reporting for AFS licensees


                             Legislation

                             ACNC Act

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001

                             Banking Act

                             Charities Act 2013, s5 and 12

                             Corporations Act 2001, Chs 2L and 5C, Pts 2L.1–2L.5, 6D.2–6D.3 and 7.9
                             Divs 2 and 4, s9, 66A, 708(20), 764A(1)(a), 764A(1)(ba), 766A, 911A(1),
                             911A(2)(b), 912A, 992A, 992AA, 1012D(8), 1017B, 1017E–1017G,
                             1308(2)–(3)

                             Income Tax Assessment Act 1997


                             Consultation papers

                             CP 207 Charitable investment fundraisers




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2016                                         Page 48
