REGULATORY GUIDE 137


Constitution requirements for
schemes registered before
1 October 2013

July 2018



About this guide
This guide is for responsible entities of registered managed investment
schemes (registered schemes) that were registered before 1 October 2013
and their advisers. It explains our approach to the constitution content
requirements in the Corporations Act for these schemes.

Note: From 27 July 2020, applications for relief should be submitted through
the ASIC Regulatory Portal. For more information, see how you apply for
relief.
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                                  About ASIC regulatory documents

                                  In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                  documents.
                                  Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                  is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                  Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                  Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                  compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                  Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                  research project.



                              Document history

                              This guide was issued in July 2018 and is based on legislation and
                              regulations as at the date of issue. The note on the front page was inserted
                              on 27 July 2020. In December 2025, minor updates were made to reflect the
                              remaking of relief in ASIC Corporations (Managed Investment Product
                              Consideration) Instrument 2025/629 in September 2025.

                              Previous versions:
                                     Superseded Regulatory Guide 134 as at September 2000
                                     Appendix to superseded Regulatory Guide 134, issued October 2015


                              Disclaimer
                              This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                              own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                              applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                              obligations.

                              Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                              are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                  Page 2
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




Requirements for schemes registered before
1 October 2013

                                Key points

                                The constitution of a registered managed investment scheme (registered
                                scheme) must meet certain requirements under the Corporations Act 2001
                                (Corporations Act). This guide sets out the requirements that applied to
                                constitutions under the version of Regulatory Guide 134 Funds
                                management (RG 134) as at September 2000.

                                For schemes registered before 1 October 2013, we will not deregister the
                                scheme or take any action against a responsible entity or its officers on the
                                basis that a constitution does not comply with s601GA and 601GB of the
                                Corporations Act if the constitution meets the requirements in this guide.



Application of this guide
               RG 137.1        This guide sets out the requirements that applied to constitutions under the
                               version of RG 134 as at September 2000.

               RG 137.2        For schemes registered before 1 October 2013, we will not deregister the
                               scheme or take any action against a responsible entity or its officers on the
                               basis that a constitution does not comply with s601GA and 601GB of the
                               Corporations Act if the constitution meets the requirements in this guide: see
                               RG 134 at RG 134.13–RG 134.15.
                                    Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), Parts (Pts) or Chapters (Chs) are to the
                                    Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.

               RG 137.3        This guide is not intended to state any new policy. It merely reflects the
                               requirements that applied under RG 134 as at September 2000.

                                    Note 1: This guidance was previously contained in an appendix to the version of RG 134
                                    as at October 2015. There has been no change to the no-action position outlined in that
                                    guidance. A copy of previous versions of RG 134 can be obtained from ASIC Digest.

                                    Note 2: In replicating the requirements in the version of RG 134 as at September 2000, we
                                    updated relevant legislative references (e.g. changing references to ‘the Law’ to ‘the
                                    Corporations Act’). We also removed historical references to the Managed Investments
                                    Act 1998 and superseded ASIC policy statements and class orders.

                                    Note 3: Our no-action position for schemes registered before 1 October 2013 will not
                                    affect the rights of other persons, including members, if the responsible entity has
                                    contravened its duty in s601FC(1)(f) to ensure the constitution meets the requirements in
                                    s601GA and 601GB.

                                    Note 4: Where a scheme registered before 1 October 2013 applies to become registered as
                                    an Australian passport fund, the responsible entity will have to amend the constitution to
                                    comply with the Australian Passport Rules. We expect the responsible entity to make any
                                    changes needed to meet RG 134 if it has not already made those amendments.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                             Page 3
                          REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




Assessing a constitution

                               Our policy

                               Ordinary case

               RG 137.4        We assess a constitution when it is lodged with a registration application for
                               a managed investment scheme. To help us assess the constitution, the
                               application must state where the constitution covers the matters required by
                               s601GA and 601GB. Ordinarily, we will only check the parts of the
                               constitution that are identified.

               RG 137.5        We will not ordinarily review amendments to a constitution or replacement
                               constitutions lodged after registration.

                               Further review

               RG 137.6        We may, however, completely review a constitution or replacement or
                               amended constitution at any time to see if it complies with the Corporations
                               Act.


                               Underlying principles

               RG 137.7        The responsible entity and its directors have a responsibility to ensure that
                               the constitution meets the outcomes under s601GA and 601GB.


                               Explanations

                               What is a ‘constitution’?

               RG 137.8        Each scheme must have a constitution that is lodged when applying for
                               registration of the scheme.

               RG 137.9        We cannot register a scheme if its constitution does not appear to meet
                               s601GA and 601GB. The Corporations Act does not prescribe in detail what
                               a constitution must contain. Instead, under s601GA and 601GB a
                               constitution must:
                               (a)   adequately cover some specified matters which are important to the
                                     relationship between the members and the responsible entity; and
                               (b)   be a document that is legally enforceable between the members and the
                                     responsible entity.

               RG 137.10       The responsible entity has a duty to comply with a constitution when the
                               constitution is consistent with the Corporations Act: see s601FC(1)(m).

               RG 137.11       We are aware that constitutions will be different in length and form. Apart
                               from the matters prescribed in s601GA, constitutions will also include



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                   Page 4
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                              different matters. For example, some constitutions may refer to other rules or
                              regulations (which may or may not be legally enforceable between the
                              members and the responsible entity).

               RG 137.12      We are also aware that most constitutions will declare a trust in favour of the
                              members over scheme property. This view is based on the obligation of a
                              responsible entity under s601FC(2) to hold scheme property on trust for the
                              members.

               RG 137.13      We consider that a constitution needs to contain those matters that Pt 5C.3
                              requires.

                              Assessing the constitution

               RG 137.14      Under s601EB(1)(e), we have to assess a scheme’s constitution. A
                              constitution must deal adequately with key matters set out at s601GA and
                              601GB governing the rights and obligations of the responsible entity as well
                              as those of the members. These are:
                              (a)   the consideration to acquire interests in the scheme;
                              (b)   investment and borrowing powers of the responsible entity;
                              (c)   member complaints handling;
                              (d)   winding up the scheme;
                              (e)   the responsible entity’s rights to be paid or indemnified from the
                                    scheme property; and
                              (f)   the withdrawal rights of the members and the exit price for interests in
                                    the scheme.

                              Further review

               RG 137.15      Although we will not usually review all of a constitution, we may do so at
                              any time.

               RG 137.16      We may discover, for example, that a constitution has a provision that
                              negates the effect of other provisions that we relied on in assessing the
                              adequacy of the constitution. In this case, we may do a thorough review of
                              the constitution.

                              No compliance clause

               RG 137.17      We do not consider that a constitution needs a provision to say that it is
                              subject to the Corporations Act. This is because the Corporations Act
                              imposes direct obligations to comply with the Act and the constitution.

               RG 137.18      However, we do consider that the provisions of the constitution must not be
                              inconsistent with the Corporations Act, so that the constitution will be
                              legally enforceable as required by s601GB. For example, we may refuse
                              registration of a scheme where its constitution contains a clause purporting


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                  Page 5
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                              to limit or exclude the liability of the responsible entity for conduct that may
                              contravene the Corporations Act.

               RG 137.19      If such a clause is included in the constitution it may need to be qualified in
                              the following manner:
                              (a)   the limitation of liability only operates to the extent permitted by the
                                    Corporations Act; and
                              (b)   in no way does the limitation purport to exclude or reduce liability
                                    under the Corporations Act.

               RG 137.20      This also highlights the need for parties relying on the constitution to first
                              examine the Corporations Act to understand the effect of such an exclusion
                              clause.


Content needed under s601GA

                              Our policy

               RG 137.21      We are required by the Corporations Act to assess whether or not a
                              constitution makes adequate provision about the matters specified in
                              s601GA. We consider that to make adequate provision about those matters,
                              the content must be certain and complete in a contractual sense. That is, a
                              person reading a constitution must be able to understand how matters will be
                              resolved without having to rely on extrinsic material or on further agreement
                              between the members and the responsible entity. This policy gives guidance
                              about what the Corporations Act requires to help responsible entities
                              comply.

               RG 137.22      We have given relief to allow a constitution to include a provision that has
                              the effect of ensuring consistency with the listing rules of an eligible
                              Australian financial market: see ASIC Corporations (Chapter 5C—
                              Miscellaneous Provisions) Instrument 2017/125 (ASIC Instrument
                              2017/125). The relief means that changes to the terms of the constitution as a
                              result of the operation of this type of provision are not required to be made in
                              accordance with s601GC(1) or 601GC(2).

                              Consideration to acquire

               RG 137.23      Section 601GA(1)(a) provides that a constitution must make adequate
                              provision for the consideration that is to be paid to acquire an interest in the
                              scheme. We consider that adequate provision has been made when a
                              constitution provides for an independently verifiable price. However, we
                              have given relief from the effect of s601GA(1)(a) under ASIC Corporations
                              (Managed Investment Product Consideration) Instrument 2025/629 (ASIC
                              Instrument 2025/629) in a number of situations when:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                  Page 6
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                              (a)   for commercial reasons, the consideration to acquire cannot be
                                    determined independently; and
                              (b)   investor protection will not be reduced.

               RG 137.24      Relief is available under ASIC Instrument 2025/629 for:
                              (a)   placements of quoted interests;
                              (b)   when there is no pooling, except of money pending its further
                                    investment;
                              (c)   rights issues to members and distribution reinvestment plans;
                              (d)   forfeited interests;
                              (e)   interest purchase plans;
                              (f)   fees for wholesale clients;
                              (g)   interests that are components of stapled securities;
                              (h)   the issue of interests based on the value of scheme property attributable
                                    to interests in a class, less any liabilities that may be met from that
                                    property attributable to interests in that class divided by the number of
                                    interests on issue in that class (which can be adjusted for the costs in
                                    acquiring or disposing of scheme property, for assets of the scheme that
                                    are not scheme property or otherwise); and

                                    Note: This relief is only for interests in schemes that are not in a class of interests that is
                                    traded on a financial market, or are interests in schemes that are AQUA products that
                                    are able to be traded on the financial market operated by ASX Limited or exchange
                                    traded products that are able to be traded on the financial market operated by Cboe
                                    Australia Pty Ltd.

                              (i)   the issue of interests based on the market price of interests of that class
                                    on the market at or around the time of issue.

                                    Note: This applies to interests traded on a financial market other than the AQUA market
                                    of ASX Limited or Cboe Australia Pty Ltd’s market for exchange traded products—for
                                    example, interests in a scheme included in the official list of the financial market
                                    operated by ASX Limited.

               RG 137.25      This means that the responsible entity does not have to include a price or the
                              consideration in a constitution if it fits one of the situations set out in ASIC
                              Instrument 2025/629. We will consider giving relief in other situations if the
                              criteria in RG 137.23(a)–RG 137.23(b) are met.
                                    Note: For our general policy on exemptions and modifications, see Regulatory Guide 51
                                    Applications for relief (RG 51). For our policy on relief for managed investment
                                    schemes, see Regulatory Guide 136 Funds management: Discretionary powers
                                    (RG 136).

                              How to apply for relief

               RG 137.26      To apply for relief:
                              (a)   lodge your relief application through the ASIC Regulatory Portal; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                                Page 7
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                              (b)   ensure the application complies with RG 51 and RG 136.

               RG 137.27      You can also contact ASIC for more information and assistance.

                              Powers to deal with scheme property

               RG 137.28      Section 601GA(1)(b) provides that a constitution must have adequate
                              provisions about what powers the responsible entity has when dealing with
                              scheme property, such as what investments can be made. We consider that
                              adequate provision for the responsible entity’s powers in dealing with
                              scheme property has been made when the powers are set out in the
                              constitution with certainty and completeness. For example, adequate
                              provision has been made if the constitution gives the responsible entity all
                              the powers of a natural person to invest and to borrow on security of the
                              scheme property.

                              Complaints procedures

               RG 137.29      Section 601GA(1)(c) provides that a constitution must have adequate
                              provisions about the method by which complaints made by members in
                              relation to the scheme will be dealt with. We consider that a constitution
                              makes adequate provision about member complaints when it provides for a
                              complaints handling procedure that will give an effective way for members
                              to efficiently get redress if they suffer loss due to breaches.

               RG 137.30      When assessing the method for dealing with members’ complaints, we will
                              refer to Australian Standard AS ISO 10002–2006 Customer satisfaction—
                              Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations (ISO 10002:2004,
                              MOD) as a guide, but it is not necessary for the constitution to set out
                              provisions relating to every aspect of the standard. We expect a constitution
                              to at least include provisions about:
                              (a)   acknowledging complaints;
                              (b)   properly considering complaints within reasonable timeframes;
                              (c)   communicating with the member;
                              (d)   outlining remedies available to the member; and
                              (e)   advising the member of any further avenue for complaint.

                              Winding up

               RG 137.31      Section 601GA(1)(d) provides that a constitution must have adequate
                              provisions about winding up the scheme. We consider that adequate
                              provision for winding up a scheme has been made if its constitution:
                              (a)   deals with all the circumstances under which a scheme may be wound
                                    up; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                  Page 8
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                              (b)   provides for an independent audit by a registered company auditor of
                                    the final accounts after winding up.

               RG 137.32      The provisions about winding up need to be consistent with Pt 5C.9.

                              Withdrawal rights of members

               RG 137.33      Section 601GA(4) provides that if members have a right to withdraw, the
                              constitution must specify the right and set out adequate procedures in a way
                              that is fair to all members. We consider that if there are provisions for a right
                              of withdrawal, the constitution complies if it sets out fair provisions about:
                              (a)   how members can withdraw; and
                              (b)   what exit price will apply.

               RG 137.34      If there is provision for withdrawal, the constitution must include a method
                              for calculating the exit price in a way that is fair to all members and
                              independently verifiable. Fairness will normally require that the price
                              depend on appropriate, and reasonably current, valuations of scheme
                              property.
                                    Note: ASIC Instrument 2025/629 also provides relief so that the calculation of the exit
                                    price can be based on the value of scheme property attributable to interests in a class,
                                    less any liabilities that may be met from that property attributable to interests in that
                                    class divided by the number of interests on issue in that class (and can be adjusted for
                                    the costs in acquiring or disposing of scheme property, for assets of the scheme that are
                                    not scheme property or otherwise).

               RG 137.35      Generally, if the withdrawal provisions meet these requirements, we will
                              treat them as complying with the Corporations Act unless they:
                              (a)   unreasonably disadvantage one group of members; or
                              (b)   are otherwise inconsistent with the Corporations Act.

                              Underlying principles

               RG 137.36      We consider that a constitution must address the matters in s601GA in a way
                              that enables members to know their rights. We consider these matters must
                              be addressed in a way that is consistent with the Corporations Act.

                              Incorporation by reference

               RG 137.37      A provision that allows provisions in another document to override the terms
                              of the constitution prevents the provisions of the constitution that deal with
                              the matters in s601GA and 601GB from being adequate, because they are
                              not certain and complete. That type of provision may require a reader to
                              consider material that is extrinsic to the constitution itself and avoid the
                              requirements for amendments of the constitution. The Corporations Act
                              would not permit ASIC to register a scheme if its constitution has this type
                              of provision.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                           Page 9
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                              Provisions incorporating listing rules by reference

               RG 137.38      We consider that relief to permit inclusion of a provision that has the effect
                              of ensuring a constitution is consistent with the listing rules of an eligible
                              Australian financial market by incorporating by reference and giving
                              overriding effect to those listing rules is appropriate. This is because:
                              (a)   the listing rules are available to the public;
                              (b)   amendments to the listing rules are subject to regulatory oversight; and
                              (c)   amendments to the terms of the constitution are highly likely to be
                                    appropriate where the listing rules require those amendments in order to
                                    maintain listing.

                                    Note: See ASIC Instrument 2017/125.


                              Explanations

                              Consideration to acquire

                              Independently verifiable price

               RG 137.39      We do not consider that ‘adequate provision’ for ‘consideration to acquire’,
                              in s601GA(1)(a), means there must be a ‘fair price’. We do not require this
                              because the Corporations Act does not require any duty of fairness to
                              applicants for interests. Applicants are protected, in relation to the
                              consideration paid for interests, by the disclosure requirements of Div 2 of
                              Pt 7.9.

               RG 137.40      To meet s601GA(1)(a), the consideration for acquiring interests needs to be
                              set out in the constitution so that it is independently verifiable. The
                              Corporations Act requires provisions enabling calculation of the
                              consideration to be set out in the constitution so members have rights about
                              the consideration for an issue of interests. This is because the consideration
                              for an issue of an interest to another may affect the value of a member’s
                              interest.

               RG 137.41      If the amount of consideration can be influenced by any party who has an
                              interest in the scheme, it will not comply. This means that the consideration
                              is not to be influenced by:
                              (a)   the responsible entity;
                              (b)   any related party of the responsible entity;
                              (c)   any person acting in concert with the responsible entity in setting the
                                    consideration; and
                              (d)   any other person having an interest in the amount of consideration.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                 Page 10
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




               RG 137.42      For there to be an independently verifiable price, the scheme’s auditor must
                              be able to verify the amount of consideration by referring to the constitution
                              and without referring to the responsible entity. If the consideration is based
                              on the value of scheme property, the constitution has to set out how the
                              property will be valued.

               RG 137.43      We will not generally give relief so interests in a trust can be issued at the
                              responsible entity’s discretion at a discount or at an increased price as this
                              would not be consistent with the policy of the Corporations Act. We do not
                              accept that, because companies can issue shares at a discount or a premium,
                              similar treatment should be applied to issuing interests in a scheme in the
                              form of a trust.

               RG 137.44      Unitholders in a trust have different rights from shareholders. Unitholders in
                              a trust place their funds under the responsible entity’s control to invest their
                              funds. The scheme property is held for the benefit of the members. By
                              contrast, shareholders supply capital for running a company. Shareholders
                              are not beneficially or legally entitled to the assets of the company.

               RG 137.45      We will, however, give relief to facilitate flexibility for the responsible entity
                              about the price of interests in a number of situations: see ASIC Instrument
                              2025/629.

                              Placements of quoted interests

               RG 137.46      We have given conditional relief in ASIC Instrument 2025/629 to allow
                              interests in a scheme to be issued at a price determined by the responsible
                              entity. This relief facilitates off-market placements of quoted interests. The
                              relief applies only if the interests are quoted on the financial market of ASX
                              Limited, Cboe Australia Pty Ltd or an approved foreign market (as defined
                              in ASIC Instrument 2025/629).

               RG 137.47      Relief means that interests can be issued at a discount to the market price.
                              The price paid will normally be the result of commercial negotiations
                              between the responsible entity and the person taking up the issue.

               RG 137.48      The market price may reflect only dealings by holders of small parcels of
                              interests. In this situation, the responsible entity may not be able to find
                              anyone willing to take a substantial placement at the market price.

               RG 137.49      If interests in the scheme are quoted, the market is an independent pricing
                              mechanism. The market regulates the depth of any discount, and establishes
                              an appropriate reference point for measuring it. These mechanisms are not
                              available when a scheme is not listed.

               RG 137.50      We recognise that issuing interests at a discount to the market could dilute
                              the value of members’ interests. This is justifiable because of the substantial
                              commercial benefit in enabling capital to be raised by a placement. There



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                 Page 11
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                              are conditions on our relief that limit the extent of any dilution of existing
                              interests. Stricter conditions apply to issues that could involve large
                              dilutions.

               RG 137.51      A condition of relief for placements is that unless the issue is covered by
                              s601GAA(12) or 601GAA(13) (as notionally inserted into the Corporations
                              Act by ASIC Instrument 2025/629), the responsible entity and its associates
                              are not issued any of the interests.

               RG 137.52      Additional conditions apply if the issue under the proposed placement,
                              together with any related issue in the previous year, immediately before the
                              issue, comprises more than 15% of interests in that class.

               RG 137.53      The additional conditions require 75% by value of members who hold
                              interests in the same class to approve the issue and 25% by value to vote.
                              If interests of members in another class are affected, then unless the
                              responsible entity reasonably considers that the issue will not adversely
                              affect the interests of members in that other class, those members must
                              separately approve the issue. Those who are to be issued interests must be
                              excluded from determining if approval is given.

                              Limited pooling

               RG 137.54      Sometimes the only pooling or common use is of members’ contributions
                              before they are invested or otherwise disposed of. In this situation, the price
                              at which interests are issued to one member does not affect the interests of
                              the others. We have given relief in ASIC Instrument 2025/629 to these
                              schemes so the responsible entity can decide the issue price.

                              Rights issues and distribution reinvestment plans

               RG 137.55      We have given relief so issues can be made at a discount for some rights
                              issues and distribution reinvestment plans, because there will be no unfair
                              dilution. Relief is available when:
                              (a)   the responsible entity reasonably believes that any price discount is less
                                    than or equal to the percentage stated in the constitution; and
                              (b)   the interests (whether renounceable or not) are offered to all the existing
                                    members proportionately to the value of their interests and not to
                                    anyone else. Foreign members may be excluded in a number of
                                    circumstances: see s601GAA(10) (as notionally inserted into the
                                    Corporations Act by ASIC Instrument 2025/629).

               RG 137.56      We have given incidental relief from s601FC(1)(d) so foreign members can
                              be excluded.

               RG 137.57      We also have given relief so that the responsible entity can decide the price
                              under a distribution reinvestment plan. In a distribution reinvestment plan,




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                 Page 12
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                              the responsible entity uses money payable to a member as a distribution of
                              capital or income to pay for additional interests. If all members may from
                              time to time elect to participate in the distribution reinvestment plan, our
                              relief applies. Foreign members may be excluded in a number of
                              circumstances: see s601GAA(11) (as notionally inserted into the
                              Corporations Act by ASIC Instrument 2025/629).

               RG 137.58      Relief for distribution reinvestment plans is given on the condition that:
                              (a)   all the issues under the distribution reinvestment plan are in the same
                                    class;
                              (b)   the same price applies to all interests issued under the distribution
                                    reinvestment plan in relation to a particular distribution;
                              (c)   all interests issued under the distribution reinvestment plan in relation to
                                    any particular distribution are issued at substantially the same time; and
                              (d)   the responsible entity reasonably believes that any price discount
                                    offered is not more than the percentage stated in the constitution.

               RG 137.59      The responsible entity has to consider the rights and interests of all members
                              when deciding the price in these circumstances, particularly the rights and
                              interests of members who do not take up the offer. This is because the
                              responsible entity has duties under s601FC(1)(c) and 601FC(1)(d), and a
                              fiduciary relationship with members.

                              Forfeited interests

               RG 137.60      We have given relief so the responsible entity can decide the price at which
                              partly paid interests are resold. This relief applies if the interests are:
                              (a)   in a class of interests that are quoted on a financial market operated by
                                    ASX Limited or Cboe Australia Pty Ltd; and
                              (b)   forfeited to the responsible entity because of a failure to pay a call.

               RG 137.61      This does not imply that in these circumstances we will also give relief from
                              the Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) requirements or other provisions of
                              the Corporations Act.

               RG 137.62      The forfeited interests are to be sold at a public auction conducted, as far as
                              practicable, in accordance with the provisions in the Corporations Act about
                              forfeited shares: see s254Q.

                              Fees

               RG 137.63      We consider that some fees such as an entry fee are a part of the
                              consideration payable to acquire an interest in a scheme. Without the relief
                              available under ASIC Instrument 2025/629, these fees would have to be
                              specified in an independently verifiable manner in the constitution.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                 Page 13
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




               RG 137.64      We recognise that fee arrangements involving negotiated rates for wholesale
                              clients are a means by which responsible entities can attract those investors
                              to a scheme. Such arrangements may assist in more efficient structuring of
                              schemes by facilitating economies of scale.

               RG 137.65      Under the conditions of ASIC Instrument 2025/629:
                              (a)   fee arrangements must be disclosed to:
                                    (i)    existing members of the scheme; and
                                    (ii)   persons being offered interests in the scheme under a PDS; and
                              (b)   the fee arrangement agreed with any member must not adversely affect
                                    the fees that any other member will incur.

               RG 137.66      In some circumstances, discounted fee arrangements for related parties may
                              be used to provide incentives for effective performance by officers and
                              employees. We have given individual relief to a scheme so that a differential
                              fee arrangement could apply to employees of a related body corporate of the
                              responsible entity of the scheme and their relatives where:
                              (a)   the number of employees as a proportion of all members in the scheme
                                    was insignificant (and therefore unlikely to materially affect other
                                    members in voting or takeover); and
                              (b)   the differential fee arrangement involving the waiver of entry and exit
                                    fees did not affect the scheme to the disadvantage of other members of
                                    the scheme.

               RG 137.67      We will consider applications for relief to allow differential fees for
                              employees or officers on a case-by-case basis, taking these matters into
                              account. Applications should include proposals for disclosing such fee
                              arrangements.

               RG 137.68      This relief is consistent with the relief we have given from s601FC(1)(d) to
                              allow individually negotiated fees: see ASIC Corporations (Registered
                              Schemes and CCIVs: Differential Fees) Instrument 2017/40.

                              Powers to deal with scheme property

               RG 137.69      We do not consider that a scheme’s investment policy must be set out in its
                              constitution. This is because s601GA(1)(b) relates to powers of investment,
                              rather than to how the responsible entity intends to exercise its powers. We
                              expect PDSs will specify the investment policy for a scheme.

                              Complaints procedures

               RG 137.70      A constitution must adequately deal with how members’ complaints will be
                              handled: see s601GA(1)(c). This implies there must be a complaints
                              handling system. The complaints handling system may also be seen as a
                              measure to ensure compliance that will need to be addressed in the



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                 Page 14
                         REGULATORY GUIDE 137: Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013




                              compliance plan. Further, because the complaints handling method will be in
                              the constitution, the scheme’s compliance plan is required by the
                              Corporations Act to include adequate measures to ensure that the scheme’s
                              complaints handling method is complied with.

               RG 137.71      The intention of the Corporations Act is that there must be an appropriate
                              complaints handling system set out in the constitution so that it is a right of
                              members.

                              Winding up

               RG 137.72      The Corporations Act sets out the framework for winding up of schemes.
                              A constitution should set out members’ rights in a winding-up process
                              consistently with Pt 5C.9.

               RG 137.73      The appointment of the auditor is terminated when a winding up
                              commences: see s331AD. The accounts of winding up should be
                              independently audited to ensure compliance with the Corporations Act. We
                              consider that provision in a constitution for the independent sign off of the
                              accounts of a winding up is a part of adequately dealing with winding up.

                              Withdrawal rights of members

               RG 137.74      We do not prescribe how fairness is to be achieved. Because the constitution
                              must provide for the withdrawal price, we consider that the basis for the price
                              set out must be independently verifiable based on the terms of the constitution.

                                   Note: ASIC Instrument 2025/629 provides relief so that the calculation of the
                                   withdrawal price can be based on the value of scheme property attributable to interests
                                   of the relevant class, less any liabilities that may be met from that property attributable
                                   to interests in that class divided by the number of interests on issue in that class (and can
                                   be adjusted for the costs in acquiring or disposing of scheme property, for assets of the
                                   scheme that are not scheme property or otherwise).

               RG 137.75      The withdrawal provisions in a constitution must be consistent with Pt 5C.6,
                              which restricts withdrawal from non-liquid schemes.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2018                                                           Page 15
