REGULATORY GUIDE 131

Funds management:
Establishing and registering
a fund

October 2022




About this guide
This guide is for responsible entities of registered managed investment
schemes (registered schemes), Australian passport fund operators,
corporate directors of retail corporate collective investment vehicles (CCIVs),
and their advisers.

It provides guidance on our requirements for:
   establishing and registering a managed investment scheme and
    subsequently registering as an Australian passport fund;
   establishing and registering a CCIV and its initial sub-fund(s); and
   registering further sub-funds.
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in October 2022 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. In June 2025, we updated references to
                             reflect changes to RG 1 and related guidance.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 131, issued July 2018


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                             Page 2
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    How our guidance applies ................................................................. 4
                                    Registering a managed investment scheme ..................................... 4
                                    Registering as an Australian passport fund ....................................... 6
                                    Registering a CCIV and sub-funds .................................................... 7
                                    What to include with an application ................................................... 8
                                    How we assess an application........................................................... 9
                             B      Registering a managed investment scheme............................... 11
                                    Applying to register a scheme ......................................................... 11
                                    The responsible entity ...................................................................... 11
                                    Contents of the application .............................................................. 12
                                    Assessment by ASIC ....................................................................... 14
                             C      Registering as an Australian passport fund ............................... 19
                                    Applying to register as an Australian passport fund ........................ 19
                                    Contents of the application .............................................................. 20
                                    Assessment by ASIC ....................................................................... 26
                                    Decision by ASIC ............................................................................. 36
                                    Entry on the Asia Region Funds Passport Register ........................ 36
                             D      Registering a CCIV and sub-funds .............................................. 37
                                    Meeting the CCIV registration requirements ................................... 37
                                    Contents of the application .............................................................. 38
                                    Lodging the application form and paying the fee ............................. 40
                                    Assessment by ASIC ....................................................................... 41
                                    Registering further sub-funds .......................................................... 41
                                    Registering a sub-fund of a CCIV as an Australian passport fund .. 43
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 44
                             Related information ............................................................................... 49




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                                       Page 3
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               This guide provides information on how to establish and register a
                               managed investment scheme. A managed investment scheme must meet
                               certain requirements to become registered under the Corporations Act
                               2001 (Corporations Act).

                               This guide provides information on how to register as an Australian
                               passport fund for the purposes of the Asia Region Funds Passport.

                               This guide also provides information on how to register a corporate
                               collective investment vehicle (CCIV), its initial sub-fund(s) and any further
                               sub-funds.




How our guidance applies
              RG 131.1       This guide is for:
                             (a)   responsible entities of registered managed investment schemes
                                   (registered schemes);
                             (b)   Australian passport fund operators;
                             (c)   corporate directors of CCIVs; and
                             (d)   their advisers.

              RG 131.2       We will apply this guide when assessing applications lodged with ASIC to
                             register:
                             (a)   a managed investment scheme;
                             (b)   a registered scheme as an Australian passport fund; and
                             (c)   a CCIV, its initial sub-fund(s) and any further sub-funds.

              RG 131.3       This guide does not apply to operators of foreign passport funds lodging a
                             notice of intention to enter or operate in Australia as a host economy under
                             the Asia Region Funds Passport.

                                   Note: For information on the requirements for foreign passport fund operators lodging a
                                   notice of intention to offer interests in Australia, see Regulatory Guide 138 Foreign
                                   passport funds (RG 138).




Registering a managed investment scheme
              RG 131.4       To register a managed investment scheme, the responsible entity must be an
                             Australian public company registered under the Corporations Act and hold




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                    Page 4
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             an Australian financial services (AFS) licence authorising it to operate a
                             registered scheme.

              RG 131.5       An application to register a managed investment scheme can be made to
                             ASIC by completing Form 5100 Application for registration of a managed
                             investment scheme.

              RG 131.6       For a managed investment scheme to be registered, s601EB(1) of the
                             Corporations Act sets out that:
                             (a)   the application must:
                                   (i)    state the name of the scheme, the name and address of the
                                          responsible entity, and the name and address of the person who has
                                          consented to act as auditor of the compliance plan; and
                                   (ii)   be accompanied by a copy of the constitution, a copy of the
                                          compliance plan and a statement signed by the directors (directors’
                                          statement) that the constitution meets s601GA and 601GB and the
                                          compliance plan meets s601HA (see s601EA);
                             (b)   the responsible entity must be an Australian public company holding an
                                   AFS licence (see s601FA);
                             (c)   the constitution must meet the requirements of s601GA and 601GB;
                             (d)   the compliance plan must set out the adequate measures that the
                                   responsible entity will apply in operating the managed investment
                                   scheme (see s601HA);
                             (e)   a copy of the compliance plan (signed by the directors of the
                                   responsible entity) must be lodged with ASIC (see s601HC); and
                             (f)   arrangements that satisfy the requirements of s601HG must be in place
                                   to audit compliance with the compliance plan.

                                   Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), chapters (Chs) and parts (Pts) are to the
                                   Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.

              RG 131.7       When lodging an application, the responsible entity will also need to select
                             the dominant asset kind relevant to the managed investment scheme.

              RG 131.8       When an application to register a managed investment scheme is lodged with
                             ASIC, we assess whether the application complies with the requirements of
                             the Corporations Act. We must register a managed investment scheme within
                             14 days of lodgement (14-day registration period), unless it appears to us that an
                             application does not meet one or more legislative requirements under s601EB.

              RG 131.9       We may seek clarification about the information in an application or the
                             documents attached to it during the 14-day registration period. We may also
                             ask for amendments to the application form, constitution, compliance plan or
                             directors’ statement if they do not appear to comply with the requirements of
                             the law as interpreted and set out in our regulatory guides. We may also




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                         Page 5
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             refuse the application if we are of the opinion there is non-compliance,
                             without asking for amendments.

              RG 131.10      We will refuse to register a managed investment scheme if the responsible
                             entity or its advisers are unwilling or unable to make any requested
                             amendments within the 14-day registration period, and it appears to us that
                             s601EB is not met.

              RG 131.11      When a managed investment scheme is registered, we give it an Australian
                             Registered Scheme Number (ARSN) and keep a record of it: see s601EB(2)
                             and (3).

                                   Note: See Section B for information on registering a managed investment scheme.




Registering as an Australian passport fund
              RG 131.12      An Australian passport fund operator will use its Australian Company
                             Number (ACN) or Australian Registered Business Number (ARBN) to log
                             into the ASIC Regulatory Portal to apply for registration as an Australian
                             passport fund.

              RG 131.13      An Australian passport fund operator seeking to register an Australian
                             passport fund will need to complete and submit to ASIC an application and
                             attach a copy of the Product Disclosure Statement (PDS): see s1212.

                                   Note: See our website for more information on how to register as an Australian passport
                                   fund, which includes guidance on the requirements for PDSs.

              RG 131.14      A managed investment scheme must be registered under the Corporations
                             Act before it may become registered as an Australian passport fund.
                             However, it does not need to be registered at the time the application to
                             register as an Australian passport fund is lodged.

              RG 131.15      We must register an Australian passport fund if we are of the opinion that
                             the Australian passport fund operator:
                             (a)   meets the eligible entity requirements in section 3 of Annex 2 to the
                                   Memorandum of Cooperation on the Establishment and Implementation
                                   of the Asia Region Funds Passport (Memorandum of Cooperation); and
                             (b)   is likely to comply with the Corporations Act, including the Australian
                                   Passport Rules, and the Australian Securities and Investments
                                   Commission 2001 (ASIC Act).

                                   Note: The Australian Passport Rules are made under s1211 and 1211A by the
                                   Australian Minister responsible for the Asia Region Funds Passport (the responsible
                                   Minister).

              RG 131.16      There is no prescribed timeframe for us to decide whether to register an
                             Australian passport fund. We will aim to make decisions about applications



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                    Page 6
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             promptly. However, the time we take to make a decision is likely to be
                             impacted by the nature, scale and complexity of the Australian passport fund
                             operator and the fund, and the quality of the information provided in support
                             of the application.

              RG 131.17      In making any decision whether to register an Australian passport fund, we
                             may:
                             (a)   ask for further information on answers the Australian passport fund
                                   operator has given in the application, particularly if they are unclear or
                                   do not appear to be consistent with the law and/or our guidance;
                             (b)   give the operator the opportunity to make amendments to the answers it
                                   has given;
                             (c)   seek clarification of the contents of the PDS; or
                             (d)   give the operator the opportunity to make amendments to the PDS or
                                   provide explanations where we have concerns.

              RG 131.18      We may refuse registration as an Australian passport fund if the Australian
                             passport fund operator or its advisers are unwilling or unable to provide
                             information or make amendments needed to enable us to grant the registration.

                                   Note: See Section C for more information on registering as an Australian passport fund.




Registering a CCIV and sub-funds
              RG 131.19      A CCIV is a type of company that is limited by shares. Chapter 8B of the
                             Corporations Act, which took effect on 1 July 2022, governs CCIVs.

              RG 131.20      A CCIV will be either a retail CCIV or a wholesale CCIV. A CCIV must
                             have at least one sub-fund from the initial registration of the CCIV.

              RG 131.21      A CCIV must have a sole director—its corporate director. A corporate
                             director must be an Australian public company that holds an AFS licence.

              RG 131.22      All CCIVs must have a constitution and retail CCIVs must have a
                             compliance plan.

              RG 131.23      Subject to the corporate director providing the documents set out in Table 1,
                             ASIC will register a CCIV, its initial sub-fund(s) and any future sub-funds.

                                   Note: See Section D for more information on registering a CCIV and sub-funds




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                    Page 7
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




What to include with an application
               RG 131.24     Table 1 sets out what a responsible entity, Australian passport fund operator
                             or corporate director needs to provide and do to register a managed
                             investment scheme, an Australian passport fund, or a CCIV or sub-fund.

Table 1:      Application requirements for registering a managed investment scheme, an
              Australian passport fund, or a CCIV or sub-fund

 Application           Managed investment               Australian passport fund       CCIV or sub-fund
 requirements          scheme

 Application           Form 5100 Application for        Apply for registration as an   To register:
                       registration of a managed        Australian passport fund,       the CCIV and initial sub-
                       investment scheme                available through the ASIC       fund(s), use
                                                        Regulatory Portal                Form 5201 Application for
                                                                                         registration of a corporate
                                                                                         collective investment
                                                                                         vehicle; and
                                                                                        subsequent sub-fund(s),
                                                                                         use Form 5202
                                                                                         Application for
                                                                                         registration of a sub-fund
                                                                                         of a corporate collective
                                                                                         investment vehicle.

 Constitution          Must meet s601GA and             Must meet section 4 of the     The constitution of a:
                       601GB                            Australian Passport Rules       retail CCIV must meet
                                                                                         s1223B, 1223G and
                                                                                         s1223H; and
                                                                                        wholesale CCIV must
                                                                                         meet s1223B and 1223F.

 Compliance plan       Must meet s601HA                 Must meet s601HA, including Must meet s1226A.
                                                        the additional obligations for
                                                                                       Wholesale CCIVs are not
                                                        an Australian passport fund
                                                                                       required to lodge a
                                                                                       compliance plan: see
                                                                                       s1226(3).

 Directors’            Form 5103 Directors’             Not applicable                 Not applicable
 statement             statement relating to
                       application for registration
                       of a managed investment
                       scheme

 PDS                   Not applicable                   Must meet Div 2 of Pt 7.9      Not applicable

 Fee                   Yes                              Yes                            Yes




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                 Page 8
                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




 Application              Managed investment                 Australian passport fund            CCIV or sub-fund
 requirements             scheme

 Additional               Not applicable                     The Australian passport             Not applicable
 information                                                 fund operator must supply:
                                                              an Australian criminal
                                                               history check; and
                                                              a bankruptcy check
                                                                Note: If an overseas criminal
                                                                history or bankruptcy check
                                                                has not been obtained, the
                                                                operator may alternatively
                                                                provide a statutory
                                                                declaration explaining the
                                                                efforts made to obtain the
                                                                checks and stating their
                                                                criminal and bankruptcy
                                                                history.

Note 1: For more information on our fees and methods of payment, see Information Sheet 30 Fees for commonly lodged
documents (INFO 30).
Note 2: For an Australian passport fund, overseas criminal history and bankruptcy checks are required for each country of
residence (in addition to Australian criminal history and bankruptcy checks) if the person has resided overseas within the past
10 years. Australian criminal history and bankruptcy checks are not required if the person has not resided in Australia at all over
the past 10 years.




How we assess an application
                RG 131.25       Once an application has been submitted, we will advise the responsible
                                entity, Australian passport fund operator or corporate director that we have
                                received the application.

                RG 131.26       We will contact the responsible entity, Australian passport fund operator or
                                corporate director to let them know whether we require more information or
                                amendments to the application or documents, or if we have decided to
                                register or refuse the application.

                RG 131.27       If we request more information or amendments, we will give the responsible
                                entity, Australian passport fund operator or corporate director a reasonable
                                time to supply any more information or make any amendments required
                                before deciding whether to register or refuse the application. We will
                                communicate our decision to the responsible entity, operator or corporate
                                director once the further information is supplied or the amendments are
                                made.

                                       Note: If the responsible entity, Australian passport fund operator or corporate director
                                       does not supply the information or make the amendments within a reasonable time, we
                                       will refuse the application for registration if we are of the opinion it does not meet the
                                       requirements to be granted.

                RG 131.28       This process is shown in Figure 1.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                             Page 9
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




Figure 1: Application assessment process



                                             Application lodged with ASIC




                                         Application entered on ASIC system




                                         Application allocated to ASIC officers




                                                Consideration of materials



                                        Applicant advised of receipt of application




                                  Assessment of compliance with relevant provisions




                               Further information or amendment to documents if required




          Refusal to                      Applicant supplies further information                       Decision to
           register                             or amended documents                                    register




                                           Decision communicated to applicant




Note 1: The process in this flowchart is explained in RG 131.25–RG 131.27 (accessible version).
Note 2: Applicants may choose to withdraw their application at any stage of the process. However, this does not mean that they
will be entitled to a refund of the application fee.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                       Page 10
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




B          Registering a managed investment scheme

                               Key points

                               To register a managed investment scheme an application must be lodged
                               with ASIC.

                               The application must be in the approved form, and the contents of the
                               application and necessary supporting documentation must meet the
                               requirements of the Corporations Act. This section explains how we apply
                               those requirements when assessing an application to register a scheme.




Applying to register a scheme
              RG 131.29      An application to register a managed investment scheme must be lodged
                             with ASIC and meet the requirements in s601EA.

              RG 131.30      After we receive an application, we will undertake a ‘completeness check’ to
                             see whether it is complete. If it does not pass this check, we will reject the
                             application and the responsible entity will have to reapply. We will generally
                             tell the responsible entity which parts are incomplete.



The responsible entity
              RG 131.31      To register a managed investment scheme, the responsible entity must be an
                             Australian public company that has an AFS licence authorising it to operate
                             the registered scheme: see s601FA.

                                   Note: For information on how to become licensed as a responsible entity under the AFS
                                   licensing regime, see Regulatory Guide 1 Applying for and varying an AFS licence (RG 1).

              RG 131.32      If the responsible entity is not already authorised by its AFS licence to
                             operate the relevant kind of registered scheme, an application to register a
                             managed investment scheme should not be submitted until we have
                             considered the AFS licensing application. We will indicate when an
                             application to register the scheme can be made. If the application to register
                             the scheme is made before we have given this indication, we may refuse the
                             application because there is no responsible entity that meets the requirements
                             of s601FA.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                   Page 11
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




Contents of the application

                             Application

              RG 131.33      The responsible entity must complete Form 5100. The application requires
                             details about the responsible entity and the person who has consented to be
                             the auditor of the compliance plan: see s601EA(2)(a) and (b).

                                   Note: The consent of the auditor under s601EA(2)(b) must be obtained before the
                                   application is lodged.

              RG 131.34      All relevant fields on the application must be completed or we will reject the
                             application for lodgement.

              RG 131.35      Where the application requires detail about an aspect of the managed
                             investment scheme, this should be completed with sufficient detail to enable
                             us to properly understand and assess the answer.


                             Constitution

              RG 131.36      The constitution must meet the requirements in s601GA and 601GB.

              RG 131.37      Under s601GA, the constitution must make adequate provision for, or
                             specify, certain prescribed matters. These include:
                             (a)   the consideration to acquire and dispose of an interest in the registered
                                   scheme;
                             (b)   the powers and rights of the responsible entity, including:
                                   (i)    powers to make investments of, or borrow or deal with, scheme
                                          property; and
                                   (ii)   rights to be paid fees or be indemnified out of scheme property;
                             (c)   the method for dealing with complaints about the registered scheme;
                             (d)   any rights of members to withdraw from the registered scheme; and
                             (e)   the process for winding up the registered scheme.

              RG 131.38      Under s601GB, the constitution of a registered scheme must be a legally
                             enforceable document between the responsible entity and members. It must
                             set out some or all of the rights, duties and liabilities of the responsible entity
                             in its operation of the scheme.

              RG 131.39      While there is no prescribed form for the constitution of a registered scheme,
                             the application must state which provisions of the constitution address the
                             matters in s601GA and 601GB. We will usually consider only these
                             provisions, and other provisions that appear related, when registering a
                             managed investment scheme.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                 Page 12
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Compliance plan

              RG 131.40      The compliance plan must set out the adequate measures the responsible
                             entity will apply to ensure the registered scheme operates in accordance with
                             the Corporations Act and its constitution: see s601HA.

              RG 131.41      A compliance plan must include the following arrangements:
                             (a)   all scheme property is clearly identified as scheme property and held
                                   separately from the property of the responsible entity and any other
                                   scheme;
                             (b)   the compliance committee functions properly;
                             (c)   scheme property is valued at regular intervals appropriate to the nature
                                   of the property;
                             (d)   the compliance plan is audited; and
                             (e)   adequate records of the scheme’s operations are kept (see s601HA(1)).

              RG 131.42      Under s601HB(1), the responsible entity may lodge a compliance plan that
                             incorporates by reference specified provisions, as in force at a specified time
                             or from time to time, of the compliance plan of another registered scheme of
                             which it is also the responsible entity.

              RG 131.43      The compliance controls in a compliance plan should be prepared
                             specifically by reference to the type of registered scheme and its investment
                             strategy. Where a compliance plan incorporates parts of another plan, the
                             compliance controls that make up that part of the incorporated plan should
                             be appropriate compliance controls for that registered scheme. Because
                             group compliance risks apply across all registered schemes the responsible
                             entity operates, we consider group compliance controls are generally
                             appropriate to be incorporated into all compliance plans for those schemes.
                             However, registered scheme level compliance controls should only be
                             incorporated where they are appropriate to the nature, scale and complexity
                             of the particular scheme. For example, incorporating parts of a compliance
                             plan that address compliance risks associated with the investment strategy
                             for a mortgage fund into an agribusiness fund plan will not be appropriately
                             tailored to addressing the specific risks of the second fund.

                                   Note 1: For more information on incorporating parts of compliance plans into other
                                   compliance plans, see Regulatory Guide 132 Funds management: Compliance and
                                   oversight (RG 132) at RG 132.89–RG 132.92.

                                   Note 2: For examples of ‘group compliance risks’ and ‘scheme-level compliance risks’,
                                   see RG 132.119 and RG 132.146–RG 132.148.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                  Page 13
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Directors’ statement

              RG 131.44      The directors of the responsible entity must declare that:
                             (a)   the contents of the constitution meet the requirements of the
                                   Corporations Act;
                             (b)   the constitution is a legally enforceable document between the members
                                   and the responsible entity; and
                             (c)   the compliance plan complies with s601HA.

              RG 131.45      The directors must make this or by lodging a signed Form 5103.

              RG 131.46      Where Form 5103 is used, each director of the responsible entity at the date
                             of lodgement must have signed the directors’ statement. Directors need to
                             take care that their statement is correct. Under s1308, if a director does not
                             take reasonable steps to ensure they do not make a false statement to ASIC,
                             the director may be guilty of an offence.

              RG 131.47      Agents for the directors cannot make the declaration. However, on occasion,
                             an alternate director may make the declaration. A director can appoint an
                             alternate director with the other directors’ approval. The alternate director will
                             act as an alternate to exercise some or all of the director’s powers for a specified
                             period. Depending on the terms of appointment, an alternate may be granted
                             the same powers and carry out the same duties as the appointing director.



Assessment by ASIC
              RG 131.48      When an application to register a managed investment scheme is lodged with
                             ASIC, we will look at whether it appears to comply with s601EB. We must
                             register the managed investment scheme within the 14-day registration
                             period, unless it appears to us that the application does not meet one or more
                             of the requirements: see s601EB.


                             Constitution

              RG 131.49      We will look at whether the constitution appears to meet the requirements in
                             s601GA and 601GB: see our guidance on these requirements in Regulatory
                             Guide 134 Funds management: Constitutions (RG 134). This regulatory
                             guide sets out the basis on which we will apply the content requirements for
                             constitutions when an application to register a managed investment scheme
                             is lodged with ASIC.

              RG 131.50      We will consider whether the constitution appears to make adequate
                             provision for or specifies:
                             (a)   the consideration that is to be paid to acquire an interest in the scheme
                                   (see Section B of RG 134);



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 14
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             (b)   the powers of the responsible entity in making investments of, or
                                   otherwise dealing with, scheme property (see RG 134.139–
                                   RG 134.145);
                             (c)   any rights to be paid fees out of scheme property or to be indemnified
                                   out of scheme property for liabilities or expenses incurred in relation to
                                   performing its duties (see RG 134.146–RG 134.160);
                             (d)   method by which complaints made by members in relation to the
                                   scheme are to be dealt with (see RG 134.161–RG 134.176);
                             (e)   any right to withdraw from a registered scheme and the adequate
                                   procedures for making and dealing with withdrawal requests (see
                                   RG 134.199–RG 134.239);
                             (f)   winding up the scheme (see Section H of RG 134).


                             Compliance plan

              RG 131.51      We will consider whether the compliance plan appears to meet the
                             requirements in s601HA: see our guidance on the requirements in RG 132.

              RG 131.52      Taking into account our guidance in RG 132, we will check whether the
                             compliance plan for a registered scheme appears to contain:
                             (a)   adequate compliance controls as set out in RG 131.41; and
                             (b)   at a minimum, adequate detail about the things set out in RG 132.85.

                                   Note: If the compliance plan incorporates provisions from the compliance plan of an
                                   earlier scheme, we will not generally check that the compliance plan of the earlier
                                   scheme contains this content at the point of registering the later scheme. However, if we
                                   have concerns about the content of the incorporated compliance plan, we may raise it at
                                   a later time.

              RG 131.53      Where a compliance plan incorporates parts of another plan, we will
                             consider whether the compliance controls which make up that part of the
                             incorporated plan appear to be appropriate compliance controls for the
                             registered scheme: see RG 132.89–RG 132.92. We will apply greater
                             scrutiny to scheme-level compliance controls that are incorporated into the
                             compliance plan to satisfy ourselves that they are appropriate to the nature,
                             scale and complexity of the particular scheme. We will generally also check
                             that the parts of the other plan have been incorporated in the way that meets
                             s601HB and ASIC Corporations (Chapter 5C—Miscellaneous Provisions)
                             Instrument 2017/125: see RG 132.89.

              RG 131.54      We will consider whether the group-level and scheme-level compliance
                             controls appear adequate to ensure compliance with the Corporations Act
                             and the scheme’s constitution. We expect adequate compliance controls to:
                             (a)   align with the responsible entity’s values, objectives and strategy (see
                                   RG 132.86);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                     Page 15
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             (b)   reflect the responsible entity’s actual procedures, processes and
                                   practices (see RG 132.87 and RG 132.99);
                             (c)   have a nexus to the compliance obligations and compliance risks (see
                                   RG 132.88);
                             (d)   be set out with enough certainty (see RG 132.93–RG 132.96);
                             (e)   be written in a clear manner so that they are usable by the target
                                   audience (see RG 132.97–RG 132.99);
                             (f)   identify functional roles responsible for carrying out a particular
                                   compliance control (see RG 132.100–RG 132.101 and RG 132.106);
                             (g)   have sufficient frequency and quantity to effectively manage the
                                   compliance risks (see RG 132.107–RG 132.109);
                             (h)   be tailored to the nature, scale and complexity of the scheme, taking
                                   into account the assets invested in by the scheme and the scheme’s
                                   investment strategy (see RG 132.85(a), RG 132.146 and RG 132.153);
                                   and
                             (i)   be reviewed and maintained (see RG 132.112–RG 132.118).

              RG 131.55      We will also consider the processes for monitoring compliance with the
                             compliance controls: see RG 132.110. We expect adequate processes to:
                             (a)   evaluate the effectiveness of compliance controls;
                             (b)   ensure that the allocation of roles is appropriate for meeting compliance
                                   obligations;
                             (c)   ensure the compliance obligations are accurate and up to date;
                             (d)   ensure that previously identified compliance failures are addressed
                                   effectively;
                             (e)   identify and address instances where compliance controls were not
                                   complied with or there were ‘near misses’;
                             (f)   note attitudes and behaviours in relation to compliance and the
                                   perceived competence of employees when dealing with issues that arise;
                             (g)   assess performance against the compliance controls; and
                             (h)   keep records of the compliance controls, results of testing and
                                   remediation undertaken.


                             Director’s statement

              RG 131.56      For an application that uses Form 5103, we will check that each and every
                             director of the responsible entity, or a properly appointed alternate, has
                             signed the form. We will check these directors were directors at the date of
                             lodgement. If an alternate director has signed, we will review the terms of
                             the alternate director’s appointment to ensure they are broad enough to
                             authorise the signing of the form.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 16
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Action we may take

              RG 131.57      During the 14-day registration period, we may ask for:
                             (a)   in rare instances, an explanation of how the managed investment
                                   scheme meets the definition of a ‘managed investment scheme’ in s9;
                             (b)   an amendment to the application or more information, particularly
                                   where an answer given does not provide sufficient detail to enable us to
                                   properly understand and assess the answer;
                             (c)   a new Form 5103 to be signed by all directors and lodged;
                             (d)   a further explanation of provisions in the constitution;
                             (e)   amendments to be made to provisions in the constitution to meet
                                   s601GA and 601GB (see our guidance in RG 134), and the constitution
                                   to be re-executed;
                             (f)   a further explanation about the contents of the compliance plan; and
                             (g)   amendments to be made to the compliance plan to meet s601HA (see
                                   our guidance in RG 132).

              RG 131.58      We will refuse to register the managed investment scheme if the responsible
                             entity or its advisers are unwilling or unable to provide this explanation,
                             further information or amended documentation as required within the 14-day
                             registration period.

              RG 131.59      We may also refuse to register the managed investment scheme if it appears
                             to us that one or more of the criteria in s601EB are not met. We may do this
                             without taking any of the steps in RG 131.57. This is because it is up to the
                             responsible entity to ensure the application meets the requirements of the
                             Corporations Act when lodged.

              RG 131.60      If we decide not to register the managed investment scheme, we will write to
                             the responsible entity setting out the decision and the reasons why. We will
                             also tell the responsible entity how to apply to the Administrative Appeals
                             Tribunal for a review if the responsible entity considers the decision is
                             wrong.

              RG 131.61      The responsible entity may choose to withdraw the application. If the
                             responsible entity takes this option, we will not be able to refund the
                             application fee or hold it over if the responsible entity decides to reapply.
                             The fact that the application has been withdrawn will be on the public
                             record.


                             Review of provisions prior to lodgement of application

              RG 131.62      When lodging an application to register the managed investment scheme, the
                             responsible entity or its advisers should state that certain provisions of the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 17
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             constitution have been reviewed before lodgement if that is the case. We
                             may refuse registration if:
                             (a)   the responsible entity or its advisers have not requested a review of
                                   provisions before lodgement;
                             (b)   the provisions appear to us to not meet the Corporations Act; and
                             (c)   we do not have sufficient time to seek information on whether the
                                   provisions will meet the Corporations Act.

                                   Note: Generally, we will not review draft provisions of a scheme constitution before it
                                   is lodged for registration, except for the provisions for the consideration to acquire an
                                   interest or calculation of the withdrawal amount. For more information on requesting a
                                   review of provisions for constitutions, see RG 134.35–RG 134.44.

              RG 131.63      We will not give priority to or expedite the processing time of an application
                             to register a managed investment scheme on the sole basis that it has been
                             preceded by a review by our staff.

              RG 131.64      Our review of the provisions in a constitution before lodgement does not
                             prevent us from raising more matters when we assess whether the
                             constitution meets the requirements under s601EB.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                      Page 18
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




C          Registering as an Australian passport fund

                               Key points

                               The Asia Region Funds Passport allows interests in passport funds
                               established and regulated in one participating economy to be sold to
                               investors in another participating economy.

                               Australian passport fund operators wishing to operate an Australian
                               passport fund under the Asia Region Funds Passport will need to comply
                               with the registration and ongoing requirements under the Passport Rules
                               agreed between participating economies, and comply with the law in their
                               home economy (Australia) and host economies.

                               ASIC and our fellow passport regulators have established arrangements for
                               cooperation and information sharing in administering the Asia Region
                               Funds Passport.




Applying to register as an Australian passport fund
              RG 131.65      An Australian passport fund operator seeking to register an Australian
                             passport fund will need to complete and submit to ASIC an application and
                             attach a copy of the PDS: see s1212.

              RG 131.66      The requirements for applying to register as an Australian passport fund are
                             in addition to the requirements for registering a managed investment scheme
                             under Ch 5C.

              RG 131.67      To register an Australian passport fund, we need to be of the opinion that:
                             (a)   the Australian passport fund operator is an eligible entity within the
                                   meaning of section 3 of Annex 2 to the Memorandum of Cooperation;
                                   and
                             (b)   the Australian passport fund is likely to be operated in compliance with
                                   the Corporations Act, including the Australian Passport Rules, and the
                                   ASIC Act.

              RG 131.68      Section 1212(1) sets out that an application may be made to register as an
                             Australian passport fund where:
                             (a)   the responsible entity or person acting on its behalf lodges the
                                   application; or
                             (b)   the proposed responsible entity or person acting on its behalf lodges the
                                   application and has also applied to register the managed investment
                                   scheme under s601EB.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 19
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




              RG 131.69      Where an application for registration of a managed investment scheme is
                             lodged at the same time as an application to register as an Australian
                             passport fund, we may:
                             (a)   begin our assessment of both applications on receiving them; and
                             (b)   ask for further information or amendments at the same time.

              RG 131.70      As an Australian passport fund must be a registered scheme, we will refuse
                             the application to register as an Australian passport fund if we also refuse the
                             application to register the managed investment scheme.

              RG 131.71      We will be unlikely to make a decision to register the Australian passport
                             fund at the same time as making a decision to register the managed
                             investment scheme. This is because generally an application to register as an
                             Australian passport fund is more complex and will take more time for us to
                             assess.



Contents of the application

                             Application

              RG 131.72      The Australian passport fund operator can complete Apply for registration as
                             an Australian passport fund, which is available through the ASIC
                             Regulatory Portal.

                                   Note 1: See our website for more information on how to register as an Australian passport
                                   fund, which includes guidance on the requirements for PDSs.

                                   Note 2: An Australian passport fund operator will need to contact us to obtain a copy of
                                   the application if it cannot complete Apply for registration as an Australian passport
                                   fund using the ASIC Regulatory Portal. Please ask online or call 1300 300 630.

              RG 131.73      The Australian passport fund operator will also need to pay the applicable
                             fee when submitting their application.

                                   Note: For more information on our fees and methods of payment, see INFO 30.

              RG 131.74      The application is made up of yes/no, multiple choice and open-ended
                             questions that take into account the purpose of each provision in the
                             Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 131.75      Where we have asked for specific representations to be given about
                             compliance with the Australian Passport Rules, we will usually rely on the
                             answer that is given to form an opinion about the likelihood of compliance.

              RG 131.76      Australian passport fund operators need to take care that their
                             representations are correct. Under s1308, if an operator does not take
                             reasonable steps to ensure it does not make a false statement to ASIC, it may
                             be guilty of an offence.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                     Page 20
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




              RG 131.77      The number of questions that an Australian passport fund operator will need
                             to answer depends on a range of factors. These include the type of assets
                             held, whether any portfolio limits have been exceeded and whether any
                             functions are delegated.

                             Delegated functions

              RG 131.78      Under the Australian Passport Rules, delegated functions remain the
                             responsibility of the Australian passport fund operator. This requires it to
                             have suitable processes in place to ensure appropriate standards of care are
                             applied by the delegate or sub-delegate in performing functions and that
                             delegates’ activities are monitored, controlled and evaluated: see
                             section 11(1) of the Australian Passport Rules.

                                   Note: Under s1211(2), the Australian Passport Rules must be substantially the same as
                                   the Passport Rules set out in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of Cooperation. The
                                   Australian Passport Rules made under s1211(1) will be taken to be substantially the
                                   same where they together with other provisions of the Corporations legislation made by
                                   the responsible Minister have substantially the same effect as the Passport Rules set out
                                   in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of Cooperation.

              RG 131.79      We consider suitable processes may include an established process for
                             delegations that incorporates set accountabilities, reporting obligations and
                             performance appraisals of delegates, along with appropriate oversight and
                             knowledge of any sub-delegations and sub-delegates. We will generally
                             check this information as part of the application.

              RG 131.80      Section 11(3) of the Australian Passport Rules sets out requirements where
                             an Australian passport fund operator delegates the investment management
                             function for more than 20% of the value of the Australian passport fund’s
                             assets. Where this happens, the investment management business of every
                             qualifying delegate must be regulated in:
                             (a)   a participating economy; or
                             (b)   an economy that has, in respect of investment management functions of
                                   collective investment schemes that may be offered to the general public,
                                   a regulatory framework that is ‘broadly similar in effectiveness’ to that
                                   in Australia (see section 11(3)).
                                   Note: Section 11(3) does not require regulation in this way for a qualifying delegate of
                                   the investment management function if the delegation is for less than 20% of the assets.

              RG 131.81      We consider that regulatory frameworks are broadly similar in effectiveness
                             to the Australian framework for the purpose of section 11(3) in the following
                             economies:
                             (a)   Hong Kong;
                             (b)   Singapore;
                             (c)   member states of the European Union; and
                             (d)   the United Kingdom.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                     Page 21
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




              RG 131.82      Our view is based on an examination of the criteria that we use to assess
                             whether a foreign regulatory regime is ‘sufficiently equivalent’.

              RG 131.83      If an Australian passport fund operator wants a further economy to be
                             recognised, it should consider the principles we have developed for granting
                             relief for foreign providers from certain Australian regulatory requirements.
                             One key requirement is that the foreign provider is subject to a sufficiently
                             equivalent overseas regulatory regime.

                                   Note: For more information on sufficient equivalence, see Regulatory Guide 54
                                   Principles for cross-border financial regulation (RG 54). These principles include the
                                   General Principles (see Table 1 of RG 54) and the Equivalence Principles (see Table 2
                                   of RG 54).

              RG 131.84      To properly assess an application for relief, we need to understand how
                             managed investments are regulated in the relevant overseas regulatory regime.

                                   Note: Applications for relief should be lodged through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.

              RG 131.85      The more complex the arrangements, the greater the likelihood more questions
                             will need to be answered and, generally, the longer the assessment period.

                             Compliance with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
                             guidelines

              RG 131.86      Under the Australian Passport Rules, a body may be required to be regulated
                             or supervised by a regulatory body in general compliance with the Basel
                             Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) guidelines: see
                             sections 7(3)(a)(iv), 13(10)(a), 21(1), 27(2)(a)(i), 28(2)(a)(i), 30(2)(a)(ii) and
                             30(4)(a) of the Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 131.87      We have adopted a three-tiered approach when considering compliance with
                             the BCBS guidelines. We consider that a body will be from a:
                             (a)   Tier 1 country—if that country is a member of the Basel Committee on
                                   Banking Supervision;

                                   Note: This includes members of the European Union, as the European Union is a
                                   member of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.

                             (b)   Tier 2 country—if that country is a participating economy; or
                             (c)   Tier 3 country—if that country is any other country.

              RG 131.88      We will accept all Tier 1 countries as complying with the BCBS guidelines.
                             This is because, as members of Basel Committee on Banking Supervision,
                             these countries are required to implement the initiatives of the committee.
                             They must meet minimum standards of implementation, but can exceed
                             them. Members of the European Union are required to meet similar
                             requirements because of their membership of the European Union.

              RG 131.89      We will also accept all Tier 2 countries, because each participating economy
                             has been subject to a Financial Sector Assessment Program country report.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                   Page 22
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




              RG 131.90      We will treat the BCBS guidelines referred to in the Australian Passport
                             Rules as referring to the core principles methodology adopted by the BCBS.


                             Eligible entity requirements

              RG 131.91      An Australian passport fund operator must meet certain requirements in the
                             Australian Passport Rules to be an eligible entity. These requirements apply
                             at the time of application, unless there is an exemption or modification. The
                             eligible entity requirements are summarised in Table 2, and the assessments
                             we apply in considering whether the requirements have been met are
                             discussed in further detail at RG 131.104–RG 131.135.

Table 2:     Summary of eligible entity requirements for Australian passport fund operators

 Requirement                                                                                     Guidance

 Assets under management test

 The Australian passport fund operator or its related parties must have assets under             RG 131.108–
 management with a total value of at least US$500 million.                                       RG 131.110

 Relevant qualifications test

 The Australian passport fund operator must have officers with the relevant qualifications set   RG 131.111–
 out in section 6 of the Australian Passport Rules.                                              RG 131.114

 Financial resources test

 The Australian passport fund operator must have equity resources of at least US$1 million,      RG 131.115–
 plus the additional capital amount: see section 7 of the Australian Passport Rules.             RG 131.118

 Organisational arrangements test

 The Australian passport fund operator must have in place processes and procedures to            RG 131.119–
 ensure it meets the organisational arrangements test in section 8 of the Australian Passport    RG 131.123
 Rules.

 Track record test

 The Australian passport fund operator or a related party must meet the track record test in     RG 131.124–
 section 9 of the Australian Passport Rules.                                                     RG 131.129

 Good standing test

 The Australian passport fund operator must meet the good standing test in section 10 of the     RG 131.130–
 Australian Passport Rules.                                                                      RG 131.135

 Home economy and home regulator test

 The Australian passport fund operator must:                                                     See section 3 of
  have its principal place of business in Australia; and                                        Annex 2 to the
                                                                                                 Memorandum of
  be regulated by ASIC as responsible entity of a registered scheme.
                                                                                                 Cooperation


              RG 131.92      One of the key objectives of the Asia Region Funds Passport is to provide a
                             high degree of investor protection. The eligibility requirements in the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                             Page 23
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Australian Passport Rules aim to ensure high standards are met and, in
                             particular, that Australian passport fund operators are well established,
                             competent, adequately resourced and adequately set up to manage retail
                             collective investment schemes.


                             Compliance with the Corporations Act, including the
                             Australian Passport Rules, and the ASIC Act

              RG 131.93      Under s1212A, we must be of the opinion that the Australian passport fund
                             operator is likely to comply with the Corporations Act, including the
                             Australian Passport Rules, and the ASIC Act. In forming this opinion, we
                             will take into account:
                             (a)   the operator’s compliance history; and
                             (b)   whether the operator’s compliance management system is sufficiently
                                   effective and responsive to allow it to demonstrate its commitment to
                                   complying with its obligations under the Corporations Act and ASIC
                                   Act (see Section B of RG 132).

              RG 131.94      In our view, there is a greater likelihood of non-compliance with the
                             Corporations Act and ASIC Act when the compliance management system is
                             not effective and responsive. To be effective and responsive, we consider the
                             compliance management system should be planned, implemented, evaluated,
                             improved and documented.

              RG 131.95      We will ask Australian passport fund operators to identify the compliance
                             controls in place to meet the requirements of the Corporations Act, including
                             the Australian Passport Rules, the frequency with which they are undertaken
                             and the frequency with which compliance with them is monitored. We have
                             included some common compliance controls and frequencies in the
                             prescribed form to make it less time consuming for an operator to describe
                             all of the compliance controls and their frequencies. However, we do not
                             expect operators to use this list if they do not have those compliance controls
                             or frequencies—in this case, operators can describe the actual compliance
                             controls and frequencies instead.

                             Permitted investments

              RG 131.96      Division 6.2 of the Australian Passport Rules governs the types of assets in
                             which an Australian passport fund is permitted to invest. Those assets
                             include investments in regulated collective investment schemes, deposits,
                             currency, derivatives, transferable securities, money market instruments and
                             depository receipts over gold. The purpose of restricting passport funds to
                             holding only certain types of assets is to secure the reputation of the Asia
                             Region Funds Passport as a regulatory arrangement that provides for liquid
                             investments that are readily able to be priced.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 24
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




              RG 131.97      The application asks questions about the permitted assets that will be held by
                             the Australian passport fund, to break down the requirements of the relevant
                             specific provision of the Australian Passport Rules into its key components.

                             Breach of the Australian Passport Rules

              RG 131.98      To submit an application to become an Australian passport fund, the
                             prospective Australian passport fund operator must be able to comply with
                             the Australian Passport Rules. Where there is a breach of the Australian
                             Passport Rules any attempt to submit an application will most likely result in
                             a decision to refuse the application. We expect prospective operators to
                             rectify any breach of the Australian Passport Rules, and have no reasonable
                             basis to expect a further breach, before submitting an application.

                             Exceeding portfolio allocation limits

              RG 131.99      The Australian Passport Rules set out portfolio allocation limits across the
                             permitted asset types: see Division 6.3 of the Australian Passport Rules.
                             These limits seek to ensure that a passport fund is well diversified across
                             different issuers and equivalent assets with similar characteristics. However,
                             it is not a breach of the Australian Passport Rules to exceed a portfolio
                             allocation limit: see section 29 of the Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 131.100     An Australian passport fund that exceeds a portfolio allocation limit must
                             cease to do so as soon as reasonably practicable, but no later than three
                             months after the date the limit was first exceeded: see section 29(2) of the
                             Australian Passport Rules. If the Australian passport fund operator satisfies
                             the independent oversight entity that an extension would be in the best
                             interests of members and receives notice in writing from the independent
                             oversight entity, this three-month period may be extended by one month
                             (with further one-month extensions allowed): see section 29(3) of the
                             Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 131.101     Where an existing registered scheme has exceeded one or more portfolio
                             allocation limits, or it is considered likely that a limit may soon be exceeded,
                             but the period in section 29(2) and (3) has not expired, it may still be
                             possible to submit an application for registration. In this case, we encourage
                             the prospective Australian passport fund operator to raise any concerns or
                             discussion points with us before lodging an application.


                             PDS

              RG 131.102     An Australian passport fund operator must also attach to its application a
                             copy of the PDS, which is required before the operator may offer interests to
                             retail clients: see s1212(2).

              RG 131.103     The PDS must comply with the requirements in s1013C and must contain
                             sufficient information on the Australian passport fund for a retail client to
                             make an informed decision about whether to purchase an interest in the fund.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 25
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




Assessment by ASIC
              RG 131.104     When an application to register as an Australian passport fund is lodged with
                             ASIC, we will assess whether it complies with s1212A.

              RG 131.105     We take a risk-based approach to assessment. We will consider each
                             question answered and the underlying risk the relevant provision in the
                             Australian Passport Rules is intended to address.


                             Assessment of the eligible entity requirements

              RG 131.106     When we assess the application to register as an Australian passport fund,
                             we may ask for more information or documents that will demonstrate the
                             Australian passport fund operator’s ability to meet the eligible entity
                             requirements. If the operator does not provide the information and
                             documentation we need, we may consider that it has not demonstrated that it
                             can meet the eligible entity requirements.

                                   Note: The eligible entity requirements applicable to an Australian passport fund
                                   operator are distinct from, and may be additional to, the AFS licensing requirements for
                                   a responsible entity.

              RG 131.107     We will refuse to register an Australian passport fund if:
                             (a)   the Australian passport fund operator or its advisers are unwilling or
                                   unable to provide more information or documentation within a
                                   reasonable time, and we are unable to form an opinion that the eligible
                                   entity test can be met; or
                             (b)   in our opinion the operator cannot meet the relevant eligible entity test.

                             Assets under management test

              RG 131.108     The Australian passport fund operator and its related parties must be
                             collectively responsible for operating financial asset collective investment
                             schemes that have total assets of at least US$500 million. This is calculated
                             using the method set out in section 3(5)(b) of the Australian Passport Rules.
                             The calculation can include any amounts in relation to which the operator or
                             related party has discretionary management powers.

              RG 131.109     We will generally check:
                             (a)   the percentage by which the test has been exceeded; and
                             (b)   whether all assets invested directly or indirectly in other collective
                                   investment schemes or discretionary management accounts operated by
                                   the Australian passport fund operator or its related parties have been
                                   excluded to avoid double counting.

              RG 131.110     We will generally ask for more information or documents where the test has
                             been exceeded by less than 1%. If the assets under management test is




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                    Page 26
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             exceeded by only a small amount, there may be a higher likelihood that the
                             Australian passport fund operator will not meet section 7 of the Australian
                             Passport Rules in the future. We may ask for the financial accounts used to
                             derive the total amount of assets under management. We may also ask for
                             more information on:
                             (a)   any related party that is being relied on;
                             (b)   how each related party is a related party within the meaning of the
                                   Memorandum of Cooperation; and
                             (c)   how the amount was calculated.

                             Relevant qualifications test

              RG 131.111     The Australian passport fund operator must have officers with the relevant
                             qualifications. We will assess whether the following officers have relevant
                             experience in an International Organization of Securities Commissions
                             (IOSCO) financial services related business:
                             (a)   CEO—the CEO must have spent 10 of the last 15 years in such an
                                   organisation and 5 of those 10 years in a managerial or supervisory role;
                             (b)   at least two executive directors (which may include the CEO)—the
                                   executive directors must have spent five of the last seven years in such
                                   an organisation; and
                             (c)   any officer or employee responsible for making, or supervising at least
                                   on a joint basis, all discretionary investment decisions for the Australian
                                   passport fund—the employee or officer must have spent either:
                                   (i)    five of the last seven years in such an organisation; or
                                   (ii)   three of the last five years in such an organisation and hold a
                                          bachelor degree or higher qualification in a relevant discipline.
                                   Note: For the definition of ‘IOSCO financial services related business’, see the key terms.

              RG 131.112     We may request more information on:
                             (a)   the ways in which the experience of the CEO, executive directors, or an
                                   officer or employee is relevant;
                             (b)   how the organisation carries on business in financial or capital markets
                                   or financial services;
                             (c)   how a qualification is the equivalent of a bachelor degree or higher
                                   qualification; and
                             (d)   how a qualification is in a relevant discipline.

              RG 131.113     If, after an application is submitted, an officer or employee no longer
                             complies with the qualifications test, the Australian passport fund operator
                             must do what is necessary to meet the test as quickly as possible.
                                   Note: An example of an officer or employee no longer complying with the
                                   qualifications test is an unexpected employee resignation.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                       Page 27
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




              RG 131.114     We are unlikely to refuse an application where there is evidence the
                             Australian passport fund operator has taken, or is taking, reasonable steps to
                             meet the qualifications test. For example, this may include advertising for
                             the vacant position or having appointed a suitable acting replacement.
                             However, we will not register the Australian passport fund until a suitable
                             replacement is found and appointed.

                             Financial resources test

              RG 131.115     The Australian passport fund operator must meet the financial resources test.
                             We will generally consider that the operator is meeting the financial
                             resources test if its equity:
                             (a)   is greater than or equal to US$21 million (we refer to this as the ‘capped
                                   scenario’);
                             (b)   is greater than US$1 million, and the total assets under management of
                                   the operator is less than or equal to US$500 million (we refer to this as
                                   the ‘additional capital amount scenario’); or
                             (c)   the total assets under management of the operator is greater than
                                   US$500 million and the equity is greater than US$1 million plus the
                                   additional capital amount (we refer to this as the ‘no additional capital
                                   amount scenario’).
                                   Note 1: In calculating the Australian passport fund operator’s equity, a guarantee or
                                   undertaking held by the operator or an approved professional indemnity (PI) insurance
                                   policy may be counted in certain circumstances.

                                   Note 2: In general, we consider that satisfying the AFS licence requirement under
                                   reg 7.6.02AAA of the Corporations Regulations 2001 to hold ‘adequate’ PI insurance
                                   will ensure that an operator meets the ‘approved PI insurance policy’ requirement if it
                                   applies.

              RG 131.116     The additional capital amount is calculated by subtracting US$500 million
                             from the total assets under management of the Australian passport fund
                             operator, and then multiplying that figure by 0.001. The additional capital
                             amount is capped at US$20 million.

              RG 131.117     We will generally ask for further information or documents where the
                             financial resources test has been exceeded by less than 5%. If the assets
                             under management test is exceeded by only a small amount, there may be a
                             higher likelihood that the Australian passport fund operator will not meet
                             section 4(3) of the Australian Passport Rules in the future. We will generally
                             require the operator to demonstrate how the requirement has been satisfied.

              RG 131.118     To assess whether the financial resources test is met, we may ask for:
                             (a)   financial accounts;
                             (b)   the guarantee or undertaking, if one is being relied on to meet the test;
                                   and
                             (c)   the approved PI insurance policy, if one is being relied on to meet the test.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                     Page 28
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Organisational arrangements test

              RG 131.119     The Australian passport fund operator must meet the organisational
                             arrangements test. We will check that the operator has in place controls,
                             processes and frameworks to ensure it will comply with all aspects of the
                             organisational arrangements test. We will generally be satisfied that the
                             operator meets the organisational arrangements test when it meets our
                             guidance.

              RG 131.120     We will apply our guidance in Section B of RG 132 when considering
                             whether the compliance framework ensures ongoing compliance. We will
                             check that the compliance management system:
                             (a)   has documented processes to comply with the Australian Passport Rules
                                   (see RG 132.180–RG 132.184);
                             (b)   identifies functional roles for carrying out each compliance control and
                                   monitoring that compliance control (see RG 132.59–RG 132.70); and
                             (c)   will be reviewed and maintained (see RG 132.78–RG 132.80).

              RG 131.121     In considering whether there is an adequate risk monitoring and management
                             process, we will apply the guidance in Section B of Regulatory Guide 259
                             Risk management systems of fund operators (RG 259). We will check
                             whether the risk management framework:
                             (a)   is documented (see RG 259.21);
                             (b)   contains a process for identifying, assessing and understanding each of
                                   the material risks of the Australian passport fund operator and fund (see
                                   RG 259.63–RG 259.76);
                             (c)   contains a process for managing the risks identified (see RG 259.78–
                                   RG 259.84);
                             (d)   contains a process for adequate oversight of the risk management
                                   systems by both the party responsible for ownership of the risk and the
                                   compliance function (see RG 259.42–RG 259.45);
                             (e)   requires a risk appetite and tolerance statement for each identified
                                   material risk (see RG 259.32–RG 259.36); and
                             (f)   will be reviewed and maintained (see RG 259.55–RG 259.56 and
                                   RG 259.87–RG 259.90).

              RG 131.122     We will apply our guidance in Regulatory Guide 181 Licensing: Managing
                             conflicts of interest (RG 181) when considering whether there are adequate
                             procedures to manage conflicts of interest. We will check whether the
                             Australian passport fund operator:
                             (a)   has a documented conflicts of interest policy (see RG 181.33 and
                                   RG 181.44–RG 181.48);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 29
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             (b)   has processes to identify actual or potential conflicts of interest (see
                                   RG 181.30 and RG 181.46);
                             (c)   has implemented processes to manage conflicts of interest (see
                                   RG 181.34);
                             (d)   has processes to assess and evaluate the actual or potential conflicts of
                                   interest and implement a response (see RG 181.28);
                             (e)   has processes to monitor compliance and identify non-compliance (see
                                   RG 181.31, RG 181.37 and RG 181.45);
                             (f)   has processes for giving adequate disclosure to allow clients to make an
                                   informed decision about how the conflict may affect the service being
                                   provided to them (see RG 181.49–RG 181.53 and RG 181.57–
                                   RG 181.63); and
                             (g)   reviews and maintains its conflicts of interest policy and processes (see
                                   RG 181.34 and RG 181.37).

              RG 131.123     We may ask for further information on the controls, processes and
                             frameworks in relation to:
                             (a)   maintaining organisational competence;
                             (b)   compliance arrangements;
                             (c)   risk monitoring and management procedures;
                             (d)   compliance frameworks; and
                             (e)   conflicts of interest.

                             Track record test

              RG 131.124     The Australian passport fund operator must meet the track record test. We
                             will assess if the operator has been responsible for a financial asset collective
                             investment scheme capable of offering interests to the general public over
                             the past five years. This test can be met if the operator relies on its own track
                             record or relies on the track record of a related party.

                                   Note: The track record test cannot be met by relying on the track record of the
                                   Australian passport fund operator and a related party.

              RG 131.125     If the scheme nominated in the application is Australian, we will check if the
                             Australian passport fund operator or its related party has held AFS licence
                             authorisations that allow it to offer interests to retail clients in a financial
                             assets registered scheme or regulated public offer superannuation fund for at
                             least the last five years. If the scheme nominated in the application is
                             foreign, we will check the website of the foreign regulator to see if the
                             related party has held a licence, registration or authorisation to operate a
                             financial asset collective investment scheme capable of being offered to the
                             general public for at least five years.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                      Page 30
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




              RG 131.126     We consider that an Australian registered scheme or regulated public offer
                             superannuation fund will meet the definition of a financial assets collective
                             investment scheme that is regulated so that it can be offered to the general
                             public.

              RG 131.127     We may not register an Australian passport fund if:
                             (a)   our registers indicate that any scheme nominated in the application is
                                   not a financial asset collective investment scheme;
                             (b)   interests in the scheme are not able to be offered to the general public;
                                   or
                             (c)   the Australian passport fund operator or related party has not been
                                   operating at least one nominated financial asset collective investment
                                   scheme at all times during the last five years.

                             Change of control

              RG 131.128     If the Australian passport fund operator meets the track record test but there
                             has been a change in control, we will generally check if a majority of the
                             directors and responsible managers have been in their roles for at least five
                             years. We will also generally check this if the operator is relying on the track
                             record of a related party and there has been a relevant change in control of
                             that related party.

              RG 131.129     Where there has been a relevant change of control, we will assess whether
                             there has been substantial continuity among staff, business processes and
                             decision-making processes. In determining whether there has been
                             substantial continuity, we will consider the extent to which:
                             (a)   the personnel responsible for operating the registered scheme who were
                                   employed by a related body corporate remained in that capacity;
                             (b)   the same operating systems and procedures were used;
                             (c)   the same resources were shared (including key portfolio management,
                                   operational and other staff);
                             (d)   both parties used the same control structures (including reporting lines
                                   and compliance systems, procedures for monitoring service providers
                                   and accounting, computer and IT systems);
                             (e)   apart from preparing and issuing new disclosure documents, the trading
                                   or other operational processes have substantially continued following
                                   the change in control; and
                             (f)   anything suggests that there will be a change in the substantial
                                   continuity of staff, business processes and decision-making processes.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 31
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Good standing test

              RG 131.130     The Australian passport fund operator must meet the good standing test. We
                             will ask for an overseas criminal history check for any jurisdiction the
                             relevant party has resided in during the past 10 years. We will not require an
                             Australian criminal history check if the relevant party has never resided in
                             Australia during the past 10 years.

                                   Note 1: A relevant party includes the Australian passport fund operator, an officer of the
                                   operator, any entity that controls the operator and offers of any entity that controls the
                                   operator.

                                   Note 2: Criminal history and bankruptcy checks must not be more than 12 months old.

              RG 131.131     If an overseas criminal history or bankruptcy check has not been obtained, a
                             statutory declaration may be provided. The statutory declaration must
                             explain the efforts made to obtain the checks and state the criminal history
                             and bankruptcy history of the relevant party.

              RG 131.132     In assessing whether the Australian passport fund operator meets the good
                             standing test, we will:
                             (a)   review the criminal history check and bankruptcy check (or statutory
                                   declaration);
                             (b)   check our systems and data we have collected to see whether any
                                   previous events give a reason to believe that a relevant party is not of
                                   good standing; and
                             (c)   consider the number of previous events and the seriousness and age of
                                   any allegations or breaches when forming an opinion about whether the
                                   relevant party is of good standing. Where any previous event relates to
                                   dishonesty or incompetence, it will generally indicate that there is a
                                   material risk that the relevant party does not have the integrity or
                                   competence to operate or be involved in the operation of an Australian
                                   passport fund.

              RG 131.133     We may request more information, including an explanation of any previous
                             events and whether there were any mitigating factors. We may also request
                             an original or certified copy of the criminal history check, bankruptcy check
                             or statutory declaration.

              RG 131.134     Where we have concerns about the conduct of a relevant party, we may
                             undertake surveillance to test ongoing compliance.

              RG 131.135     We may seek information from another entity about any regulatory action
                             taken or disputes. This includes from an Australian or foreign regulatory
                             body or dispute resolution service.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                     Page 32
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Assessment of compliance with the Corporations Act,
                             including the Australian Passport Rules, and the ASIC Act

              RG 131.136     When we assess the application to register as an Australian passport fund,
                             we will pay particular attention to answers that provide descriptions about
                             compliance controls, and procedures to monitor compliance with the
                             compliance controls. We will look to ensure the compliance controls are
                             consistent with our guidance in RG 132.74 and RG 132.108. This includes
                             whether:
                             (a)   there is more than one compliance control for the compliance
                                   obligation;
                             (b)   the frequencies for carrying out the compliance controls or processes to
                                   monitor compliance with the compliance controls are sufficient;
                             (c)   the compliance controls use clear, definite and meaningful words to
                                   describe what is done; and
                             (d)   the compliance controls are appropriate to the compliance obligation.

              RG 131.137     Where we have concerns about the compliance controls or procedures to
                             monitor compliance with the compliance controls described in the
                             application, we will also ask for information on compliance with
                             requirements in the Corporations Act and ASIC Act. This is because many
                             compliance controls that an Australian passport fund operator may
                             implement are also relevant to compliance with similar requirements in the
                             Corporations Act that are not part of the Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 131.138     We may ask for more information or documents that will demonstrate the
                             Australian passport fund operator’s ability to meet the requirements in the
                             Corporations Act, including the Australian Passport Rules, and the ASIC
                             Act. For the application to be granted, the operator must be able to provide
                             the information and documents we need to demonstrate that it is likely to
                             meet these requirements.

                             Conflict between the constitution and Australian Passport Rules

              RG 131.139     Where the constitution of an existing registered scheme allows the
                             Australian passport fund to do something that is not permitted under the
                             Australian Passport Rules, we will conduct a closer examination of the
                             compliance controls that the Australian passport fund operator has in place
                             to prevent a breach of the Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 131.140     An Australian passport fund operator will need to amend its constitution to
                             be consistent with section 4 of the Australian Passport Rules. Where we see
                             any inconsistency, we will ask for the constitution to be amended before
                             registration.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 33
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Exceptional circumstances and reasonable actions

                RG 131.141 Some specific provisions in the Australian Passport Rules allow an action to
                             be taken in ‘exceptional circumstances’. Where the Australian Passport
                             Rules allow something to be done in exceptional circumstances, we will
                             assess the answers in each case to determine whether exceptional
                             circumstances exist or are likely to occur. We will look for something
                             unusual or out of the ordinary in the circumstances that substantiates or
                             warrants the action, taking into account the purpose of the specific provision.

                                   Note: For more information on which sections of the Australian Passport Rules allow
                                   actions to be taken in exceptional circumstances, see sections 9(2)(b)(ii), 25(1)(c) and
                                   33(3) of the Australian Passport Rules

              RG 131.142     Some specific provisions in the Australian Passport Rules allow, or require,
                             an action to be taken only where it is ‘reasonable’. Where the Australian
                             Passport Rules require something to be reasonable, we will assess the
                             answers in each case by applying a standard of objective rationality, taking
                             into account all of the facts.

                             Permitted investments

              RG 131.143     If the Australian passport fund operator lodges an application without
                             divesting assets that do not meet section 19 of the Australian Passport Rules,
                             we will refuse the application on the basis that it is against the public
                             interest. We consider that allowing existing registered schemes to hold non-
                             complying investments, but requiring new registered schemes to only hold
                             assets permitted under section 19, is unfair and not within the spirit of the
                             purpose for restricting assets.

                                   Note: Section 18 of the Australian Passport Rules provides that an Australian passport
                                   fund can hold goods and services, as long as they are not held for investment purposes.
                                   These are not considered to be assets of the Australian passport fund for the purpose of
                                   RG 131.143.

              RG 131.144     When we assess the answers given, we will focus on the purpose of the
                             specific provision and the objectives of the Australian Passport Rules.

                             Exceeding portfolio allocation limits

              RG 131.145     If an existing registered scheme has exceeded one or more of the portfolio
                             allocation limits, and the period allowed in section 29(2) and (3) of the
                             Australian Passport Rules has expired, we will not register the prospective
                             Australian passport fund until this is remedied.

              RG 131.146     If an application is submitted and one or more portfolio allocation limits has
                             been exceeded, we:
                             (a)   will generally pay particular attention to the controls the Australian
                                   passport fund operator has in place to monitor the investment portfolio;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                      Page 34
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             (b)   will generally look into whether any extension under section 29(3) is
                                   consistent with our expectations for proper assessment by the
                                   independent oversight entity of whether it was in the best interests of
                                   members not to bring the limit within the Australian Passport Rules.
                                   This is particularly the case if there has been more than one extension;
                             (c)   may request more information and/or supporting documentation,
                                   including:
                                   (i)     why a particular limit has been exceeded;
                                   (ii)    why the limit continues to be exceeded;
                                   (iii)   when the operator anticipates the Australian passport fund will
                                           operate within the limit;
                                   (iv)    the steps that are actively being taken to bring the Australian
                                           passport fund within the limit;
                                   (v)     whether the operator acquired an asset or entered into a derivative
                                           or securities lending arrangement that resulted in the limit being
                                           exceeded;
                                   (vi)    the number of extensions of time that have been sought and
                                           granted by the independent oversight entity;
                                   (vii) the earliest date the limit was exceeded; and

                                   (viii) the approximate percentage by which the Australian passport fund
                                           exceeds the limit; and
                             (d)   may ask for more information to enable us to fully understand the
                                   circumstances causing the limit to be exceeded and the actions being
                                   taken to resolve the matter. This is in order for us to be satisfied the
                                   time within which the operator expects to operate outside the limits is
                                   reasonable.

              RG 131.147     We will be unlikely to register the Australian passport fund while the
                             registered scheme continues to exceed one or more portfolio allocation limits.


                             Assessment of the PDS

              RG 131.148     We may review the PDS as part of our assessment of the application to
                             register as an Australian passport fund. If we review the PDS, we may ask for:
                             (a)   more information to understand the contents of the PDS; or
                             (b)   additional or corrective disclosure to be made to the PDS.

              RG 131.149     The fact that we do not comment on the PDS does not indicate approval of
                             the content of the PDS, or stop us from taking subsequent action against the
                             Australian passport fund operator.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                               Page 35
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




Decision by ASIC
              RG 131.150     There is no statutory timeframe for us to make a decision about whether to
                             register an Australian passport fund. The time taken for a decision to be
                             made is likely to be affected by the nature, scale and complexity of the
                             Australian passport fund operator and the fund, and the quality of the
                             information provided in support of an application. An Australian passport
                             fund operator can minimise the time it takes us to assess the application by
                             providing all the information we ask for and promptly responding to all other
                             queries we may raise. Not doing so will delay our assessment or may mean
                             we will refuse the application because we are unable to form an opinion that
                             the operator is an eligible entity or likely to comply with the Corporations
                             Act or ASIC Act.

              RG 131.151     If we decide to refuse registration, we will write to the Australian passport
                             fund operator setting out the decision and the reasons why. We will also tell
                             the operator how to apply to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for a
                             review if it considers the decision is wrong.

              RG 131.152     The Australian passport fund operator may choose to withdraw the
                             application. If it takes this option, we will not be able to refund the
                             application fee or hold it over if the operator decides to reapply. The fact that
                             the application has been withdrawn will be on the public record.



Entry on the Asia Region Funds Passport Register
              RG 131.153     We are required to establish and maintain an Asia Region Funds Passport
                             Register, or ensure that such a register is established and maintained: see
                             s1214.

              RG 131.154     The Asia Region Funds Passport Register includes details of Australian
                             passport funds and notified foreign passport funds. The register includes
                             details of Australian passport funds that have been deregistered and foreign
                             passport funds that have been denotified. It may also include details of other
                             passport funds: see s1214(3).

              RG 131.155     When an Australian passport fund becomes registered we will:
                             (a)   assign it a unique Australian Passport Fund Registration Number
                                   (APFRN) (see s1212A(2)(a)); and
                             (b)   ensure that details of the Australian passport fund are entered on the
                                   Asia Region Funds Passport Register (see s1212A(2)(b)).

              RG 131.156     A person will be able to search the Asia Region Funds Passport Register to
                             obtain details about Australian passport funds.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 36
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




D          Registering a CCIV and sub-funds

                               Key points

                               This section sets out how to register a CCIV and initial sub-fund(s). A
                               corporate director must:
                               • meet the CCIV registration requirements (see RG 131.157);
                               • prepare a CCIV registration application (see RG 131.158–RG 131.177);
                                 and
                               • lodge the application with ASIC and pay the lodgement fee (see
                                 RG 131.178–RG 131.180).

                               This section also covers:
                               • how we process an application (see RG 131.182–RG 131.185);
                               • how to register further sub-funds (see RG 131.186–RG 131.191); and
                               • how to register a sub-fund that is an Australian passport fund (see
                                 RG 131.199–RG 131.200).




Meeting the CCIV registration requirements
              RG 131.157     For a company to be registered as a CCIV, the requirements in s1222 of the
                             Corporations Act must be met. These requirements are that:
                             (a)   the company must be a company limited by shares;
                             (b)   the company must have a constitution that meets the constitution
                                   requirements in Subdiv C of Pt 8B.3 of the Corporations Act;
                             (c)   the sole proposed director of the company (i.e. the corporate director of
                                   the CCIV) must be:
                                   (i)     a public company that holds an AFS licence authorising it to
                                           operate the business and conduct the affairs of a retail CCIV;
                                   (ii)    a wholesale CCIV; or
                                   (iii)   both;
                             (d)   the company must, on registration, have at least one sub-fund;
                             (e)   each sub fund of the company must, on registration, have at least one
                                   member;
                             (f)   if the company is intended at the time of registration to be a retail CCIV,
                                   the company must have a compliance plan and compliance plan auditor; and
                             (g)   the corporate director must give notice on the CCIV registration
                                   application form about whether the CCIV is intended to be a retail
                                   CCIV or a wholesale CCIV.
                                   Note: Any CCIV and sub-fund requested to be registered must be consistent with the
                                   corporate director’s AFS licence authorisation.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                 Page 37
                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




Contents of the application
              RG 131.158     Your application must include the documents in Table 3.

Table 3:     Application requirements for registering a retail or wholesale CCIV

 Document                                  Retail CCIV                           Wholesale CCIV

 Application form                          Form 5201 Application for             Form 5201 Application for
                                           registration of a corporate           registration of a corporate
                                           collective investment vehicle         collective investment vehicle

 Copy of the CCIV’s constitution:          Must meet s1223B, 1223G and           Must meet s1223B and 1223F
 see s1222A(5)                             1223H

 Copy of the CCIV’s compliance             Must be signed by all directors and   Not required: see s1226(3)
 plan: see s1222A(6)                       meet s1226A


              RG 131.159     To register a CCIV, the corporate director must complete Form 5201. It must
                             complete and lodge a separate Form 5201 for each CCIV proposed to be
                             registered

              RG 131.160     We will assess whether your application complies with the requirements of
                             the Corporations Act and confirm whether the corporate director holds the
                             appropriate AFS licence authorisations to operate the CCIV. If it appears
                             that the application does not meet the legislative requirements, we may ask
                             you for further information or to provide additional documents.

              RG 131.161     In the form to the corporate director must provide:
                             (a)   the proposed name of the CCIV;
                             (b)   the name and address of the registered office of the corporate director;
                             (c)   notice about whether a CCIV is intended at the time of application to be
                                   a retail CCIV or a wholesale CCIV;
                             (d)   details of the consenting compliance plan auditor (for a retail CCIV
                                   only);
                             (e)   the proposed name of each sub‑fund to be registered with the CCIV
                                   (initial sub-fund); and
                             (f)   for each initial sub‑fund(s):
                                   (i)    the name and address of each member of the sub-fund; and
                                   (ii)   the shares that are referable to the sub‑fund.

              RG 131.162     Please note that specific requirements apply to the name of a CCIV (see
                             s1222E) and a sub-fund (see s1222V(1), (2) and (3)).

              RG 131.163     The terms ‘retail CCIV’ and ‘wholesale CCIV’ are defined in s1222J. In
                             general, if there is at least one investor who acquired securities as a ‘retail




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                  Page 38
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             client’, the CCIV will be a retail CCIV: see s1222K for other examples of
                             when a CCIV is a retail CCIV. Otherwise, the CCIV is a wholesale CCIV.

              RG 131.164     The corporate director will also be asked to select the dominant asset type
                             that is relevant to the initial sub-fund(s). We have identified the following
                             asset types for registration purposes:
                             (a)   financial assets;
                             (b)   derivatives;
                             (c)   direct real property;
                             (d)   film;
                             (e)   mortgages;
                             (f)   crypto-assets;
                             (g)   commodities; and
                             (h)   primary production.

              RG 131.165     The AFS licence of the corporate director will specify the particular type(s)
                             of assets that can be held by the retail CCIV or wholesale CCIV. The
                             corporate director must only select an asset type that is consistent with the
                             asset type(s) specified on their licence.

              RG 131.166     Some corporate directors may have a condition imposed on their AFS
                             licence limiting their CCIV operations to one retail CCIV that has a single
                             sub-fund. If the corporate director’s AFS licence includes this condition, it
                             may only apply to register one retail CCIV and a single sub-fund. The
                             limitation to a single sub-fund does not apply to wholesale CCIVs.


                             Constitution requirements

              RG 131.167     All CCIVs must have a constitution. As outlined in Table 3, the corporate
                             director must lodge a copy of the constitution with the application.

              RG 131.168     The constitution of a retail CCIV must comply with the content requirements
                             in s1223G and 1223H. The statutory procedures required to adopt, modify or
                             repeal the constitution of a retail CCIV are set out in s1223D(2).

              RG 131.169     The constitution of a wholesale CCIV must specify the requirements that
                             must be complied with for the CCIV to modify its constitution or repeal its
                             constitution and replace it with a new one: see s1223F.

              RG 131.170     Aspects of the guidance in RG 134 are relevant to the content of the
                             constitution of a CCIV.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 39
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Compliance plan requirements

              RG 131.171     A retail CCIV must have a compliance plan. As outlined in Table 3, a copy
                             of the compliance plan, signed by all directors of the corporate director, must
                             be lodged with the application.

              RG 131.172     If a wholesale CCIV becomes a retail CCIV, a copy of the compliance plan
                             must be lodged with ASIC within 14 days of becoming a retail CCIV: see
                             s1226.

              RG 131.173     The compliance plan of a retail CCIV must set out adequate measures that
                             the corporate director is to apply in fulfilling its responsibilities in relation to
                             the CCIV, to ensure compliance with the Corporations Act and the CCIV’s
                             constitution: see s1226A.

              RG 131.174     The compliance plan of a retail CCIV may incorporate specified provisions
                             of a compliance plan of another CCIV, provided both CCIVs have the same
                             corporate director: see s1226B.

              RG 131.175     The corporate director should take into account the nature, scale and
                             complexity of the CCIV(s) proposed to be operated when preparing the
                             compliance plan. If a compliance plan incorporates parts of another plan, the
                             compliance controls that make up that part of the incorporated plan should
                             be appropriate compliance controls for that CCIV.

              RG 131.176     As group compliance risks apply across all CCIVs that the corporate director
                             operates, group compliance controls can be incorporated into all compliance
                             plans for those CCIVs. However, compliance controls should only be
                             incorporated when they are appropriate to the nature, scale and complexity
                             of the particular CCIV.

              RG 131.177     Aspects of RG 132 are relevant to those with oversight responsibilities of
                             retail CCIVs, including corporate directors, compliance plan auditors and
                             annual implementation reviewers. RG 132 also includes guidance on the
                             compliance and oversight obligations these entities must meet under the
                             Corporations Act and other legal obligations.



Lodging the application form and paying the fee
              RG 131.178     Form 5201 must be printed, completed, signed and lodged by postal mail. It
                             is not possible to lodge the form online or by email.

              RG 131.179     To lodge your application, send the completed and signed Form 5201 and
                             accompanying documents to our mailing centre:
                                   Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                                   PO Box 4000, Gippsland Mail Centre VIC 3841




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 40
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




              RG 131.180     A corporate director cannot lodge a CCIV registration application before
                             receiving an AFS licence. If it does, we will refuse the application on the
                             basis that the proposed corporate director does not hold an AFS licence with
                             the relevant authorisation that covers the operation the CCIV.

              RG 131.181     The corporate director will also need to pay the applicable fee when
                             submitting their application.

                                   Note: For more information on our fees and methods of payment, see INFO 30.




Assessment by ASIC
              RG 131.182     We will assess whether the application complies with the requirements of the
                             Corporations Act and confirm whether the corporate director holds the
                             appropriate AFS licence authorisations to operate the CCIV.

              RG 131.183     If it appears that the application does not meet the legislative requirements,
                             we may ask the corporate director for further information or to provide
                             additional documents.

              RG 131.184     Once an application to register a CCIV has been processed, we will:
                             (a)   give the CCIV an ACN;
                             (b)   give the initial sub-fund(s) an Australian registered fund number
                                   (ARFN);
                             (c)   register the CCIV and the initial sub-fund(s); and
                             (d)   send the corporate director a certificate of registration.

              RG 131.185     We will generally provide confirmation of registration within two business
                             days of receiving the application.



Registering further sub-funds
              RG 131.186     A CCIV must have at least one sub-fund to be registered and, to remain
                             registered, it must continue to have at least one registered sub-fund.

              RG 131.187     If the corporate director has already registered a CCIV with an initial sub-
                             fund(s) and would like to register further sub-funds, it must complete
                             Form 5202 Application for registration of a sub-fund of a corporate
                             collective investment vehicle. A separate Form 5201 must be completed and
                             lodged for each CCIV proposed to be registered.

              RG 131.188     The corporate director must include the proposed name of the sub-fund, and
                             select the dominant asset kind relevant to the sub-fund, when completing
                             Form 5202.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                  Page 41
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




              RG 131.189     If the corporate director’s AFS licence includes a condition limiting its
                             operations to one retail CCIV with a single retail sub-fund, it must not apply
                             to register additional retail CCIVs or sub-funds of the retail CCIV until it
                             AFS licence is varied to remove the condition.

              RG 131.190     Before registering a new CCIV sub-fund, we encourage the corporate
                             director to review the CCIV constitution and compliance plan (for retail
                             CCIVs) to ensure ongoing compliance with the Corporations Act (e.g. there
                             may be differences in pricing, fees, liquidity and redemptions rights or risks
                             relating to a sub-fund that impact the provisions required in the constitution
                             and/or compliance plan for the CCIV).

              RG 131.191     Please note that applications to register further sub-funds do not need to
                             include a copy of the CCIV’s constitution or compliance plan.


                             Lodging applications for further sub-funds

              RG 131.192     Form 5202 must be printed, completed, signed and lodged. It is not possible
                             to lodge the form online or by email.

              RG 131.193     To lodge your application, send the completed and signed Form 5202 and
                             accompanying documents to our mailing centre:
                                   Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                                   PO Box 4000, Gippsland Mail Centre VIC 3841

              RG 131.194     A corporate director or its advisers should ensure its existing AFS licence
                             covers the further sub-fund. If a licence variation is required, the corporate
                             director should not lodge its sub-fund registration application until the AFS
                             licence is varied. Otherwise, the application will be refused on the basis that
                             the proposed corporate director does not hold an AFS licence with an
                             authorisation that covers the sub-fund(s).

              RG 131.195     There is no fee to register further sub-funds.


                             How we process an application to register a further sub-fund

              RG 131.196     We will assess whether the application complies with the requirements of the
                             Corporations Act. If it appears that the application does not meet the
                             legislative requirements, we will ask the corporate director to amend its
                             responses on the application form.

              RG 131.197     Once an application to register a sub-fund has been processed, we will:
                             (a)   give the sub-fund an ARFN (see s1222S(3));
                             (b)   register the sub-fund; and
                             (c)   send the corporate director a letter confirming the registration.

              RG 131.198     We will generally provide confirmation of registration within two business days.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 42
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




Registering a sub-fund of a CCIV as an Australian passport fund
              RG 131.199     A sub-fund of a CCIV can be registered as an Australian passport fund for
                             the purposes of the Asia Region Funds Passport. If the sub-fund of a CCIV
                             registers as an Australian passport fund, the corporate director of the CCIV
                             will be the passport fund operator.

              RG 131.200     For additional guidance on applying for a fund to become an Australian
                             passport fund, see our Asia Region Funds Passport webpage and RG 138.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 43
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               ACN                       Australian Company number

                               AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                         the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                         on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                         services
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                               Annex 3 (for              An annex to the Memorandum of Cooperation
                               example)

                               APFRN                     Australian Passport Fund Registration Number—the
                                                         number assigned to an Australian passport fund under
                                                         s1212A(2)(a) of the Corporations Act and issued to a
                                                         notified foreign passport fund for identification purposes

                               ARFN                      Australian registered fund number

                               Asia Region Funds         An agreement between economies in the Asia region that
                               Passport                  allows passport funds established and regulated in one
                                                         participating economy to offer interests to investors in
                                                         another participating economy

                               Asia Region Funds         An ASIC register that will include prescribed details of
                               Passport Register         Australian passport funds, notified foreign passport funds,
                                                         deregistered Australian passport funds and funds that
                                                         have been removed as notified foreign passport funds

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                         2001

                               ASIC Regulatory           The internet channel that allows authenticated regulated
                               Portal                    entities to interact securely with ASIC, which can be
                                                         accessed at the portal landing page

                               assets under              A requirement in the Australian Passport Rules reflecting
                               management test           the minimum total value of assets under management
                                                         that an Australian passport fund operator must have to be
                                                         an eligible entity within the meaning of section 3 of
                                                         Annex 2 to the Memorandum of Cooperation

                               Australia                 Has the meaning given for the term ‘this jurisdiction’ in s5
                                                         of the Corporations Act

                               Australian passport       A registered scheme or sub-fund of a retail CCIV that is
                               fund                      also registered as a passport fund under Pt 8A.3 of the
                                                         Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                Page 44
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               Australian Passport       The Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018 made under
                               Rules                     s1211 and 1211A of the Corporations Act

                               Basel Committee on        An international committee formed to develop standards
                               Banking Supervision       for banking regulation

                               BCBS guidelines           Banking guidelines and standards developed by the
                                                         Basel Committee on Banking Supervision

                               CCIV                      A corporate collective investment vehicle—a company
                                                         that is registered as a corporate collective investment
                                                         vehicle under the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s9 of the Corporations
                                                           Act.

                               Ch 5C (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 5C), unless otherwise specified

                               collective investment     Has the meaning given in section 55 of the Australian
                               scheme                    Passport Rules

                               corporate director        The company named in ASIC’s record of the CCIV’s
                                                         registration as the corporate director or temporary
                                                         corporate director of the CCIV
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s1224(3) of the
                                                           Corporations Act.

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                               Regulations

                               financial resources       A requirement in section 7 of the Australian Passport
                               test                      Rules regarding the financial resources that must be held
                                                         by an Australian passport fund operator for it to be an
                                                         eligible entity within the meaning of section 3 of Annex 2
                                                         to the Memorandum of Cooperation

                               foreign passport fund     A passport fund with a home economy other than
                                                         Australia

                               Form 5100 (for            An ASIC form (in this example numbered 5100)
                               example)

                               good standing test        A requirement in section 10 of the Australian Passport
                                                         Rules regarding the good standing of an Australian
                                                         passport fund operator for it to be an eligible entity within
                                                         the meaning of section 3 of Annex 2 to the Memorandum
                                                         of Cooperation

                               home economy              The participating economy in which a passport fund is
                                                         first registered, approved or authorised as a regulated
                                                         collective investment scheme




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                      Page 45
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               home regulator            The passport regulator in a passport fund’s home
                                                         economy

                               host economy              A participating economy that is not a passport fund’s
                                                         home economy and either:
                                                          permits the fund to offer interests in the fund in that
                                                           economy under the Asia Region Funds Passport; or
                                                          has accepted an application from the fund to offer
                                                           interests in the fund in that economy under the Asia
                                                           Region Funds Passport (but not to register the fund as
                                                           a passport fund in that economy)

                               INFO 30 (for              An ASIC information sheet (in this example numbered 30)
                               example)

                               IOSCO                     The International Organization of Securities Commissions

                               IOSCO financial           An entity that:
                               services related           carries on business in a financial, capital markets or
                               business                    financial services industry and is regulated in an
                                                           IOSCO jurisdiction;
                                                          provides legal, accounting or compliance services
                                                           related to that kind of business; or
                                                          provides consultation services relating to, and
                                                           addressing particular issues arising in, the operation of
                                                           collective investment schemes within the meaning of
                                                           section 55 of the Australian Passport Rules

                               IOSCO jurisdiction        An administrative region in which the securities regulator
                                                         is an ordinary or associate member of IOSCO within the
                                                         meaning of section 55 of Australian Passport Rules

                               managed investment        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                               scheme

                               member                    A member of a registered scheme

                               Memorandum of             The Memorandum of Cooperation on the Establishment
                               Cooperation               and Implementation of the Asia Region Funds Passport

                               notified foreign          A foreign passport fund that has become a notified
                               passport fund             foreign passport fund under s1213C of the Corporations
                                                         Act

                               organisational            A requirement in section 8 of the Australian Passport
                               arrangements test         Rules regarding the processes and procedures an
                                                         Australian passport fund operator must have in place to
                                                         be an eligible entity within the meaning of section 3 of
                                                         Annex 2 to the Memorandum of Cooperation




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                Page 46
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               participating economy     An economy that is a participant under the Memorandum
                                                         of Cooperation (while it is in effect) and has:
                                                          advised the Asia Region Funds Passport Joint
                                                           Committee that it has implemented the Asia Region
                                                           Funds Passport; and
                                                          not withdrawn from the Memorandum of Cooperation

                               passport fund             A regulated collective investment scheme, or sub-fund of
                                                         a regulated collective investment scheme, registered as a
                                                         passport fund in a participating economy
                                                           Note: Some regulated collective investment schemes, or sub-
                                                           funds of regulated collective investment schemes, that have
                                                           been deregistered as passport funds remain subject to
                                                           obligations as if they were still a passport fund.

                               passport fund             An entity that operates a passport fund
                               operator

                               passport regulator        The entity that regulates passport funds in a participating
                                                         economy
                                                           Note: See also the definition of ‘passport regulator’ in section
                                                           55 of the Australian Passport Rules.

                               Passport Rules            The requirements in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of
                                                         Cooperation, as incorporated into the domestic law of a
                                                         participating economy

                               PDS                       A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that must
                                                         be given to a retail client for the offer or issue of a
                                                         financial product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                         Corporations Act
                                                           Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                               PI insurance              Professional indemnity insurance

                               Pt 7.9 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example) number
                                                         7.9), unless otherwise specified

                               reg 7.6.02AAA (for        A regulation of the Corporations Regulations 2001 (in this
                               example)                  example numbered 7.6.02AAA)

                               registered scheme         A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                         s601EB of the Corporations Act

                               regulated collective      A regulated collective investment scheme as defined by
                               investment scheme         the Passport Rules for a participating economy

                               responsible entity        A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined in
                                                         s9 of the Corporations Act

                               retail CCIV               A CCIV that satisfies the retail CCIV test in s1222K of the
                                                         Corporations Act or is notified as a retail CCIV under
                                                         s1222L of the Corporations Act.
                                                           Note: This is a definition in s1222J.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                      Page 47
                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               retail client             A client as defined in s761G of the Corporations Act and
                                                         Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Regulations

                               s601EB (for example)      A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 601EB), unless otherwise specified

                               scheme                    A managed investment scheme as defined in s9 of the
                                                         Corporations Act

                               sub-fund                  Has the meaning given in s1222Q of the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: A sub-fund is established on the day on which it is
                                                           registered: see s1222T.

                               Tier 1 country            A country that is a member of the Basel Committee on
                                                         Banking Supervision

                               Tier 2 country            A country that is a participating economy

                               Tier 3 country            A country that is any country other than a Tier 1 or Tier 2
                                                         country

                               track record test         A requirement in section 9 of the Australian Passport
                                                         Rules regarding the track record of an Australian
                                                         passport fund operator for it to be an eligible entity within
                                                         the meaning of section 3 of Annex 2 to the Memorandum
                                                         of Cooperation

                               wholesale CCIV            A CCIV that is not a retail CCIV.
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s1222J of the
                                                           Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                                    Page 48
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             Australian passport fund, Australian Passport Rules, CCIV, compliance plan,
                             constitution, corporate collective investment vehicle, corporate director,
                             directors’ statement, eligible entity requirements, passport fund operator,
                             registered managed investment scheme, registered scheme, registration,
                             responsible entity


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 1 Applying for and varying an AFS licence

                             RG 54 Principles for cross-border financial regulation

                             RG 132 Funds management: Compliance and oversight

                             RG 134 Funds management: Constitutions

                             RG 138 Foreign passport funds

                             RG 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest

                             RG 259 Risk management systems of fund operators


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 30 Fees for commonly lodged documents

                             INFO 272 How to register a corporate collective investment vehicle and
                             sub-fund


                             Consultation papers

                             CP 296 Funds management

                             CP 360 Corporate collective investment vehicles: Preparing for the
                             commencement of the new regime


                             Reports

                             REP 582 Response to submissions on CP 296 Funds management

                             REP 728 Response to submissions on CP 360 Corporate collective
                             investment vehicles: Preparing for the commencement of the new regime




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 49
                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 131: Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund




                             Legislative instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Chapter 5C—Miscellaneous Provisions) Instrument
                             2017/125


                             Legislation

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001

                             Australian Passport Rules, sections 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 18, 19, 21, 25,
                             27, 28, 29, 30, 33

                             Corporations Act 2001, Chs 5C, 8B; Pt 7.9, Div 2; Pt 8B.3, Subdiv C; s9,
                             601EA, 601EB, 601FA, 601GA, 601GB, 601HA, 601HB, 601HC, 601HG,
                             1013C, 1211, 1211A, 1212, 1212A, 1214, 1222, 1222A, 1222E, 1222J,
                             1222K, 1222V, 1222S, 1223B, 1223D, 1223F, 1223G, 1223H, 1226, 1226A,
                             1226B, 1308

                             Corporations Regulations 2001, reg 7.6.02AAA


                             ASIC forms

                             Apply for registration as an Australian passport fund (available through the
                             ASIC Regulatory Portal)

                             Form 5100 Application for registration of a managed investment scheme

                             Form 5103 Directors’ statement relating to application for registration of a
                             managed investment scheme

                             Form 5201 Application for registration of a corporate collective investment
                             vehicle

                             Form 5202 Application for registration of a sub-fund of a corporate
                             collective investment vehicle


                             Other documents

                             Memorandum of Cooperation




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2022                                            Page 50
