REGULATORY GUIDE 125

Share and interest purchase
plans

August 2019




About this guide
This guide is for:
    ASX-listed companies, their advisers and investors involved in offers of
     shares under share purchase plans; and
    ASX-listed managed investment schemes, their advisers and investors
     involved in offers of interests under interest purchase plans.

It explains the conditional relief we have given to allow offers of shares or
interests to existing holders without a prospectus or a Product Disclosure
Statement (PDS).
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in August 2019 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 125 Share purchase plans, issued June
                                     2009, reissued March 2010
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 125 Small offers of shares to existing
                                     shareholders by listed companies: Share purchase plans, issued March
                                     1997, rebadged as a regulatory guide July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                              Page 2
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Meaning of ‘purchase plans’ .............................................................. 4
                                    Our approach to relief from Ch 6D and Pt 7.9 ................................... 4
                                    Our relief for purchase plans ............................................................. 5
                             B      Conditions of relief .......................................................................... 8
                                    Monetary limit of $30,000 .................................................................. 8
                                    Offers to registered holders ............................................................... 9
                                    Quotation and continuity of quotation .............................................. 11
                                    Lodging a cleansing notice .............................................................. 13
                                    Conditions relating to the issuer ...................................................... 14
                                    Pricing of the offer ............................................................................ 15
                                    Disclosure in the offer document ..................................................... 15
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 16
                             Related information ............................................................................... 18




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                                        Page 3
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               We have given relief under ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest
                               Purchase Plans) Instrument 2019/547 to allow:
                               • ASX-listed companies to offer shares to existing holders under a share
                                 purchase plan without a prospectus; and
                               • ASX-listed managed investment schemes to issue interests under an
                                 interest purchase plan to existing holders without a Product Disclosure
                                 Statement (PDS).

                               Our relief is subject to certain conditions: see RG 125.8 and Section B.




Meaning of ‘purchase plans’
              RG 125.1       For the purposes of this guide, a purchase plan is a plan for the offer of:
                             (a)   shares to existing shareholders of a company listed on ASX; and/or
                             (b)   interests to existing members of a managed investment scheme listed on
                                   ASX.

                                   Note: In this guide, we refer to these offerees as ‘holders’.

              RG 125.2       All references to purchase plans in this guide refer collectively and
                             exhaustively to these offers. The conditions and rationale of relief for each
                             offer under ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans)
                             Instrument 2019/547 are substantially the same. The relief does not extend to
                             offers of options.

              RG 125.3       Purchase plans give existing holders a convenient means of obtaining
                             additional shares or interests in the issuer. These securities are priced at a
                             discount to the market price during a period before the offer and without
                             brokerage fees.



Our approach to relief from Ch 6D and Pt 7.9
              RG 125.4       Generally, an offer of shares or interests requires a disclosure document
                             under Ch 6D or Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act).
                             This requirement ensures that investors have access to all the information
                             required to make an informed investment decision.

                                   Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), chapters (Chs) and parts (Pts) are to the
                                   Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                          Page 4
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




              RG 125.5       When the amount to be raised from each investor under a purchase plan is
                             capped, the cost of preparing, printing and distributing a prospectus or a PDS
                             for that offer may be quite high compared to the amount being raised.

              RG 125.6       Without relief from the disclosure requirements of Ch 6D and Pt 7.9, it is
                             unlikely that purchase plans would be offered. This would disadvantage retail
                             investors, who are the most likely to participate in purchase plans and who may
                             be excluded from other fundraising opportunities such as institutional
                             placements.



Our relief for purchase plans
              RG 125.7       We have used our exemption powers under s741(1) and 1020F(1)(a) to give
                             conditional relief from Ch 6D and Pt 7.9 to ASX-listed companies and ASX-
                             listed managed investment schemes offering purchase plans to existing
                             holders: see ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans)
                             Instrument 2019/547.


                             Conditions of relief
              RG 125.8       If the conditions set out in ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase
                             Plans) Instrument 2019/547 are met, offers of quoted shares or interests to
                             existing holders under a purchase plan do not require a disclosure document.
                             The conditions include:
                             (a)   subject to particular conditions applicable to some custodians (see
                                   RG 125.26), a registered holder must not be issued more than $30,000
                                   worth of shares or interests in any consecutive 12-month period;
                             (b)   offers must be made only to registered holders of shares or interests in
                                   the same class;
                             (c)   if an issuer chooses to issue shares or interests under a purchase plan to
                                   a registered holder who is a custodian (as defined in ASIC Corporations
                                   (Share and Interest Purchase Plans) Instrument 2019/547) for the
                                   beneficiaries of that custodian:
                                   (i)     the custodian must certify in writing to the issuer that certain
                                           conditions have been met;
                                   (ii)    the custodian must provide the issuer with particulars of the
                                           relevant beneficiary wishing to participate in the purchase plan
                                           offer and the existing interests of the beneficiary in the relevant
                                           securities; and
                                   (iii)   the issuer must be reasonably satisfied that, in any consecutive
                                           12-month period, the total application price of the shares or
                                           interests to be issued to, or for the benefit of, any beneficiary is not




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                Page 5
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




                                           more than $30,000 (excluding shares or interests applied for by the
                                           custodian on behalf of a beneficiary but not issued);
                             (d)   each offer must be made on similar terms and conditions and on a non-
                                   renounceable basis;
                             (e)   the issuer must have complied with its continuous disclosure and
                                   financial reporting obligations;
                             (f)   the issuer must lodge a cleansing notice with ASX;
                             (g)   the issue price must be less than the market price during a specified
                                   period (determined by the issuer) in the 30 days before either the date of
                                   the offer or the date of the issue; and
                             (h)   the written offer document must include certain disclosures, including:
                                   (i)     the method used to calculate the issue price;
                                   (ii)    the relationship between the issue price and the market price; and
                                   (iii)   the risk that the market price may change between the date of the
                                           offer and the date when the shares or interests are issued.


                             Rationale for relief

              RG 125.9       We consider that the benefits of this conditional relief for investors (such as
                             savings on brokerage) and issuers (such as savings on the costs of preparing,
                             printing and distributing disclosure documents) outweigh the disadvantages
                             and risks of not having a prospectus or a PDS.

              RG 125.10      We also consider that the risks of not having a prospectus or a PDS are
                             limited because:
                             (a)   the amount that may be invested by each holder in a 12-month period
                                   under the offer is restricted;
                             (b)   the offer price must be at a discount to the market price during a
                                   specified period; and
                             (c)   the issuer must comply with its continuous disclosure obligations and
                                   other conditions that apply to our relief.

              RG 125.11      Similar to the rights issues disclosure regime in s708AA, our relief for
                             purchase plans is conditional on an issuer complying with its continuous
                             disclosure obligations and notifying the market of certain excluded
                             information by lodging a cleansing notice with ASX.

              RG 125.12      The conditions of our relief are designed to ensure that while offerees under
                             a purchase plan will not receive a prospectus or a PDS:
                             (a)   they will have access to information through continuous disclosure and
                                   market pricing due to quotation of the issuer;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                              Page 6
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




                             (b)   the offer will be at a discount to the market price during a given period
                                   before the offer or issue; and
                             (c)   there is a limit to the amount that can be offered to investors without a
                                   prospectus or a PDS.


                             Case-by-case relief for entities listed on other markets

              RG 125.13      We will consider extending our relief to cover entities listed on markets
                             other than ASX on a case-by case or individual basis, based on an
                             assessment of the liquidity of the market, and its supervision and disclosure
                             regime.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                              Page 7
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




B          Conditions of relief

                               Key points

                               Our relief under ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans)
                               Instrument 2019/547 is subject to conditions relating to:
                               • the maximum amount that can be raised under the relief (see
                                 RG 125.14–RG 125.18);
                               • the identity of the offerees (see RG 125.19–RG 125.26);
                               • quotation of the issuer and continuity of quotation (see RG 125.27–
                                 RG 125.30);
                               • market disclosure of information by the issuer (see RG 125.35–
                                 RG 125.42);
                               • the issuer—including that there are no contraventions of, or exemptions
                                 or determinations under, the Corporations Act (see RG 125.43–
                                 RG 125.47);
                               • the pricing of the offer (see RG 125.48–RG 125.49); and
                               • disclosure in the offer document (see RG 125.50–RG 125.51).



Monetary limit of $30,000
              RG 125.14      Under ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans) Instrument
                             2019/547 the value of shares or interests that can be issued to holders is
                             restricted. Generally, no registered holder may be issued shares or interests
                             with an application price totalling more than $30,000 in any consecutive
                             12-month period (excluding shares or interests applied for but not issued).


                             Certification, or representation, by applicant

              RG 125.15      Subject to particular conditions for some custodians (see RG 125.22), and
                             for applicants applying through an electronic payment facility (see
                             RG 125.16), registered holders must certify to the issuer at the time of
                             application that the total price does not exceed $30,000 for:
                             (a)   shares or interests that are the subject of their application; and
                             (b)   any other shares or interests in the class received by the holder under
                                   the purchase plan or any similar arrangement in the 12 months before
                                   the application (excluding shares or interests applied for but not issued).

              RG 125.16      When a person applies for shares or interests through an electronic payment
                             facility, the part of the offer document containing instructions on how to
                             apply must include:
                             (a)   a unique identifier that must be provided by the holder when making a
                                   payment using the facility; and


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                              Page 8
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




                             (b)   a prominent statement that the holder, by making an application,
                                   represents to the issuer that they have complied with the matters set out
                                   in the certification in RG 125.15.

              RG 125.17      When completing the certification in RG 125.15, or making the
                             representation in RG 125.16, the registered holder must aggregate all shares
                             or interests issued to them under purchase plans in the previous 12 months,
                             whether directly as the registered holder or in a joint capacity: see
                             RG 125.19–RG 125.26.

                             Stapled securities

              RG 125.18      Specific conditions apply to shares or interests that must, under the terms on
                             which they are traded, only be transferred together with one or more other
                             shares or interests or other financial products (stapled securities). The
                             $30,000 limit applies to the stapled security as if its component shares,
                             interests or products constituted a single security. The limit does not apply to
                             any of those components separately.



Offers to registered holders
              RG 125.19      Our relief under ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans)
                             Instrument 2019/547 only applies to offers to registered holders of shares or
                             interests in the class, whose address is in a place where it is lawful and
                             practical (in the reasonable opinion of the issuer) for the issuer to offer
                             shares or interests to those people.

              RG 125.20      To be able to rely on our relief, the issuer can only make offers to people who
                             are recorded in the register of members as at a date determined by the issuer.

              RG 125.21      When two or more people are recorded in the register of members as jointly
                             holding shares in the company, or interests in the managed investment scheme,
                             they are taken to be a single registered holder and any offer should be made to
                             them jointly for the purposes of our relief.

                             Offers to a registered holder that is a custodian

              RG 125.22      When a registered holder is a custodian that holds shares or interests on
                             behalf of a beneficiary (whether directly or indirectly through one or more
                             interposed custodians), an issuer can only issue shares or interests totalling
                             more than $30,000 in any consecutive 12-month period to that custodian if,
                             on application for the shares or interests, the custodian certifies in writing:
                             (a)   that the custodian holds shares or interests in the class (directly or
                                   indirectly) on behalf of one or more beneficiaries;
                                   Note: Beneficiary in this context means a client of a custodian or a member of an
                                   investor directed portfolio service (IDPS)-like scheme, a self-managed superannuation



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                     Page 9
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




                                   fund (SMSF) or a superannuation master trust. The phrase ‘holds shares or interests’
                                   means holds legal title. Shares or interests acquired through an IDPS-like scheme, an
                                   SMSF or a superannuation master trust are taken to be held on behalf of the member
                                   who gave the instruction to acquire the securities.

                             (b)   the number of beneficiaries;
                             (c)   the name and address of each beneficiary for whom the custodian
                                   applies for shares or interests;
                             (d)   for each beneficiary:
                                   (i)     the number of shares or interests that the custodian holds (directly
                                           or indirectly) on behalf of that beneficiary;
                                   (ii)    the number, or dollar amount, of shares or interests the beneficiary
                                           or another custodian has instructed the custodian to accept on
                                           behalf of the beneficiary; and
                                   (iii)   that the application price for the shares or interests applied for on
                                           their behalf, and any other shares or interests in the class applied
                                           for on their behalf under a similar arrangement in the previous
                                           12 months (excluding shares or interests applied for but not
                                           issued), does not exceed $30,000;
                             (e)   that a copy of the written offer document was given to each beneficiary;
                                   and
                             (f)   when the custodian holds shares or interests on behalf of a beneficiary
                                   indirectly, through one or more interposed custodians—the name and
                                   address of each interposed custodian.

                                   Note: In certifying the above matters, the custodian may rely on information provided to
                                   it by the beneficiary or any interposed custodian.

              RG 125.23      The term ‘custodian’ is defined in ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest
                             Purchase Plans) Instrument 2019/547 to apply to:
                             (a)   custodians that hold an Australian financial services (AFS) licence that
                                   allows them to perform custodial or depository services or to operate
                                   IDPS accounts;
                             (b)   custodians that are otherwise exempt from holding an AFS licence with
                                   a specific custodian or depository authorisation or that are relying on
                                   the AFS licence of their ‘master custodian’ under reg 7.6.01(k) of the
                                   Corporations Regulations 2001;
                             (c)   trustees of SMSFs and superannuation master trusts;
                             (d)   responsible entities of IDPS-like schemes; and
                             (e)   registered holders of shares or interests noted on the company or
                                   managed investment scheme’s register of members as holding the
                                   shares or interests on account of another person.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                     Page 10
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




              RG 125.24      The issuer must also be reasonably satisfied that, in any 12-month period,
                             the total application price of the shares or interests issued to any beneficial
                             owner is not more than $30,000 (excluding shares or interests applied for by
                             the custodian on behalf of a beneficiary but not issued), whether those shares
                             or interests are issued to the beneficiary in their own right as a registered
                             holder, or to the custodian.

              RG 125.25      If the issuer is not satisfied with the certification by the custodian (for
                             whatever reason), the issuer cannot issue shares or interests to the custodian
                             on behalf of the beneficiary.

              RG 125.26      The offer is made to the custodian as the registered holder (not to the
                             beneficiary directly). The terms of the relief do not require custodians to
                             participate on behalf of their beneficiaries. This means it is at the discretion
                             of the custodian whether to extend the offer to its beneficiaries.



Quotation and continuity of quotation
              RG 125.27      Relief under ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans)
                             Instrument 2019/547 is limited to companies and managed investment
                             schemes that are admitted to the official list of ASX. The purchase plan offer
                             must be for a class of shares or interests that is quoted. This is because
                             investors in these shares and interests have access to:
                             (a)   information released under the continuous disclosure regime (requiring
                                   the release of price-sensitive information); and
                             (b)   the current market price of the shares or interests.


                             Suspension of trading

              RG 125.28      Our relief does not apply if trading in the class of shares or interests is
                             suspended. This is because, when trading is suspended, investors do not have
                             the benefit of a current market price of the shares or interests.

              RG 125.29      Our relief also does not apply if shares or interests in the relevant class have
                             been suspended from trading for more than five days in the shorter of:
                             (a)   the previous 12 months; or
                             (b)   the period of quotation of the securities.

              RG 125.30      This is consistent with s708A, 1012DA, 708AA and 1012DAA.

                                   Note: In calculating whether securities or financial products have been suspended for
                                   more than five days, we take the view that:
                                   (a)   ‘five days’ should be read as ‘five trading days’; and
                                   (b)   shares and interests are not suspended during a trading halt.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                     Page 11
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




                             Case-by-case relief when trading suspended

              RG 125.31      We will consider granting case-by-case or individual relief to permit an
                             issuer to offer a purchase plan even when the shares or interests have been
                             suspended for more than five days if it appears that the securities are
                             adequately priced, and the market is fully informed.

              RG 125.32      To determine whether the securities or other financial products appear to be
                             adequately priced, and the market is fully informed despite the suspension,
                             we will consider all the circumstances of the case, including:
                             (a)   the length of the suspension—generally, the longer the period, the
                                   greater the level of scrutiny we will apply in granting relief;
                             (b)   the reason for the suspension—we will consider whether the suspension
                                   was voluntary or whether it was imposed as a result of failing to comply
                                   with the ASX Listing Rules or suspected market misconduct;
                             (c)   the period of time that has elapsed since the suspension—generally, the
                                   more recent the suspension, the greater the level of scrutiny we will
                                   apply in granting relief;
                             (d)   the announcements made to the market since the suspension—we will
                                   be more likely to grant relief when disclosure to the market since the
                                   time of the suspension, either in the form of continuous disclosure
                                   announcements or unqualified financial reporting disclosure, has been
                                   timely and otherwise in accordance with the entity’s legal obligations.
                                   We expect that disclosure after the suspension would address the
                                   reasons for the suspension and, where appropriate, detail steps taken to
                                   avoid similar suspensions in the future;
                             (e)   the recent history of disclosure—an entity that has contravened
                                   disclosure requirements in the previous 12 months will need to explain
                                   why the shares or interests are adequately priced and why the market is
                                   fully informed despite this non-compliance; and
                             (f)   any other relevant circumstances that support the underlying policy.

              RG 125.33      An application for case-by-case relief should address:
                             (a)   generally, whether the shares or interests are adequately priced by the
                                   market and whether the market is fully informed; and
                             (b)   specifically, each of the factors listed in RG 125.32.

              RG 125.34      As the five-day suspension period is effectively refreshed every 12 months,
                             the application should concentrate on events that have taken place during
                             that period.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                             Page 12
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




Lodging a cleansing notice
              RG 125.35      Under ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans) Instrument
                             2019/547, holders being offered shares or interests must have access to
                             information:
                             (a)   that can be excluded from the continuous disclosure notices under the
                                   ASX Listing Rules; and
                             (b)   that investors and their advisers would reasonably require and expect to
                                   find in a disclosure document.

              RG 125.36      This information (contained in a cleansing notice) must be lodged with ASX
                             by the issuer. The timing of lodgement depends on the circumstances of the
                             purchase plan.

                                   Note: These notices are also required for share and interest placements and rights issues
                                   conducted without a disclosure document: see s708A, 1012DA, 708AA and 1012DAA.


                             Standalone purchase plans

              RG 125.37      Where an offer under a purchase plan is made as a standalone offer (i.e. it is
                             not offered in conjunction with a placement), a cleansing notice must be
                             lodged with ASX within a 24-hour period before the offer is made.

              RG 125.38      The cleansing notice must:
                             (a)   state that the issuer will be issuing shares or interests without disclosure
                                   to investors under Pt 6D.2 or Pt 7.9;
                             (b)   state that the notice is being given in accordance with ASIC
                                   Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans) Instrument 2019/547;
                             (c)   state that, as at the date of the notice, the issuer has complied with:
                                   (i)    the provisions of Ch 2M as they apply to the issuer; and
                                   (ii)   s674; and
                             (d)   set out any information that is excluded information as at the date of the notice
                                   (or that there is no such information) in accordance with the requirements of:
                                   (i)    s708A(7) and (8), as if the notice were a notice under s708A(5)(e) with
                                          respect to shares; and
                                   (ii)   s1012DA(7) and (8), as if the notice were a notice under s1012DA(5)(e)
                                          with respect to interests.

              RG 125.39      Excluded information is information:
                             (a)   that has been excluded from a continuous disclosure notice in
                                   accordance with the listing rules of the relevant market operator to
                                   whom the notice must be given; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                      Page 13
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




                             (b)   that investors and their professional advisers would reasonably require
                                   to make an informed assessment of:
                                   (i)    the assets and liabilities, financial position and performance, profits
                                          and losses, and prospects of the body; or
                                   (ii)   the rights and liabilities attaching to the relevant securities.

              RG 125.40      Excluded information only needs to be included in a cleansing notice to the
                             extent that it is reasonable for investors and their professional advisers to
                             expect to find the information in a disclosure document.


                             Purchase plans conducted with a placement

              RG 125.41      An issuer need not issue a further cleansing notice for a purchase plan when:
                             (a)   a purchase plan offer follows a placement; and
                             (b)   the issuer has lodged a cleansing notice under s708A(6) or 1012DA(6)
                                   not more than 30 days before the purchase plan offer.


                             Defective cleansing notice

              RG 125.42      If a cleansing notice is defective, and the issuer becomes aware of the defect
                             within 12 months after the shares or interests are issued under the offer, the
                             issuer must give ASX a notice that corrects the defect. This notice must be
                             given within a reasonable time after the issuer becomes aware of the defect.



Conditions relating to the issuer

                             No exemptions or orders

              RG 125.43      During the 12-month period before the day on which the relevant shares or
                             interests were issued, the issuer, or directors or auditors of the issuer, must
                             not have been covered at any time by:
                             (a)   an exemption under s111AS or 111AT; or
                             (b)   an order under s340 or 341 (other than an excluded order as set out in
                                   ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans) Instrument
                                   2019/547).

              RG 125.44      This is so that investors can be more confident that the market is fully
                             informed about the relevant shares or interests and that there is a reliable
                             market price for them.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                               Page 14
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




                             No contravention of certain provisions of the Corporations Act

              RG 125.45      A determination must not be in force in relation to the issuer:
                             (a)   for share purchase plans—under s708AA(3) or 708A(2); or
                             (b)   for interest purchase plans—under s1012DAA(3) or 1012DA(2).

              RG 125.46      Similarly, the issuer must have complied with s674 and Ch 2M, and must
                             state this in the relevant cleansing notice.

              RG 125.47      This is to ensure that full and timely disclosure has been made by the issuer
                             over the previous year.


Pricing of the offer
              RG 125.48      The issue price must be less than the market price during a specified period
                             (determined by the issuer) in the 30 days before either the date of the offer or
                             the date of the issue.

              RG 125.49      ASX Listing Rule 7.2 requires that the issue price under a purchase plan is at
                             least 80% of the volume-weighted average market price for securities in that
                             class, calculated over the last five days on which sales in the securities were
                             recorded, either before the day on which the issue was announced or before
                             the day on which the issue was made.


Disclosure in the offer document
              RG 125.50      The written offer document must contain the following information:
                             (a)   the method used to calculate the issue price and the time when this price
                                   will be determined;
                             (b)   a statement describing the relationship between the issue price and the
                                   market price; and
                             (c)   disclosure of:
                                   (i)    the risk that the market price may change between the date of the
                                          offer and the date when the shares or interests are issued to an
                                          applicant under the arrangement; and
                                   (ii)   the effect this would have on the price or value of the shares or
                                          interests that the applicant would receive.

              RG 125.51      We expect the issuer to make clear disclosure in the offer document if it
                             reserves the right to scale back entitlements. This is to ensure that offerees
                             understand that they may not receive the full amount of shares or interests
                             for which they have subscribed.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                             Page 15
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




Key terms

                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                         the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                         on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                         services
                                                                 Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASX                       ASX Limited or the exchange market operated by ASX
                                                         Limited

                               beneficiary               Has the meaning given in ASIC Corporations (Share and
                                                         Interest Purchase Plans) Instrument 2019/547

                               Ch 6D (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 6D)

                               cleansing notice          A notice confirming to the market that all excluded
                                                         information has been disclosed to the market. Excluded
                                                         information is defined in the Corporations Act in:
                                                          s708AA(8) and 708A(7) for share purchase plans; and
                                                          s1012DAA(8) and 1012DA(7) for interest purchase
                                                           plans

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               custodian                 Has the meaning given in ASIC Corporations (Share and
                                                         Interest Purchase Plans) Instrument 2019/547

                               holder                    A shareholder of an ASX-listed company or a member of
                                                         an ASX-listed managed investment scheme

                               IDPS                      An investor directed portfolio service as defined in Class
                                                         Order [CO 13/763] Investor directed portfolio services or
                                                         any instrument that amends or replaces that class order

                               interest purchase         An offer to existing holders of interests in a managed
                               plan                      investment scheme listed on ASX

                               PDS                       A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that must
                                                         be given to a retail client for the offer or issue of a
                                                         financial product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                         Corporations Act
                                                                 Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                               prospectus                A disclosure document that is lodged under Pt 6D.2 of the
                                                         Corporations Act

                               Pt 6D.2 (for example)     A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                         6D.2)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                    Page 16
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               s708A (for example)       A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 708A)

                               share purchase plan       An offer to existing holders of shares in a company listed
                                                         on ASX

                               SMSF                      A self-managed superannuation fund




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                Page 17
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 125: Share and interest purchase plans




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             capital raising, cleansing notice, disclosure relief, interest purchase plan,
                             PDS, placement, Product Disclosure Statement, prospectus, purchase plan,
                             share purchase plan

                             Legislative instruments

                             [CO 13/656] Equality of treatment impacting on the acquisition of interests

                             [CO 14/1000] Employee incentive schemes: Listed bodies

                             [CO 14/1001] Employee incentive schemes: Unlisted bodies

                             ASIC Corporations (Managed investment product consideration) Instrument
                             2015/847
                                   Note: This instrument modifies s601GA(1)(a) to allow for purchase plan offers even if
                                   the consideration to acquire an interest in the managed investment scheme cannot be
                                   independently determined.

                             ASIC Corporations (Disregarding Technical Relief) Instrument 2016/73

                             ASIC Corporations (Sale Offers That Do Not Need Disclosure) Instrument
                             2016/80

                             ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans) Instrument 2019/547

                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 161 Share and interest sale facilities

                             RG 173 Disclosure for on-sale of securities and other financial products

                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Chs 2M, 6D; Pts 6D.2, 7.9; s111AS, 111AT, 340, 341, 601GA,
                             674, 708AA, 708A, 741, 1012DAA, 1012DA, 1020F

                             Corporations Regulations 2001, reg 7.6.01

                             Consultation papers and reports

                             CP 304 Remaking ASIC class order on share and interest purchase plans:
                             [CO 09/425]

                             REP 629 Response to submissions on CP 304 Remaking ASIC class order on share
                             and interest purchase plans: [CO 09/425]



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission August 2019                                                   Page 18
