REGULATORY GUIDE 133

Funds management and
custodial services: Holding
assets

December 2024


About this guide
This guide is for:
    responsible entities of registered managed investment schemes
     (registered schemes);
    licensed providers of custodial services (licensed custody providers);
    managed discretionary account (MDA) providers that are responsible to
     clients for assets held under an MDA; and
    investor directed portfolio service (IDPS) operators that are responsible
     to clients for assets held under an IDPS.

It explains the Australian financial services (AFS) licence obligations that
apply to these entities in relation to holding assets and sets out minimum
standards for asset holders.
                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in December 2024 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 133 Funds management and custodial
                                     services: Holding assets, issued July 2018 and June 2022
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 133 Managed investments and custodial
                                     or depository services: Holding assets, issued November 2013
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 133 Managed investments: Scheme
                                     property arrangements, issued August 1998, reissued October 1998
                                     and June 1999, rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                            Page 2
                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Purpose of this guide ...............................................................................4
                                    Who this guide applies to.........................................................................5
                                    Summary of our guidance........................................................................6
                             B      Minimum standards and related requirements for asset holders.......8
                                    Specific obligations for registered schemes ............................................8
                                    Obligations for all asset holders who are licensed to hold assets ...........9
                                    Obligations for all AFS licensees who engage asset holders..................9
                                    What are the minimum standards and related requirements? ..............10
                                    Organisational structure.........................................................................12
                                    Staffing capabilities ................................................................................14
                                    Capacity and resources .........................................................................15
                                    Holding assets on trust ..........................................................................16
                                    Keeping compliance records .................................................................17
                                    Making client inquiries ...........................................................................17
                             C      Requirements when engaging another asset holder .......................19
                                    Specific obligations for registered schemes ..........................................19
                                    Obligations for all AFS licensees who engage asset holders................19
                                    Ensuring the asset holder meets the minimum standards ....................20
                                    Requirements for the content of custody agreements ...........................23
                                    Disclosure to retail clients of relationship with asset holder ..................31
                                    Transfer of assets when asset holder is changed .................................32
                             D      Compliance controls for licensed custody providers .....................33
                                    Compliance controls must cover risks to client assets ..........................33
                                    Compliance controls may vary...............................................................33
                             E      Protection of rights for land used in registered schemes ...............35
                                    Protecting members’ rights ....................................................................35
                             F      Holding crypto-assets .........................................................................38
                                    Risk management by asset holders regarding crypto-asset
                                    exchanges used to obtain crypto-assets ...............................................40
                             G      Relief from the obligation to separate assets ...................................42
                                    Specific obligations for registered schemes ..........................................42
                                    Obligations for other AFS licensees who are asset holders ..................42
                                    Relief for omnibus accounts ..................................................................42
                                    Relief does not extend to non-financial assets ......................................45
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................46
                             Related information .....................................................................................51




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                                      Page 3
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              This guide explains:
                              • the obligations that apply to responsible entities of registered managed
                                investment schemes (registered schemes), licensed providers of
                                custodial services (licensed custody providers), managed discretionary
                                account (MDA) providers and investor directed portfolio service (IDPS)
                                operators in relation to holding assets;
                              • the minimum standards and related requirements for asset holders;
                              • what responsible entities, licensed custody providers, MDA providers
                                and IDPS operators must do if they engage another asset holder;
                              • the requirements for documented compliance controls;
                              • the additional requirements that apply to primary production schemes
                                that include rights for the use of land;
                              • the limited relief we have given responsible entities of registered
                                schemes from the obligation to separate assets to allow the use of
                                omnibus accounts, and the requirements that apply when other
                                Australian financial services (AFS) licensees use omnibus accounts;
                                and
                              • ASIC’s expectations regarding holding crypto-assets where the scheme
                                property of a registered scheme includes crypto-assets, or a custodian
                                holds crypto-assets that are financial products.




Purpose of this guide
              RG 133.1       This guide sets out minimum standards for asset holders to ensure that they
                             meet their obligations under their AFS licence or delegation.

              RG 133.2       We consider that clients’ confidence will be better maintained if asset
                             holders, including non-licensees who hold assets under the licence of their
                             client, are required to meet minimum standards to ensure that:
                             (a)   client assets are not exposed to unnecessary risks because of the way
                                   assets are held; and
                             (b)   efficient operational arrangements exist for holding and dealing with
                                   client assets.

              RG 133.3       The minimum standards will help maintain client confidence in the provision
                             of the relevant services and to promote a fair and efficient market for the
                             provision of asset-holding services.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                          Page 4
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




Who this guide applies to
              RG 133.4       This guide is for:
                             (a)   responsible entities of registered schemes;
                             (b)   licensed custody providers and, where relevant, entities that provide
                                   custodial services incidentally;
                             (c)   MDA providers that are responsible to clients for assets held under an
                                   MDA;
                             (d)   IDPS operators that are responsible to clients for assets held under an
                                   IDPS; and
                             (e)   other asset holders who hold assets under the licence of their client.

                                   Note: For the purposes of this guide, we are excluding from the definition of ‘asset
                                   holders’ persons who must be, or are customarily, used to clear, settle or hold assets to
                                   participate in particular kinds of transactions on financial markets, such as certain
                                   securities depositories and clearing systems.

              RG 133.5       This guide applies to registered schemes that are also registered as
                             Australian passport funds for the purposes of the Asia Region Funds
                             Passport.

              RG 133.6       This guide does not apply to the corporate director of a corporate collective
                             investment vehicle (CCIV), a CCIV or a custodian engaged by the corporate
                             director or CCIV. However:
                             (a)   where the assets of the CCIV are held by the CCIV, the corporate
                                   director may wish to consider the principles set out in this guide; and
                             (b)   where the assets of the CCIV are held by a person other than the CCIV,
                                   the corporate director may wish to consider the principles set out in this
                                   guide when assessing whether that person has met the minimum
                                   standards in reg 8B.5.10(2) of the Corporations Regulations 2001
                                   (Corporations Regulations).


                             Services that form part of a custodial service
              RG 133.7       The minimum standards and related requirements apply to all asset holders.
                             This is regardless of whether the services are provided as a main business of
                             the provider or as an incidental provider. In some cases, the nature and scale of
                             the services provided may affect what is required to meet the minimum
                             standards.
                                   Note: For an explanation of ‘incidental providers’, see Regulatory Guide 166 AFS licensing:
                                   Financial requirements (RG 166).

              RG 133.8       We consider that services performed as a result of holding financial
                             products, or a beneficial interest in financial products, when providing a
                             custodial service are a part of holding the assets and so form part of the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                      Page 5
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             custodial services. On this basis, the following services form part of the
                             custodial services when provided in that way:
                             (a)   Exercising rights as a holder—this involves exercising the rights and
                                   obligations associated with assets held that are interests or securities,
                                   other than dealing in the assets. For example, this applies to:
                                   (i)     exercising voting rights arising from a reorganisation or
                                           restructure;
                                   (ii)    electing to participate in dividend or distribution reinvestment
                                           plans; and
                                   (iii)   electing to accept offers made on the basis of holding the assets,
                                           such as certain placements and rights issues.
                             (b)   Tax reclamations—this involves reclaiming recoverable portions of tax
                                   withheld by foreign taxation authorities from interest or dividend
                                   payments on investments held.
                             (c)   Reconciliations—this involves reconciling the asset holder’s own
                                   records of its holdings against the records of various third parties, such
                                   as fund managers, banks and other custodians.
                             (d)   Record keeping and reporting—this involves maintaining statements of
                                   holdings and completed transaction reports, and keeping records of
                                   valuations provided to the asset holder.

              RG 133.9       This list is not exhaustive. Other services may be provided from time to time
                             that may be considered to form part of the provision of a custodial service.

              RG 133.10      Other services that may be provided by licensed custody providers include:
                             (a)   fund accounting;
                             (b)   unit pricing and determining asset values and net asset values;
                             (c)   compliance monitoring and reporting;
                             (d)   maintaining and operating a basic deposit product; and
                             (e)   performance measurement and monitoring.

                                   Note: Information Sheet 141 Dealing and providing custodial or depository service as
                                   secondary service (INFO 141) may also be relevant in determining whether a person is
                                   providing a custodial service and subject to this guide.


Summary of our guidance
              RG 133.11      Table 1 summarises the sections of this guide and who each section applies to.
                             The minimum standards and related requirements in relation to asset holding
                             set out in this guide apply to entities in their capacity as asset holders or when
                             engaging an asset holder.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                 Page 6
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




Table 1:    Summary of our guidance

 Section of this guide                         Applies to

 Section B: Minimum standards and              The following entities who hold assets:
 related requirements for asset holders         responsible entities of registered schemes;
                                                licensed custody providers;
                                                MDA providers;
                                                IDPS operators; and
                                                other asset holders holding assets under the licence of their
                                                 client

 Section C: Requirements when                  The following entities who engage asset holders:
 engaging another asset holder                  responsible entities of registered schemes;
                                                 Note: Under the Australian Passport Rules, the operator of a registered
                                                 scheme that is registered as an Australian passport fund for the
                                                 purposes of the Asia Region Funds Passport is required to appoint an
                                                 independent asset holder.
                                                licensed custody providers;
                                                MDA providers;
                                                IDPS operators; and
                                                other asset holders holding assets under the licence of their
                                                 client

 Section D: Compliance controls for            Licensed custody providers
 licensed custody providers                      Note: For information on compliance controls for registered schemes,
                                                 see Regulatory Guide 132 Funds management: Compliance and
                                                 oversight (RG 132).

 Section E: Protection of rights for land      Responsible entities of registered schemes whose members
 used in registered schemes                    require the use of particular land on which the scheme will occur

 Section F: Holding crypto assets               Responsible entities of registered schemes where the scheme
                                                 property includes, or comprises, crypto-assets; and
                                                custodians of crypto-assets that are financial products

 Section G: Relief from the obligation         Responsible entities, licensed custody providers, MDA providers
 to separate assets                            and IDPS operators, in relation to holding assets




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                   Page 7
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




B          Minimum standards and related requirements
           for asset holders

                              Key points

                              An asset holder must meet minimum standards and related requirements if it
                              holds, directly or indirectly, the assets of a registered scheme, MDA or IDPS.

                              If a responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                              operator engages another asset holder it must also ensure that the asset
                              holder, including an asset holder who holds assets under its AFS licence,
                              meets these minimum standards: see Section C.

                              To meet the minimum standards, asset holders must:
                              • have an adequate organisational structure (see RG 133.34–RG 133.42);
                              • have adequate staffing capabilities (see RG 133.44–RG 133.47);
                              • have adequate capacity and resources to perform core administrative
                                activities (see RG 133.48–RG 133.50); and
                              • hold assets on trust for the client, which includes the obligation to
                                separate assets (see RG 133.51–RG 133.54).

                              An asset holder must keep records for seven years demonstrating
                              compliance with the minimum standards for organisational structure,
                              staffing capabilities, and capacity and resources: see RG 133.55.

                              We expect an asset holder that is an AFS licensee to conduct checks on its
                              clients before providing the service and then, as appropriate, to ensure that
                              it meets its obligations: see RG 133.56–RG 133.59.




Specific obligations for registered schemes
              RG 133.12      The responsible entity of a registered scheme must hold scheme property on trust
                             for members: see s601FC(2) of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act).

                                  Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), chapters (Chs) and parts (Pts) are to the
                                  Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.

              RG 133.13      Under s601FB(2), the responsible entity has the power to appoint an agent, or
                             otherwise engage a person, to do anything that the responsible entity is
                             authorised to do in relation to the scheme, including holding scheme property.

              RG 133.14      The agent, or person otherwise engaged, must comply with any directions of
                             the responsible entity in performing the delegated function or exercising the
                             delegated power.

              RG 133.15      A responsible entity or another person engaged by it to hold assets of a
                             registered scheme does not need to hold an AFS licence authorising it to



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                       Page 8
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             provide a custodial service for this purpose. This is because holding those
                             assets is not a custodial service under s766E(3)(b). Holding assets is a part of
                             the operation of the registered scheme by the responsible entity.

                                   Note: We do not consider that a controlled sub-trust is a separate scheme. This is
                                   because the members (e.g. the responsible entity as trustee) have day-to-day control
                                   over the sub-trust. We consider that any property held through a controlled sub-trust is
                                   scheme property of the registered scheme that controls the sub-trust. As such, we will
                                   regard the sub-trustee of a controlled sub-trust as a custodian who must comply with the
                                   standards and requirements in Section C.




Obligations for all asset holders who are licensed to hold assets
              RG 133.16      An asset holder who is licensed to hold assets must:
                             (a)   do all things necessary to ensure that it carries on the financial services
                                   for which it is licensed efficiently, honestly and fairly;

                                   Note: An MDA provider must be a licensed custody provider unless another licensed
                                   custody provider directly contracts with all retail clients to be the asset holder (see
                                   Regulatory Guide 179 Managed discretionary accounts (RG 179)).

                             (b)   demonstrate that it meets the minimum standards and related
                                   requirements set out in Section B of this guide, including when it
                                   applies for an AFS licence to hold assets; and

                                   Note: The minimum standards apply while the assets are held.

                             (c)   meet any other obligations that apply to its AFS licence.

                                   Note: For information on obligations that apply to an AFS licensee, see Regulatory
                                   Guide 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general obligations (RG 104) and Regulatory
                                   Guide 105 AFS licensing: Organisational competence (RG 105).




Obligations for all AFS licensees who engage asset holders
              RG 133.17      If an AFS licensee engages another asset holder, it must do all things
                             necessary to ensure that the asset holder meets the minimum standards and
                             related requirements. This includes an asset holder who holds assets under
                             the AFS licensee’s licence.

                                   Note: See Section C for more information on the obligations that apply to AFS licensees
                                   who engage another asset holder.


                             Engaging non-licensees

              RG 133.18      An asset holder engaged by an AFS licensee may or may not be an AFS
                             licensee itself. If the asset holder is providing a financial service to clients on
                             the AFS licensee’s behalf, it will generally need to be an authorised




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                      Page 9
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             representative of the AFS licensee, exempted from holding an AFS licence,
                             or acting on behalf of another AFS licensee: see s911B(1).

              RG 133.19      An asset holder engaged by an AFS licensee may also be providing a
                             financial service to the AFS licensee. The client who is provided with a
                             custodial service is the person on whose behalf the financial products are
                             held, or for whom the financial products are held on trust. Depending on the
                             terms of the arrangement, a person who contracts with a provider of a
                             custodial service may be the client of that service or merely a person who is
                             arranging for the service to be provided to another person. If the AFS
                             licensee is the client, the asset holder may not need an AFS licence to hold
                             the client assets that are financial products or beneficial interests in financial
                             products, provided that the requirements in reg 7.6.01(1)(k) of the
                             Corporations Regulations are satisfied.
              RG 133.20      The exemption under reg 7.6.01(1)(k) may be relevant to sub-custodians and
                             applies if:
                             (a)   the asset holder holds the financial products on trust for, or on behalf of,
                                   a licensed custody provider; and
                             (b)   the licensed custody provider in turn holds the beneficial interest on
                                   trust for, or on behalf of, the client of the licensed custody provider.
              RG 133.21      This exemption takes into account the responsibility of an AFS licensee who
                             holds the beneficial interest in the financial products, which may be a
                             financial service provided to the person for whom the beneficial interest is
                             held. This is to ensure that the holder of the financial products meets
                             appropriate standards. The minimum standards for asset holders also reflect
                             this responsibility by applying to AFS licensees that directly or indirectly
                             engage other entities as asset holders of client assets. Ensuring that asset
                             holders meet the minimum standards helps AFS licensees meet their broader
                             AFS licensee obligations and safeguards clients’ interests.



What are the minimum standards and related requirements?
              RG 133.22      All asset holders must:
                             (a)   have an adequate organisational structure (see RG 133.34–RG 133.43);
                             (b)   unless they engage another asset holder to hold all relevant assets—
                                   have adequate staffing capabilities (see RG 133.44–RG 133.47);
                             (c)   unless they engage another asset holder to hold all relevant assets—
                                   have adequate capacity and resources to perform core administrative
                                   activities (see RG 133.48–RG 133.50); and
                             (d)   hold assets on trust for the client, which includes the obligation to
                                   separate assets (see RG 133.51–RG 133.54).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 10
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.23      These minimum standards and related requirements apply when:
                             (a)   the asset holder is the responsible entity, licensed custody provider,
                                   MDA provider or IDPS operator, or another asset holder holding assets
                                   under the AFS licence of its client;
                             (b)   the asset holder is engaged by the responsible entity, licensed custody
                                   provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator; or

                                   Note: See Section C for more information on when another asset holder is engaged. If
                                   an asset holder engages another asset holder, it must ensure that the engaged asset
                                   holder meets the minimum standards.

                             (c)   the custodial services are provided as a main business of the provider or
                                   merely incidentally (see RG 133.7–RG 133.10).

              RG 133.24      The minimum standards are set out in the following legislative instruments,
                             which modify the Corporations Act:
                             (a)   ASIC Corporations (Asset Holding Standards for Responsible Entities)
                                   Instrument 2024/16;
                             (b)   ASIC Corporations (Custody Standards for Providers of Custodial and
                                   Depository Services) Instrument 2024/17;
                             (c)   ASIC Corporations (Managed Discretionary Account Services)
                                   Instrument 2016/968; and
                             (d)   ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services) Instrument
                                   2023/669.

                                   Note: The application of the minimum standards by legislative instrument replaces the
                                   AFS licence conditions in Pro Forma 209 Australian financial services licence
                                   conditions (PF 209). PF 209 has been amended accordingly.

              RG 133.25      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator that engages an asset holder to hold assets must keep records
                             demonstrating compliance with the minimum standards for organisational
                             structure, staffing capabilities, and capacity and resources: see RG 133.55.
                             These records must be kept for seven years.

              RG 133.26      We expect asset holders that are AFS licensees to conduct checks on their
                             clients before providing the service and then, as appropriate, to ensure that
                             the asset holder will meet its AFS licensee obligations: see RG 133.56–
                             RG 133.59.


                             Meeting the minimum standards and related requirements

              RG 133.27      All asset holders must meet these minimum standards and related
                             requirements, as set out in Section B.

              RG 133.28      In some cases, the nature and scale of the services provided may affect what
                             is required to meet the minimum standards. An asset holder’s arrangements
                             for meeting the minimum standards may vary depending on the particular



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                 Page 11
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             assets being held. We have not prescribed specific arrangements for different
                             asset holders.

              RG 133.29      We expect that an asset holder will seek independent verification of:
                             (a)   the robustness of its compliance controls that apply to the asset holding,
                                   taking into account the nature of the assets; and
                             (b)   in the case of a registered scheme, whether the asset holder is the
                                   responsible entity or a related party of the responsible entity.

              RG 133.30      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator must establish adequate procedures for giving instructions to:
                             (a)   if it is the asset holder, its custody staff; or
                             (b)   if it has engaged an asset holder, the asset holder.

              RG 133.31      It must ensure that the associated risks are managed appropriately and
                             reasonable compliance controls are in place to ensure the instructions are
                             followed. It should consider relevant industry best practice for providing
                             instructions, including data, when establishing its procedures for interacting
                             with the asset holder.

              RG 133.32      A responsible entity must set out in writing and implement a reasonable
                             process for determining:

                             (a)   whether it should hold assets or scheme property that it is permitted to
                                   hold; or

                             (b)   if it will engage another person as asset holder, which asset holder and
                                   on what terms.

              RG 133.33      The process must apply a reasonable written policy approved by the
                             directors of the responsible entity. The written policy must address the
                             potential conflicts of interest and other considerations relevant to the best
                             interests of members.



Organisational structure
              RG 133.34      An asset holder must have an organisational structure that supports the
                             separation of the assets held from its own assets and those of any other client
                             or managed investment scheme. The exception to this is omnibus accounts:
                             see Section G. We consider that the use of nominee companies is a means of
                             separating client assets.

              RG 133.35      The requirements for organisational structure do not apply when all the
                             financial products or beneficial interests in financial products in which the
                             asset holder has an interest are held by another person that it appoints.
                             However, in that case the asset holder must still ensure that it has appropriate



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 12
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             controls to appoint and monitor delegates and that its arrangements for
                             managing conflicts arising from this function are adequate. We encourage
                             asset holders to separate staff responsible for appointing and monitoring
                             sub-custodians from staff involved in investment management decisions.
                             The asset holder also has an obligation to ensure sub-custodians comply with
                             the organisational structure requirements. An exception applies for assets
                             outside Australia, if this is not reasonably practicable.

              RG 133.36      Asset holders must ensure that custodial staff and their managers are
                             segregated from staff performing other functions in a way that minimises the
                             potential for a conflict of interest arising between:
                             (a)   the duties of custodial staff; and
                             (b)   the duties and interests of persons who make investment decisions,
                                   trading decisions or other discretionary decisions resulting in the
                                   transfer or disposal of client assets.

              RG 133.37      The exception to this is discretionary decisions on certain at-call deposit
                             accounts with regulated deposit takers and foreign exchange transactions.

              RG 133.38      This is particularly important where the asset holder is the responsible entity,
                             MDA provider or IDPS operator performing transactional functions, or a
                             related body corporate.

              RG 133.39      Custodial staff and other staff involved in these discretionary decisions must
                             be located sufficiently separately to reduce, as far as is reasonably
                             practicable, the risk of inappropriate influence on decisions relating to
                             holding client assets.

              RG 133.40      In addition, asset holders must have a documented policy designed to ensure
                             that custodial staff are not influenced to act other than in accordance with
                             their duties because of a conflict of interest. The policy must be approved by:
                             (a)   the asset holder’s directors or governing body;
                             (b)   a senior manager authorised to give approval (by the directors or
                                   governing body); or
                             (c)   for an AFS licensee that is a foreign company, its senior officer in
                                   Australia.

              RG 133.41      The asset holder must undertake reasonable checks to ascertain and
                             document whether there has been any attempt to inappropriately influence
                             custodial staff, and must take reasonable action if this occurs.

                                   Note: Where the asset holder is an AFS licensee, it also has a general obligation to have
                                   adequate arrangements to manage its conflicts of interest. For information on managing
                                   conflicts of interest, see Regulatory Guide 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest
                                   (RG 181).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                   Page 13
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.42      Reporting lines must be independent of potentially conflicting activities up
                             to the level of the managing director or senior officer in Australia. An asset
                             holder must have arrangements that ensure custodial staff who are not
                             involved in potentially conflicting activities can report directly, or through
                             other custodial staff:
                             (a)   to the board of directors or governing body of the client;
                             (b)   for a registered scheme with a compliance committee—to the
                                   committee; or
                             (c)   for non-Australian clients—to the most senior officer of the client in
                                   Australia, or the relevant foreign jurisdiction in which the assets are held.

              RG 133.43      An asset holder’s organisational structure must ensure that custodial staff can
                             report directly to the directors of the asset holder or, in the case of a
                             responsible entity, the compliance committee. This can be directly or through
                             other custodial staff. The custodial staff and their managers must not also be
                             responsible for investment decisions, trading decisions or other discretionary
                             decisions resulting in the transfer or disposal of client assets. The exception to
                             this is discretionary decisions on holding certain at-call deposit accounts with
                             regulated deposit takers and foreign exchange transactions.


Staffing capabilities
              RG 133.44      Custodial staff must have the knowledge and skills necessary to properly
                             perform their functions relating to the custodial property. The asset holder
                             must provide adequate ongoing training and educational programs so that
                             staff knowledge remains at a level necessary for performing their assigned
                             responsibilities. The training must cover the asset holder’s legal obligations,
                             to the extent relevant to enable the staff members to perform their particular
                             responsibilities relating to custodial property.

              RG 133.45      Responsible entities, licensed custody providers, MDA providers and IDPS
                             operators have obligations to conduct ‘know your staff’ risk-based due
                             diligence inquiries under the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-
                             Terrorism Financing Act 2006 (AML/CTF Act).

              RG 133.46      In addition to these inquiries, we expect that résumé, police and reference
                             checks would be carried out, where appropriate. We also expect appropriate
                             oversight to be applied, to address the risk of fraud and any other risks in
                             relation to the asset holding (including exercising rights as holder) that might
                             arise from the engagement of an employee.

              RG 133.47      We expect an asset holder to assess the risks associated with the various
                             employee functions within its organisation, and design measures that it
                             considers are appropriate to the nature of the risks faced by it in relation to
                             potential fraud (e.g. mandatory absence periods, dual approval processes,
                             staff rotation and ‘maker/checker’ processes).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 14
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




Capacity and resources
              RG 133.48      An asset holder’s staff must have the necessary time and authority to
                             perform their duties associated with holding client assets. This will vary,
                             depending on the nature of the assets.

              RG 133.49      The asset holder must make resources available to custodial staff, including
                             in specialist areas, to the extent necessary for them to adequately perform
                             their duties. This is likely to include:
                             (a)   computer systems that are reasonably up to date and secure from any
                                   actual or potential threats, including from fraud;
                             (b)   systems capable of handling record keeping and transaction processing
                                   appropriate to the volume of transactions and capable of reliably
                                   identifying assets for each client, particularly when omnibus accounts
                                   are used;
                             (c)   systems capable of handling client instructions for assets held
                                   (e.g. exercising voting rights or other rights conferred on the asset
                                   holder on client instructions);
                             (d)   procedures for accurately recording all client assets held, all movements
                                   of those assets and evidence of authorisation for such movements. This
                                   includes who gave authorisation, how and when, and all income and
                                   other related administrative activities;
                             (e)   access to information sources that may be relevant to being aware of
                                   action that may be taken in exercising rights as an asset holder and
                                   pricing information;
                             (f)   memberships at central securities depositories, where relevant to client
                                   assets;
                             (g)   access to and, if necessary, membership of any relevant settlement and
                                   clearance systems;
                             (h)   where appropriate, access to relevant and appropriate domestic or global
                                   sub-custodial networks;
                             (i)   where physical assets are held, secure physical storage;
                             (j)   appropriate business continuity and disaster recovery procedures; and
                                   Note: AFS licensees that are bodies regulated by the Australian Prudential Regulation
                                   Authority (APRA) are excluded from the requirement in s912A(1)(h) to have risk
                                   management systems. However, responsible entities that are trustees of regulated
                                   superannuation funds must meet the requirement in s912A(1)(h), except for risks arising
                                   solely from the operation of the regulated superannuation fund by the trustee.

                             (k)   appropriate systems and procedures for change management.

              RG 133.50      In all circumstances, such systems, processes and procedures should ensure that
                             opportunities for fraud and operational error are reduced as far as reasonably




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                 Page 15
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             practicable. As part of having adequate risk management arrangements for AFS
                             licensees to whom that requirement applies, we expect that:

                             (a)   AFS licensees that are responsible for giving instructions on the use of
                                   assets where high-volume transactions are likely to occur will ensure that
                                   automated systems are used to authenticate instructions. However, we
                                   recognise that there may be exceptional circumstances where it is only
                                   practical to use manual systems; and

                             (b)   asset holders will have reasonable capacity to accept and act on instructions
                                   through such processes.



Holding assets on trust
              RG 133.51      Responsible entities, licensed custody providers, MDA providers and IDPS
                             operators must do all things necessary to ensure that they, and any other
                             asset holder they engage, hold the relevant assets on trust. This is except for
                             assets held:
                             (a)   outside of Australia where a trust structure is not recognised under the
                                   foreign law and it is reasonable to hold the assets in accordance with the
                                   foreign law;
                             (b)   outside of Australia where it is not reasonable to hold the assets on trust
                                   under the foreign law and the client has documented that they are
                                   satisfied that the assets are held in a manner that, given the relevant
                                   laws, provides reasonably effective protection in case of insolvency of
                                   the asset holder. This includes the basis on which the asset holder is
                                   satisfied;
                             (c)   under the requirements for omnibus accounts; or

                                   Note: See Section G for information on omnibus accounts.

                             (d)   if the asset holder is providing a custodial service through its authorised
                                   representative, where:
                                   (i)    the asset holder is liable to the client for the acts and omissions of
                                          the authorised representative as if they were the acts or omissions
                                          of the asset holder; and
                                   (ii)   revenue received from the client in relation to the provision of the
                                          custodial service is revenue of the asset holder.

                                   Note: The conditions in RG 133.51(d) avoid the application of regulatory requirements
                                   that could create an incentive for an asset holder to engage an authorised representative
                                   to hold the assets on its behalf.

              RG 133.52      The trust may be a bare trust or directed trust. A directed trust is held on the
                             basis that the asset holder holding the assets will have no active powers and
                             limited duties in relation to the trust assets, except as provided for in the
                             custody agreements.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                    Page 16
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.53      In the case of a deposit-taking facility, the rights under the facility (rather
                             than any money that has been deposited in the account) are the client assets.
                             It is these rights that should be held on trust. For example, this can be
                             achieved by establishing the account on the basis that the account is recorded
                             in the issuer’s records as ‘X Ltd as trustee for Y registered scheme’. In this
                             example, X Ltd may be the responsible entity or a custodian. We consider an
                             issuer of a deposit-taking facility cannot hold the facility on trust.

              RG 133.54      Except where permitted for certain omnibus accounts, an asset holder must also:
                             (a)   identify the assets, as far as is reasonably practicable, that are held for a
                                   client; and
                             (b)   keep the assets of a client held on trust separate from the assets of:
                                   (i)    the asset holder; and
                                   (ii)   any other person or scheme (in the case of managed investment
                                          schemes).



Keeping compliance records
              RG 133.55      An asset holder must keep records demonstrating how it has done all things
                             necessary to ensure the minimum standards are met for organisational structure,
                             staffing capabilities, and capacity and resources (as set out in RG 133.34–
                             RG 133.50). These records must be kept for seven years.



Making client inquiries
              RG 133.56      Businesses regulated under the AML/CTF Act have obligations to conduct
                             certain ‘know your client’ risk-based due diligence inquiries, to the extent
                             that they are ‘designated service providers’ under the AML/CTF Act.

              RG 133.57      In addition, we expect asset holders that are AFS licensees to conduct pre-
                             contract inquiries—and subsequent inquiries, when appropriate—about their
                             clients. In conducting these inquiries, we expect the asset holder to take into
                             account the client’s circumstances and other circumstances. These inquiries
                             will help ensure that AFS licensees meet their obligations to provide
                             financial services efficiently, honestly and fairly. They will also reduce the
                             risk of unexpected differences in capabilities or service requirements, which
                             could lead to potentially avoidable operational risks and other issues. Such
                             inquiries may form part of the adequate risk management systems that AFS
                             licensees must have in place under s912A(1)(h).

                                   Note: Bodies regulated by APRA are excluded from the requirement in s912A(1)(h)
                                   unless they are responsible entities that are also trustees of regulated superannuation
                                   funds (in which case, the exclusion is limited to risks arising solely from the operation
                                   of a regulated superannuation fund by the trustee).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                     Page 17
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.58      These inquiries may also produce information that forms part of the factual
                             background against which the AFS licensee can meet its obligations to report
                             to ASIC in certain circumstances.

              RG 133.59      We suggest that asset holders engaged to provide services to another person
                             consider making the following inquiries about their clients:
                             (a)   when assets are to be held by the asset holder—identification of these
                                   assets (from at least the client), clarification of the sources of pricing for
                                   assets that are to be applied by the asset holder, and reconciliation of
                                   holdings against relevant counterparties (such as unit registries) and on
                                   transition from a retiring asset holder;
                             (b)   when acting as a licensed custody provider—verification of the
                                   wholesale status of the client, unless the licensed custody provider
                                   complies on the basis that the client is a retail client;
                             (c)   review of the scope of the business and breadth of the operation for
                                   which custody is provided, including what assets the asset holder may
                                   be called on to hold and what transactions it may be called on to
                                   undertake;
                             (d)   understanding the process for provision of instructions to the asset
                                   holder, including from a third-party fund manager or investment
                                   administrator;
                             (e)   an assessment of whether the asset holder is able to carry out the
                                   mandate of the client (e.g. can the asset holder hold the type of assets
                                   involved and provide the reporting required by the client for these
                                   assets?); and
                             (f)   review of public registers concerning a corporate client’s status and
                                   licences.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 18
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




C          Requirements when engaging another asset
           holder

                              Key points

                              Responsible entities, licensed custody providers, MDA providers or IDPS
                              operators that arrange for another person to hold client assets must take
                              certain steps to protect clients.

                              When engaging an asset holder, they must:
                              • ensure that they have a basis to be confident that the asset holder will
                                meet the minimum standards in Section B, and document how they do
                                this; and
                              • monitor ongoing compliance with the minimum standards and deal
                                appropriately with any deficiencies that arise (see RG 133.65–
                                RG 133.80).

                              They must ensure that there is a legally enforceable agreement, which
                              addresses certain issues, with any asset holder they engage (see
                              RG 133.81–RG 133.108) or any master custodian they engage (see
                              RG 133.120–RG 133.123).

                              The agreement must also address certain issues: see RG 133.109–
                              RG 133.119. For retail clients, we expect the engagement of the asset
                              holder to be disclosed and the role of the asset holder to be properly
                              explained: see RG 133.124–RG 133.125.

                              If a responsible entity changes the asset holder, it must consider whether it
                              is appropriate to obtain an independent report on the transfer of assets: see
                              RG 133.126.




Specific obligations for registered schemes
              RG 133.60      The responsible entity of a registered scheme has power to appoint an asset
                             holder to hold scheme property under s601FB(2).

              RG 133.61      A responsible entity that engages an asset holder to hold scheme property is
                             liable to members for the acts and omissions of the asset holder under s601FB(2).



Obligations for all AFS licensees who engage asset holders
              RG 133.62      An AFS licensee may engage another asset holder because:
                             (a)   it is not permitted to hold assets:
                                   (i)   under its AFS licence (e.g. because it cannot meet the financial
                                         requirements in RG 166); or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                          Page 19
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                                   (ii)   under the Australian Passport Rules; or

                                          Note: The Australian Passport Rules are the Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018
                                          made under s1211(1) and 1211A by the Australian Minister responsible for the
                                          Asia Region Funds Passport. Under s1211(2), the Australian Passport Rules must
                                          be substantially the same as the Passport Rules set out in Annex 3 to the
                                          Memorandum of Cooperation on the Establishment and Implementation of the
                                          Asia Region Funds Passport (Memorandum of Cooperation).

                             (b)   it does not wish to be an asset holder for the relevant assets.

                             If a responsible entity engages another asset holder because it does not meet
                             the financial requirements under ASIC Corporations (Financial
                             Requirements for Responsible Entities, IDPS Operators and Corporate
                             Directors of Retail CCIVs) Instrument 2023/647, it must ensure that all the
                             relevant assets are held by another person. This is apart from any exceptions
                             permitted under ASIC Instrument 2023/647. For responsible entities, these
                             exceptions are ‘Tier $500,000 class assets’ and ‘special custody assets’.

                                   Note: For definitions of these terms, see ASIC Instrument 2023/647 and RG 166.

              RG 133.63      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator must also ensure that client assets are held on trust and segregated
                             from:
                             (a)   its own property; and
                             (b)   in the case of a registered scheme—the property of any other scheme.

                                   Note: Omnibus accounts are excepted from this requirement (see Section G).

              RG 133.64      If a person applies for an AFS licence as a responsible entity, licensed
                             custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator and plans to engage
                             another asset holder, it will need to demonstrate that it will ensure that any
                             asset holder that holds client assets on its behalf meets the minimum
                             standards in Section B.



Ensuring the asset holder meets the minimum standards
              RG 133.65      The minimum standards in Section B apply to all asset holders. This is
                             regardless of whether the asset holder is engaged by a responsible entity,
                             licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator directly or is a
                             sub-custodian engaged by another person (a master custodian) authorised by
                             the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator. The minimum standards also apply if there are further links in a
                             chain (e.g. in the case of a sub-sub-custodian).

              RG 133.66      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator does not routinely need to explain to us how its choice of asset
                             holder or master custodian will meet the minimum standards when it applies
                             for an AFS licence or otherwise. However, when applying for an AFS



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                 Page 20
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             licence it will need to explain the process it will use. If the responsible
                             entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator plans to
                             engage another person as asset holder directly, or indirectly through a master
                             custodian, it must be able to demonstrate how it will:
                             (a)   ensure any asset holder that is engaged meets the minimum standards;
                             (b)   monitor ongoing compliance with the minimum standards and deal with
                                   any deficiencies that arise; and
                             (c)   achieve the outcomes in RG 133.66(a)–RG 133.66(b) where the assets
                                   are outside Australia, except where exceptions are recognised.

              RG 133.67      Where appropriate, the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA
                             provider or IDPS operator may be able to meet the obligations in RG 133.66
                             in relation to an asset holder that is appointed by a master custodian by
                             seeking appropriate information or assurance from the master custodian.

              RG 133.68      To check compliance, we may ask for written evidence at any time about
                             how the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or
                             IDPS operator is satisfied that a particular person should be appointed or
                             remain as the asset holder.

              RG 133.69      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator must ensure that any relevant master custodian has adequate
                             processes. This includes adequate processes for selecting, monitoring and
                             reviewing any other person engaged as asset holder (even if the asset holder
                             is a related party) and taking appropriate action on any deficiency of
                             performance.

              RG 133.70      Key processes must be documented. This includes the processes the
                             responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator has followed or will follow for appointing, monitoring and
                             reviewing the activities of the asset holder or master custodian. Where they
                             engage an asset holder that is a related party, they must have adequate
                             arrangements to manage any conflicts of interest under s912A(1)(aa) to
                             ensure that it meets all its obligations. This includes its obligation to ensure
                             that the minimum standards are met.

                                   Note: For more information on managing conflicts of interest, see RG 181.


                             Selecting an asset holder

              RG 133.71      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator must follow a reasonable documented process in selecting an
                             appropriate asset holder or master custodian. We expect it will consider, for
                             example:
                             (a)   the adequacy of financial, human and technological resources, and risk
                                   management systems of the asset holder; and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                               Page 21
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             (b)   where it engages a master custodian—the basis on which the master
                                   custodian will engage any sub-custodian.

              RG 133.72      For a responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator, the engagement must be in accordance with a documented policy
                             approved by the directors. The policy must address any conflict of interest
                             that might arise from the engagement and, in the case of a responsible entity,
                             any other considerations relevant to the best interests of members.

              RG 133.73      The appropriateness of the policy must be reviewed at least every 13 months.
                             At our request, a responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider
                             or IDPS operator must, at its own expense, arrange for a report on the
                             effectiveness or reasonableness of the policy. The written direction may
                             specify who is to prepare the report and when.

              RG 133.74      We expect that the risks arising from engaging an asset holder will be
                             addressed in the risk management arrangements of a responsible entity,
                             licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator. We also expect
                             responsible entities, licensed custody providers, MDA providers or IDPS
                             operators to apply appropriate resources to ensure that any arrangements for
                             holding assets are consistent with their obligations. This includes ensuring that
                             the minimum standards are met.


                             Monitoring ongoing compliance

              RG 133.75      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator must have an established process to monitor and assess an asset
                             holder’s performance of the asset holder’s obligations.

              RG 133.76      If the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator delegates decisions to the asset holder about which authorised
                             deposit-taking institution (ADI) or foreign equivalent are used, or how
                             foreign exchange transactions are entered, they must be satisfied about the
                             asset holder’s written processes for:
                             (a)   determining which account to use;
                             (b)   monitoring performance of the issuer’s obligations; and
                             (c)   taking action in case of a deficiency arising from the failure of the
                                   issuer of the account.

              RG 133.77      In addition, if the asset holder is permitted to choose to use its associate, a
                             responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator will need to check the adequacy of the process to ensure that the
                             conflict is managed so outcomes are no less favourable than if there was not
                             an association.

                                   Note: A responsible entity of a registered scheme must also comply with Pt 5C.7 about
                                   related party transactions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                 Page 22
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.78      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator must ensure that records of the relevant assets are kept in a way that
                             enables the holding of the assets to be audited. It should also ensure that it
                             enforces contractual rights to a written annual acknowledgement by the asset
                             holder that any relevant assets are held in compliance with the minimum
                             standards. This includes that the assets are held on trust when required and
                             separated, subject to the permitted use of omnibus accounts. This also applies
                             where a master custodian engages an asset holder.

                                   Note: For the use of omnibus accounts, see Section G.

              RG 133.79      In addition, we expect a responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA
                             provider or IDPS operator to seek:
                             (a)   information to satisfy itself that the asset holder’s internal processes and
                                   controls are adequate and continue to operate effectively, and that they
                                   are subject to appropriate independent checking; and
                             (b)   periodic information from the asset holder about the effectiveness of
                                   such controls, and actions taken or planned to address any concerns.

              RG 133.80      We expect that, where appropriate, a responsible entity, licensed custody
                             provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator will obtain a copy of and consider
                             an independent audit of the effectiveness of the controls applying to the asset
                             holding. This could be an audit based on Guidance Statement GS 007 Audit
                             implications of the use of service organisations for investment management
                             services, issued by the Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (AUASB), or
                             another appropriate international equivalent (e.g. Statement on Standards for
                             Attestation Engagements SSAE No. 18 Attestation standards: Clarification
                             and recodification (PDF 956 KB). This audit may be performed on the basis
                             of an engagement by the asset holder.

                                   Note: GS 007 is designed to provide detailed and transparent reporting on relevant
                                   control frameworks of asset holders and other custodians. It includes guidance on how
                                   to apply the AUASB’s relevant auditing and assurance standards when preparing audit
                                   and assurance reports on the description, design and operating effectiveness of the
                                   service organisation’s controls over the investment management services.




Requirements for the content of custody agreements

                             Agreement with an asset holder

              RG 133.81      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator must ensure that there is a legally enforceable agreement with any
                             asset holder it engages. There must be an agreement with any master
                             custodian and also between any master custodian and asset holder (sub-
                             custodian) that addresses the relevant issues. The agreement must generally
                             be in writing, unless the criteria in RG 133.122–RG 133.123 are met.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                 Page 23
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.82      The agreement with an asset holder must address the issues in RG 133.83–
                             RG 133.108.

                             Rights to review and monitor the asset holder

              RG 133.83      The agreement must provide the responsible entity, licensed custody
                             provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator with reasonable rights for the
                             ongoing review and monitoring of the asset holder and any sub-custodians.
                             The agreement must also address the criteria against which their
                             performance will be assessed. We expect that these rights and criteria must
                             be adequate to ensure:
                             (a)   the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                                   operator can meet its obligations to its clients under the Corporations Act;
                             (b)   ASIC’s minimum standards for asset holders are met; and
                             (c)   the services provided will at least meet the standards generally applying
                                   in the relevant markets for the assets held.

                             Written certification

              RG 133.84      The agreement must require that the asset holder will give a certification to
                             the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator in writing at least every 13 months. The asset holder must certify
                             that, other than in any trivial respect or as previously disclosed to the
                             responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator in writing, it believes on reasonable grounds that, since the date of
                             the previous statement in writing or the commencement of the agreement:
                             (a)   it has met, and has no reason to believe that it will not continue to meet,
                                   the minimum standards in the relevant ASIC legislative instrument that
                                   reflects the standards for asset holders (whether or not there is any
                                   explicit reference to the instrument in the agreement); and
                             (b)   it is complying with the agreement.

                             Manner in which assets are held

              RG 133.85      The agreement must require that the asset holder, on request, will:
                             (a)   formally acknowledge the manner in which it holds assets; and
                             (b)   notify any other person where the asset holder is aware that to do so
                                   might protect the interest in the assets of the client for whom the assets
                                   are held. However, the responsible entity, licensed custody provider,
                                   MDA provider or IDPS operator may direct otherwise in writing.

                             Giving of instructions

              RG 133.86      The agreement must set out how instructions will be given to the asset
                             holder.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 24
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             Liability

              RG 133.87      The agreement must contain reasonable liability provisions. If appropriate,
                             the agreement must also contain reasonable indemnity provisions for losses
                             caused to the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or
                             IDPS operator by the acts and omissions of the asset holder that relate to the
                             agreement.

              RG 133.88      We expect that a responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA
                             provider or IDPS operator would not compromise the interests of its clients
                             in the presence of liability or indemnity provisions, unless it is satisfied that
                             any additional cost would be disproportionate to the benefits to its clients.
                             Clients have a significant interest in promoting compliance by the asset
                             holder and, in the event of non-compliance, receiving compensation for loss
                             by the asset holder. Without implying that it would be sufficient, at a
                             minimum, a responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or
                             IDPS operator must:
                             (a)   not agree to any broad exclusion of any liability for direct losses that
                                   would apply for the failure to take reasonable care under general law;
                                   and
                             (b)   only allow any limited exclusion if reasonable.

                             Security interests, mortgages, liens or other encumbrances

              RG 133.89      The agreement must prohibit the asset holder from taking or granting to its
                             associates a security interest, mortgage, lien or other encumbrance over, or
                             in relation to, the assets held under the agreement. This is not required if the
                             responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator reasonably believes, for documented reasons, that any conflict that
                             may arise as a result of the security interest, mortgage, lien or other
                             encumbrance will not materially increase the risk that the asset holder will
                             fail to meet its obligations. The responsible entity, licensed custody provider,
                             MDA provider or IDPS operator should be satisfied that the asset holder
                             would meet its obligations under the agreement, even if acting contrary to
                             the agreement might maximise the value of the lien.

              RG 133.90      A responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator must keep the written record of reasons for seven years after the
                             security interest, mortgage, lien or other encumbrance has ceased. For
                             example, an asset holder may have a lien over assets held to secure
                             entitlement to expenses incurred and it may exercise that right in its own
                             interest subject to the terms of, or legal rights under, the lien.

                             Record keeping and reporting

              RG 133.91      The agreement must set out how records of the assets are held and how
                             transactions are recorded including by whom, by what means and when they



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 25
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             were authorised. These records must be kept and maintained by the asset
                             holder and made available to the responsible entity, licensed custody
                             provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator. This includes:
                             (a)   the verification procedures for the appropriately frequent reconciliation
                                   and checking of the balances of client assets held by the asset holder; and
                             (b)   the requirements for reporting by the asset holder.

                             Auditing

              RG 133.92      The agreement must require that the asset holder provides all reasonable
                             access and assistance to any auditor engaged to perform an audit.
                                   Note 1: Under reg 5C.4.02 of the Corporations Regulations, an agent of a responsible
                                   entity, such as an asset holder, must give the auditor of the registered scheme’s
                                   compliance plan access to the books of the scheme, and assist in the conduct of the
                                   audit. Under reg 5C.5.01, responsible entities and their agents must give the compliance
                                   committee access to the books of the scheme and assist the committee in the
                                   performance of its functions.

                                   Note 2: We may require an AFS licensee and an agent of a responsible entity to assist us
                                   in checking compliance: see s601FF and 912E of the Corporations Act and reg 5C.2.01
                                   of the Corporations Regulations. We also have powers to require production of books
                                   under the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act).


                             Identity of any agents

              RG 133.93      The agreement must provide that before arranging for assets to be held by
                             another person as agent, the arranging asset holder will provide the
                             responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS
                             operator with written notice of the identity of, and contact information for,
                             each agent. This written notice should be provided where reasonably
                             practicable and, in any event, before the assets are held, except in
                             exceptional circumstances identified in the agreement.

                             Termination

              RG 133.94      The agreement must set out that the responsible entity, licensed custody
                             provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator has the right to terminate the
                             agreement if it has reasonable grounds for believing that the asset holder is
                             not complying with, or is unlikely to comply with, the agreement to a
                             material extent and that, as a result, the asset holder will not comply with the
                             relevant requirements. This should take into account any remedy provided,
                             or that may be expected to be provided, by the asset holder. The relevant
                             requirements are the requirements that the responsible entity, licensed
                             custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator must ensure the asset
                             holder meets in providing the services under the agreement (reflecting
                             ASIC’s minimum standards) and the requirement that records must be kept
                             to enable convenient audit.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                   Page 26
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.95      The provisions for termination where the responsible entity, licensed custody
                             provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator has reasonable grounds for
                             holding that belief must include, at a minimum, provisions to the effect that
                             it may terminate the agreement:
                             (a)   without payment, other than of entitlements previously accrued or the
                                   reasonable fees, costs and expenses involved in the transfer of the assets
                                   to the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or
                                   IDPS operator or another asset holder; and
                             (b)   without limiting any right to damages the responsible entity, licensed
                                   custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator may have under the
                                   agreement, including recovering the expenses referred to in
                                   RG 133.95(a) if the asset holder is in breach.

              RG 133.96      The agreement must also require that, on termination, the assets will be
                             transferred to the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA
                             provider or IDPS operator, or be transferred as they lawfully direct within a
                             reasonable period. The agreement must provide for the obligations of the
                             parties at termination. This includes the payment of outstanding fees and
                             charges to the asset holder and any costs of the transfer.

                             Breach reporting

              RG 133.97      The agreement must require that material or systemic breaches of the
                             agreement by the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider
                             or IDPS operator or the asset holder will be notified by the asset holder to:
                             (a)   the responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or
                                   IDPS operator; and
                             (b)   if the client is a responsible entity, its board of directors or the
                                   compliance committee of each relevant scheme.

                                   Note: This is in addition to any other statutory breach reporting requirements.

              RG 133.98      The agreement must also require the notification to be in writing and given
                             within a reasonable timeframe of the asset holder becoming aware of the
                             breach.

                             Arrangements with other parties

              RG 133.99      The agreement must set out the terms on which the asset holder is authorised
                             to directly or indirectly engage another party as asset holder and require
                             provisions of the appointment in a written agreement in accordance with the
                             requirements in this guide. This is subject to the exceptions in RG 133.122.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                     Page 27
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             Business continuity

              RG 133.100     The agreement must require that the asset holder will establish and maintain
                             business continuity arrangements that are reasonable for the nature, scale and
                             complexity of its business.

                             Confidentiality

              RG 133.101     The agreement must require that the asset holder will keep in confidence any
                             information of a confidential nature. However, any disclosure to ASIC or
                             disclosure as permitted by law or by the client is excepted.

                             Suspicious matter reporting for responsible entities

              RG 133.102     For a responsible entity of a registered scheme, the agreement must provide
                             that the asset holder will establish and maintain adequate arrangements to
                             ensure that it will report to ASIC within 10 business days if it suspects the
                             responsible entity has breached its obligations to report its own reportable
                             situations under s912DAA.

              RG 133.103     The required arrangements relate only to what the asset holder does after the
                             suspicion arises. This is regardless of whether the suspicion arise from:
                             (a)   inquiries it undertakes for another purpose (including in relation to other
                                   arrangements with the asset holder that reflect obligations applying
                                   under the AML/CTF Act);
                             (b)   information obtained in the ordinary course of business; or
                             (c)   information received from another source.

              RG 133.104     The required arrangements are not the source of any obligation to make
                             inquiries.

              RG 133.105     We would expect the asset holder to use reasonable judgement in
                             determining whether to discuss the suspicion with the responsible entity
                             before reporting to ASIC. We accept that, under the required arrangements,
                             if an employee or agent of the asset holder has such a suspicion, the asset
                             holder may give reasonable consideration to determine if there are grounds
                             for the suspicion before reporting to ASIC.

              RG 133.106     The agreement must not contain any provision that would require the asset
                             holder to notify the responsible entity of suspicious matter reporting by the
                             asset holder to ASIC about the responsible entity’s activities. However,
                             except as otherwise restricted by law or where it would be imprudent in light
                             of the risk of tipping off a person engaged in misconduct, it may generally be
                             appropriate to seek clarification from the responsible entity after the matter
                             is considered under the internal governance arrangements of the asset holder.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 28
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.107     We consider that entities that are considering committing, or not reporting,
                             significant breaches may be deterred if they know that the asset holder could
                             identify such a breach and report it to ASIC.

              RG 133.108     We also consider that asset holders that provide services under contract, and
                             their employees, can report suspicious matters to ASIC under the
                             whistleblower protection in Pt 9.4AAA, including where the AML/CTF Act
                             may not apply.

                                   Note: For information on whistleblower protection, see Information Sheet 238
                                   Whistleblower rights and protections (INFO 238) and Information Sheet 239 How ASIC
                                   handles whistleblower reports (INFO 239).


                             Agreement as a retail client

              RG 133.109     If the asset holder is engaged by a retail client, the agreement must set out the
                             issues in RG 133.110–RG 133.119, as relevant.

                             Manner in which assets are held

              RG 133.110     The agreement with the retail client must require that the asset holder will
                             tell the retail client, on request, the manner in which it holds the assets.

                             Giving of instructions

              RG 133.111     The agreement with the retail client must set out how instructions will be
                             given to the asset holder.

                             Liability

              RG 133.112     The agreement with the retail client must state that the asset holder is liable
                             to the client if there is a loss to the client because of a failure by the asset
                             holder, or any sub-custodian engaged by them, to comply with the duties
                             under the agreement or to observe reasonable standards generally applied by
                             providers of custodial services. This is subject to provision for the asset
                             holder to limit its liability resulting from the failure of a sub-custodian it has
                             appointed if that sub-custodian is insolvent and the asset holder (as master
                             custodian) has taken reasonable care in appointing and monitoring the
                             sub-custodian’s compliance.

                             Security interests, mortgages, liens or other encumbrances

              RG 133.113     The agreement with the retail client must prohibit the asset holder from
                             taking or granting a security interest, mortgage, lien or other encumbrance
                             over, or in relation to, the assets held under the arrangement. The exception
                             to this is a security interest, mortgage, lien or other encumbrance:
                             (a)   for expenses and outlays made within the terms of the agreement other
                                   than any of its unpaid fees; or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                             Page 29
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             (b)   entered into in accordance with the client’s written instructions.

                             Record keeping and reporting

              RG 133.114     The agreement with the retail client must address how records of the assets
                             are held and any transactions recorded, including how, by whom and when
                             they were authorised. These records must be kept and maintained by the
                             asset holder and made available to the client. This includes:
                             (a)   the verification procedures for the appropriately frequent reconciliation
                                   and checking of the balances of client assets held by the asset holder; and
                             (b)   the requirements for reporting by the asset holder.

                             Identity of any agents

              RG 133.115     Where practicable, the agreement with the retail client must provide that the
                             asset holder will provide the client, with written notice of the identity of, and
                             contact information for, each agent:
                             (a)   before arranging for the assets to be held by another person as agent;
                                   and
                             (b)   in any event, before the assets are held, except in exceptional
                                   circumstances identified in the agreement.

                             Termination

              RG 133.116     The agreement with the retail client must require that on termination the
                             assets will be transferred to the client, or otherwise transferred as the client
                             lawfully directs within a reasonable time.

              RG 133.117     The agreement must provide for other obligations of the parties at
                             termination. This includes the payment of outstanding fees and charges to
                             the asset holder and any costs of the transfer.


                             Business continuity

              RG 133.118     The agreement with the retail client must state that the asset holder will
                             establish and maintain arrangements to enable it to provide the services
                             under the agreement in any contingency for which it should reasonably plan.
                             Those arrangements must be reasonable for the nature, scale and complexity
                             of the asset holder’s business.


                             Confidentiality

              RG 133.119     The agreement with the retail client must require that the asset holder will
                             keep any information of a confidential nature in confidence. However, any
                             disclosure to ASIC or disclosure as permitted by law or by the client is
                             excepted.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 30
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             Agreement with a master custodian

              RG 133.120     In many cases, a responsible entity, MDA provider or IDPS operator will not
                             directly engage an asset holder, but will engage a master custodian that
                             engages the asset holder (or sub-custodian). As far as possible, the same
                             minimum standards should apply for an asset holder that is a sub-custodian
                             engaged by a master custodian. However, in the case of a responsible entity,
                             the provisions referred to in RG 133.102–RG 133.108 on suspicious matter
                             reporting do need to be included if the master custodian holds a beneficial
                             interest in the client assets for the responsible entity.
              RG 133.121     If a responsible entity, MDA provider or IDPS operator engages a master
                             custodian that appoints a sub-custodian, it must enter into a written agreement
                             with the master custodian reflecting the terms required in an agreement with
                             an asset holder in RG 133.83–RG 133.101. That agreement must contain an
                             obligation for the master custodian to ensure its agreement with the
                             sub-custodian is in writing and on substantively the same terms as required for
                             an agreement with an asset holder (other than the requirement in RG 133.102–
                             RG 133.108 on suspicious matter reporting).
              RG 133.122     In some cases, it may not be reasonably practicable to engage another person
                             to hold client assets outside Australia who is willing to include such matters in
                             the agreement. In this case, to the extent that it is not reasonably practicable to
                             ensure compliance, the agreement between the master custodian and the
                             sub-custodian does not need to contain the matters in RG 133.83–RG 133.101
                             or RG 133.110–RG 133.119. However, the master custodian must provide the
                             responsible entity, licensed custody provider, MDA provider or IDPS operator
                             with documents that demonstrate it is not reasonably practicable to engage
                             another person to hold the assets who is willing to include such matters in the
                             agreement.
              RG 133.123     The requirement for a master custodian to enter into an agreement does not
                             apply if the sub-custodian is controlled by the master custodian and the master
                             custodian is liable to its client for the acts and omissions of the sub-custodian
                             as if they were the acts or omissions of the master custodian.



Disclosure to retail clients of relationship with asset holder
              RG 133.124     For retail clients, we expect responsible entities, MDA providers and IDPS
                             operators to explain in the Product Disclosure Statement (PDS), Financial
                             Services Guide (FSG) or IDPS Guide the limited role of the asset holder in
                             holding the assets or scheme property, and acting only as a custodian. We
                             also expect responsible entities, MDA providers and IDPS operators to
                             explain the limited role of the asset holder more generally in
                             communications with clients that refer to the asset holder as a custodian. To
                             promote understanding, in communications to retail clients the role of the



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 31
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             asset holder should be explained in a clear, concise and effective manner.
                             This includes the limited nature of the services undertaken.

              RG 133.125     Where some of the assets or scheme property may not be held on trust by the
                             asset holder, these circumstances may also need to be explained in
                             communications.



Transfer of assets when asset holder is changed
              RG 133.126     If a responsible entity changes the asset holder, it must consider whether it is
                             appropriate to obtain a report from an unrelated person with relevant knowledge
                             confirming that all assets to be transferred have been identified and transferred.
                             Verification of the appropriate identification and transfer of assets may involve
                             checking reconciliations between the outgoing and incoming asset holder or
                             obtaining an audit. If the responsible entity does not consider it is in the best
                             interests of members to obtain the report, it must keep a record in writing of the
                             grounds for its belief. It must keep this record for seven years.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 32
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




D          Compliance controls for licensed custody
           providers

                              Key points

                              This section applies to licensed custody providers. It does not apply to
                              registered schemes, MDAs and IDPSs. For information on compliance
                              controls addressing risks to client assets applicable to registered schemes,
                              MDAs and IDPSs, see Regulatory Guide 132 Funds management:
                              Compliance and oversight (RG 132).

                              As an AFS licensee, a licensed custody provider must have documented
                              compliance controls to ensure that it complies with its obligations in relation
                              to client assets.

                              Compliance controls may vary depending on the nature and amount of
                              assets and who holds them.



Compliance controls must cover risks to client assets
              RG 133.127     A licensed custody provider must establish and maintain adequate
                             documented controls to demonstrate that it is complying with its AFS licence
                             obligations.

                                  Note: We use the term compliance ‘controls’ instead of ‘compliance measures’, as this
                                  reflects Australian Standard AS ISO 37301:2023 Compliance management systems—
                                  Requirements with guidance for use.



Compliance controls may vary
              RG 133.128     We have not prescribed in detail what compliance controls should be put in
                             place for dealing with client assets.

              RG 133.129     There will be different risks to clients arising out of the different ways that
                             client assets are held. This includes whether the licensed custody provider is
                             the asset holder or if it engages another asset holder to hold some or all the
                             assets. We also recognise that what is required in documented compliance
                             controls will depend on the nature and amount of assets held.

              RG 133.130     For example, more sophisticated compliance controls may be required by a
                             standalone custody business that provides services for a full range of
                             financial products, compared to a licensed custody provider that holds only a
                             limited range and value of assets.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                Page 33
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             If the licensed custody provider is the asset holder

              RG 133.131     If the licensed custody provider is the asset holder, we consider its
                             documented compliance controls should include:
                             (a)   regular checks to ensure that all record keeping for client assets is
                                   carried out in a timely and accurate manner; and
                             (b)   measures for ensuring that the minimum standards in Section B of this
                                   guide are met.


                             If another person is the asset holder

              RG 133.132     If the licensed custody provider engages another person as an asset holder,
                             we expect it to ensure that clients are protected from the possible compliance
                             risks arising from this arrangement.

              RG 133.133     We consider the licensed custody provider’s documented compliance
                             controls should set out the controls it will take to minimise these risks. This
                             would include, for example, controls for ensuring that:
                             (a)   it will allow a person to be the asset holder only if the person meets the
                                   minimum standards in Section B;
                             (b)   the activities of the asset holder will be actively monitored and
                                   appropriate action taken in case of deficiencies; and
                             (c)   any agreement entered into with the asset holder will remain compliant
                                   and current.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 34
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




E          Protection of rights for land used in registered
           schemes

                              Key points

                              This section applies to registered schemes.
                              In order to comply with its responsible entity duties and general AFS
                              licensee duties under the Corporations Act, the responsible entity of a
                              primary production registered scheme must adequately protect the rights to
                              use the land for the purposes of the scheme.
                              In order to adequately protect the rights to the land, the responsible entity
                              should ensure that members of the scheme have an interest in the land
                              registered under state or territory land title laws.
                              The land should be held in a way that protects members from risks that are
                              outside the scope of the scheme, such as the insolvency of a landowner.




Protecting members’ rights
              RG 133.134     In many primary production registered schemes, members contract with the
                             responsible entity to set up and maintain the scheme, and harvest or exploit
                             its products in the context that there will be arrangements allowing the use of
                             certain land. For example, this could apply to schemes involved in
                             agriculture, use of animals, harnessing energy from solar or wind energy, or
                             obtaining benefits from sequestering carbon dioxide. The land often remains
                             the property of the responsible entity, or an associate or unrelated landowner,
                             and reverts to it when the scheme ends.
              RG 133.135     We consider that it is inconsistent with the obligation of a responsible entity
                             to do all things necessary to ensure that it operates a registered scheme
                             efficiently, honestly and fairly to operate the scheme if the scheme is subject
                             to risks of failure because of inadequate protection of the rights to use land
                             for the scheme for the expected duration of the scheme. We consider the
                             rights of members in relation to the land requiring protection include the
                             rights sufficient to enable access, cultivation, transmission, exploitation,
                             maintenance, protection, repair, refurbishment, and harvesting or obtaining
                             output from the scheme, where relevant to the scheme.
              RG 133.136     To provide adequate protection of the rights to land, it is appropriate that
                             members have an interest in the land registered under the state or territory land
                             title laws—for example, by lodging the instruments before or immediately after
                             the interests in the registered scheme are issued. We consider that land should
                             be held in a way that protects members from risks outside the scope of the
                             scheme, such as the insolvency of a landowner.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 35
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.137     Certain risks arise if members are not protected by an interest in land (needed
                             for operation of the scheme) that:
                             (a)   is registered under state or territory laws;
                             (b)   is paramount; and

                             (c)   cannot lawfully be adversely affected by any existing or subsequent
                                   secured creditor or a transferee, except one whose title has been
                                   conferred by the responsible entity in accordance with its duties.

              RG 133.138     Risks to members include the following:
                             (a)   the holder of the interest in the land may have used, or may use, the
                                   land as security without acknowledging the interests of members. If
                                   there is a default, the secured creditor may act without regard to the
                                   interests of the members;
                             (b)   a person holding an interest in the land on which the registered scheme
                                   relies (landowner)—or a liquidator of a landowner or other person
                                   authorised to act on a landowner’s behalf—may restrict access to land
                                   that is reasonably necessary for the operation of the scheme but is not
                                   covered by the interest;
                             (c)   a landowner—or a liquidator of a landowner or other person authorised
                                   to act on the landowner’s behalf—may transfer the land (or an interest
                                   in the land) and the transferee may not be under an obligation to
                                   recognise the rights of the members regarding the land; and
                             (d)   it may be practically difficult to continue to operate or to wind up the
                                   registered scheme if a landowner has become insolvent.

              RG 133.139     If the interest in the land continues only while the obligations of the interest
                             holder to others with an interest in the land (e.g. a secured creditor or lessor)
                             are being met, failure to meet these obligations may result in the loss of the
                             interest. Retail investors may not expect the registered scheme to be put at
                             risk by such failures. If the security or lease has been entered into by the
                             responsible entity in accordance with its duties, risk remains and may require
                             disclosure to retail clients.

                                   Note: For more information on disclosure to retail clients, see Regulatory Guide 232
                                   Agribusiness managed investment schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors
                                   (RG 232). RG 232 includes a disclosure principle dealing with a responsible entity’s
                                   disclosure obligations in relation to the arrangements entered into to secure rights of
                                   access or tenure to the resources and infrastructure required to operate the agribusiness
                                   scheme, including any land, licences or leases, and water.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                     Page 36
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.140     Registration of an interest does not ensure the land right that the interest
                             might normally confer can be used. There may be other rights to use land,
                             such as native title rights. A responsible entity must only offer interests in
                             the registered scheme if following reasonable inquiry it does not believe that
                             there are such rights or that government action or refusal to grant permission
                             will mean the land cannot be used for the scheme as intended.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 37
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




F          Holding crypto-assets

                              Key points

                              This section applies to:
                              • responsible entities where scheme assets comprise or include crypto-
                                assets; and
                              • custodians where the crypto-assets are financial products.

                              It contains ASIC’s expectations of such asset holders, including the
                              requirement to have specialist expertise and infrastructure relating to
                              crypto-asset custody.

              RG 133.141     We consider the following measures are good practice for the asset holder,
                             and any custodian engaged by it, holding the crypto assets:
                             (a)   It should have:
                                   (i)     specialist expertise and infrastructure relating to crypto-asset
                                           custody, including robust systems and practices to receive,
                                           validate, review, report and execute instructions from the relevant
                                           client; and
                                   (ii)    robust cyber and physical security practices for its operations,
                                           including appropriate internal governance and controls, risk
                                           management and business continuity practices.
                             (b)   The crypto-assets should be segregated on the blockchain. This means
                                   that unique public and private keys are maintained by the asset holder
                                   so that the other assets are not intermingled with other crypto-asset
                                   holdings.
                             (c)   The private keys used to access the crypto-assets should be generated
                                   and stored in a way that minimises the risk of loss and unauthorised
                                   access as detailed in the following examples:
                                   (i)     Solutions that protect private key material using hardware devices
                                           should be physically isolated and have appropriately limited
                                           connectivity to other computing systems (cold storage). Private key
                                           material should not be held on internet-connected systems or
                                           networked hardware (hot storage) beyond what is strictly necessary
                                           for the operation of the product.
                                   (ii)    Hardware devices used to hold private key material should be
                                           subject to robust physical security practices.
                                   (iii)   Effective systems and processes for key backup and recovery
                                           should be maintained, with geographically distributed backup sites
                                           preferred.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                          Page 38
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             (d)   Signing approaches that minimise ‘single point of failure risk’ should be
                                   adopted.
                             (e)   Cyber security practices and the controls environment should be
                                   independently verified to an appropriate standard—for example:
                                   (i)     System and organisation controls report 1 and report 2;
                                   (ii)    GS 007;
                                   (iii)   International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC
                                           27001:2022 Information security, cybersecurity and privacy
                                           protection—Information security management systems—
                                           Requirements (ISO 27001) and ISO/IEC 27002:2022 Information
                                           security, cybersecurity and privacy protection—Information
                                           security controls (ISO 27002); and
                                   (iv)    National Institute of Standards and Technology, Cybersecurity
                                           framework (NIST CSF).

              RG 133.142     The security of private keys is of critical importance. Private keys are
                             necessary to sign transactions that assign crypto-assets to new addresses. If
                             private keys are compromised, unauthorised parties can use them to transfer
                             the crypto-assets to addresses (and parties) that are outside the control of the
                             asset holder. Accordingly, asset holders should ensure that the private keys
                             used are protected from unauthorised access—both online and offline.

              RG 133.143     Asset holders should adopt a transaction-signing approach that minimises
                             single point of failure risk. For example, a multi-signature or sharding-based
                             signing approach is preferred to a single private key to sign transactions. As
                             technology develops, other suitable approaches may also emerge. It is a
                             matter for the asset holder to determine the most effective approach,
                             considering the benefits and drawbacks of different approaches.

              RG 133.144     The process of receiving, validating, reviewing and executing instructions
                             should include appropriate permissioning so that no one party has control of
                             the entire process. If the structure of the product is such that it only needs to
                             interact with a predefined set of addresses—for example, particular dealers,
                             markets or authorised participants—the asset holder should consider a
                             whitelist approach, so that transfers can only be made to those predefined
                             addresses.

              RG 133.145     In relation to compensation systems, we consider it good practice that asset
                             holders have access to an arrangement so that clients can be compensated if
                             crypto-assets are lost. The precise nature of the arrangement—including
                             what is covered, how much is covered, and its form (e.g. insurance, an asset
                             protection plan or compensation fund)—is for the asset holder to determine,
                             taking into account the nature of the product and obligations at law.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                          Page 39
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.146     We consider it good practice that cyber security practices and controls
                             environments are independently verified to an appropriate standard, as
                             determined by industry practice. It is a matter for the responsible entity to
                             decide whether they are satisfied with the standards, certifications or
                             attestations that the custodian has achieved.

              RG 133.147     Asset holders should, where appropriate, take the necessary steps to obtain a
                             copy of and consider an independent audit of the effectiveness of the
                             controls of a third-party service organisation responsible for custody of
                             assets. Where crypto-assets are held, it is expected this would include
                             controls determined by industry practice for mandated standards,
                             certifications or attestations that are expected for custodians of crypto-assets.
                             This could be an audit based on GS 007 or a comparable audit from other
                             jurisdictions.



Risk management by asset holders regarding crypto-asset
exchanges used to obtain crypto-assets
              RG 133.148     An AFS licensee must do all things necessary to ensure that the financial
                             services covered by the licence are provided efficiently, honestly and fairly:
                             see s912A(1)(a). Under s912A(1)(h), most AFS licensees are required to
                             have adequate risk management systems.

              RG 133.149     We consider it good practice for asset holders to carefully consider where
                             they source their crypto-assets from, including their service providers used to
                             buy or sell crypto-assets. In particular:
                             (a)   the asset holder should be satisfied, based on reasonable due diligence,
                                   that any service provider it relies on to buy or sell crypto-assets:
                                   (i)    is a digital currency exchange provider registered with the
                                          Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC),
                                          or is regulated by one or more laws of a foreign country giving
                                          effect to the Financial Action Task Force recommendations
                                          relating to customer due diligence and record-keeping; and
                                   (ii)   implements risk-based systems and controls under the AML/CTF
                                          Act that are supervised or monitored by a body empowered by law
                                          to supervise and enforce the customer due diligence and record-
                                          keeping obligations; and
                             (b)   the asset holder should ensure that authorised participants, market
                                   makers and other service providers that trade crypto-assets in
                                   connection with the product do so through a service provider that meets
                                   the same standard as above.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                          Page 40
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




              RG 133.150     The obligations under the AML/CTF Act require entities to, among other
                             things, have customer identification procedures and aim to reduce the risk of
                             crypto-assets being used to support criminal activity.

              RG 133.151     Research also suggests that market integrity issues are more prevalent on
                             crypto-asset markets with lower levels of regulation, compliance and
                             transparency.

              RG 133.152     The asset holder is responsible for ensuring its risk management systems
                             appropriately manage all other risks posed by crypto-assets. This could
                             include implementing or applying relevant standards published by Australian
                             and international organisations as they are developed.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 41
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




G          Relief from the obligation to separate assets

                              Key points

                              A responsible entity must ensure that scheme property is clearly identified
                              as scheme property and held separately from its property and the property
                              of any other scheme.

                              We have given limited relief to responsible entities from this requirement,
                              and make similar exceptions for other asset holders, to allow the use of
                              omnibus accounts.



Specific obligations for registered schemes
              RG 133.153     A responsible entity that holds scheme property on trust under s601FC(2)
                             must generally ensure that property of the registered scheme is:
                             (a)   clearly identified as scheme property (see s601FC(1)(i)(i)); and
                             (b)   held separately from the responsible entity’s property and the property
                                   of any other scheme (see s601FC(1)(i)(ii)).



Obligations for other AFS licensees who are asset holders
              RG 133.154     Similar requirements apply if an AFS licensee holds assets as a licensed
                             custody provider under ASIC Instrument 2024/17, an MDA provider under
                             ASIC Instrument 2016/968 or an IDPS operator under ASIC Instrument
                             2023/669.


Relief for omnibus accounts
              RG 133.155     In some circumstances, it may not be appropriate to separate assets from
                             those of other persons or schemes. Holding certain classes of assets
                             separately may be inconsistent with market practice where it is likely to
                             substantially add to the cost of holding assets or scheme property. We have
                             given limited relief from s601FC(1)(i) to responsible entities in certain
                             circumstances. This is subject to requirements to ensure that the interests of
                             members are not put at any material risk of being lost by any pooling
                             arrangements: see ASIC Instrument 2024/16.

              RG 133.156     Our relief under ASIC Instrument 2024/16 permits responsible entities to use
                             omnibus accounts for:
                             (a)   Australian or foreign currency;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 42
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             (b)   a deposit-taking facility with a body carrying on a business of accepting
                                   money on deposit, including rights under that facility;
                             (c)   securities; or
                             (d)   derivatives.

              RG 133.157     This relief applies subject to ASIC’s power to exclude reliance by a
                             responsible entity in certain circumstances.

                                   Note: For information on how to apply for relief, see Regulatory Guide 51 Applications
                                   for relief (RG 51) and Regulatory Guide 136 Funds management: Discretionary powers
                                   (RG 136).

              RG 133.158     Provisions regarding the use of pools (e.g. omnibus accounts) also apply to
                             licensed custody providers under ASIC Instrument 2024/17, MDA providers
                             under ASIC Instrument 2016/968 and IDPS operators under ASIC Instrument
                             2023/669.

              RG 133.159     Omnibus accounts are permitted where:
                             (a)   the assets are held separately from the assets of the AFS licensee
                                   engaging the asset holder and the asset holder;
                             (b)   the AFS licensee responsible for ensuring that the assets are held (e.g.
                                   the responsible entity) ensures that the asset holder:
                                   (i)     maintains adequate records at all times showing the entitlement of
                                           clients in the assets not held separately;
                                   (ii)    performs reconciliation procedures on each business day for the
                                           assets not held separately. An exception to this is if, because of the
                                           nature of assets of a particular type, it is ordinary and reasonable
                                           commercial practice to reconcile such assets less frequently. We
                                           expect that this standard will generally be required daily for
                                           financial products traded on a financial market and deposit
                                           products;
                                   (iii)   does not restrict its capacity to exercise or cause the exercise of powers
                                           in relation to the assets, including any power to direct voting; and
                                   (iv)    has safeguards in place to ensure that the omnibus account will
                                           never fail to have sufficient funds to meet the entitlements of the
                                           client, and any other person in relation to the assets not held
                                           separately for more than two business days. If necessary, this may
                                           be through the asset holder supplementing the assets not held
                                           separately with its own assets. The amount paid in by the asset
                                           holder would become held for the persons having a beneficial
                                           interest in the omnibus account, other than the asset holder. If,
                                           because of later repayments, the account goes into surplus, the
                                           asset holder can be reimbursed with equivalent assets; and
                             (c)   the AFS licensee responsible for ensuring that the assets are held:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                 Page 43
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                                  (i)     documents its policy on not holding assets separately and its
                                          reasons why that policy is appropriate. In setting out the reasons
                                          why the policy is appropriate, the AFS licensee should consider
                                          any extent to which it might expose the relevant clients to
                                          unreasonable risk or have any reason to believe that applying the
                                          policy would not meet its duties to the relevant clients;
                                  (ii)    ensures the policy has been reviewed during the previous 13 months
                                          and a written record of the outcome of the review recorded; and
                                  (iii)   keeps a record of the policy and the record of its review for seven
                                          years after it has ceased to be the current policy that enables the
                                          assets not to be held separately.

              RG 133.160     For retail clients of licensed custody providers, the potential use of omnibus
                             accounts must be notified in the asset holder’s FSG and expressly agreed to
                             in writing by the retail client.


                             Key reasons for permitting use of omnibus accounts

              RG 133.161     Omnibus accounts are typically used to hold financial assets. If asset
                             separation requirements applied, omnibus accounts would cause the
                             responsible entity to be in breach of the obligation to clearly identify scheme
                             property or assets and hold it separately from other relevant property or
                             assets.

              RG 133.162     A responsible entity might reasonably consider that holding assets or scheme
                             property separately would be inappropriate if it increases the costs to
                             members without materially decreasing any risk. A risk could arise from
                             holding assets together to the extent that the assets of one client could be
                             used to settle the obligations of another client.

              RG 133.163     Ensuring efficient and compliant operation by the asset holder may include
                             operating separate omnibus accounts for different types of clients (e.g. buy–
                             hold clients versus broker–dealer clients). Specifically, if there is a non-trivial
                             risk of a shortfall in a client’s account due to the nature of the client or the
                             types of transaction entered into that would not be addressed by the asset
                             holder paying in assets to cover a shortfall, we expect that the asset holder
                             would, as part of its risk management system, segregate the client’s assets to
                             minimise potential losses to other clients or to the asset holder itself.

              RG 133.164     If an asset holder has used assets in the omnibus account for the benefit of
                             another person not in accordance with the client’s instructions and a shortfall
                             arises, the asset holder must cover the shortfall after the end of the second
                             business day after the shortfall arises.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 44
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




Relief does not extend to non-financial assets
              RG 133.165     Our policy on omnibus accounts does not extend to assets other than
                             securities, derivatives, foreign currency and certain deposit-taking facilities.
                             For example, responsible entities or other persons holding scheme property
                             are not permitted to hold a single piece of other property as trustee for a
                             registered scheme and also another scheme.

              RG 133.166     However, we consider that the obligation to hold assets separately arises
                             only to the extent that this can be done. This may not be possible for real
                             property (e.g. where disclosure of trusts in the land titles register may not be
                             permitted) and certain other assets. In this case, we accept that real property
                             can be registered in the name of the asset holder without breaching the
                             requirements to hold the assets separately in:
                             (a)   s601FC(1)(i) for responsible entities of registered schemes;
                             (b)   ASIC Instrument 2024/17 for licensed custody providers;
                             (c)   ASIC Instrument 2016/968 for MDA providers; or
                             (d)   ASIC Instrument 2023/669 for IDPS operators.

              RG 133.167     In the case of a responsible entity, we consider the obligation to separate
                             assets or scheme property extends to doing all that is practicable to achieve
                             separation, given the nature of the property and its ownership. As such, we
                             do not consider it necessary to give any relief from s601FC(1)(i) for assets
                             that are real property. However, we expect compliance arrangements to
                             particularly address the risks of this asset-holding arrangement.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 45
                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




Key terms


                                Term                      Meaning in this document

                                ADI                       An authorised deposit-taking institution—a corporation
                                                          that is authorised under the Banking Act 1959. ADIs
                                                          include:
                                                           banks;
                                                           building societies; and
                                                           credit unions

                                AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                          the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                          on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                          services
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s9.

                                AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                                AFS licensee              The obligations of an AFS licensee under Ch 7 of the
                                obligations               Corporations Act

                                AML/CTF Act               Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing
                                                          Act 2006

                                Annex 3 (for              An annex to the Memorandum of Cooperation
                                example)

                                APRA                      Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

                                Asia Region Funds         An agreement between economies in the Asia region that
                                Passport                  allows passport funds established and regulated in one
                                                          participating economy to offer interests to investors in
                                                          another participating economy

                                ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                                ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                          2001

                                asset holder              Means:
                                                           a person who holds:
                                                            − scheme property or assets of a registered scheme;
                                                            − client assets of an IDPS;
                                                            − client portfolio assets of an MDA service; or
                                                            − financial products, or a beneficial interest in financial
                                                              products, held under a custodial service; or
                                                           a licensed custody provider or, where relevant, an
                                                            entity that provides custodial services incidentally

                                AUASB                     Auditing and Assurance Standards Board




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                Page 46
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                                Term                      Meaning in this document

                                Australian passport       A registered scheme or sub-fund of a retail CCIV that is
                                fund                      also registered as a passport fund under Pt 8A.3 of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                                Australian Passport       The Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018 made under
                                Rules                     s1211 and 1211A of the Corporations Act

                                CCIV                      A corporate collective investment vehicle—a company
                                                          that is registered as a corporate collective investment
                                                          vehicle under the Corporations Act
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s9.

                                client                    A member of a registered scheme, a client of an IDPS
                                                          operator, a client of an MDA provider or a client of a
                                                          custodial service being a person for whom financial
                                                          products or a beneficial interest in financial products are
                                                          held in providing the custodial service (as the case may
                                                          be)

                                client assets             Scheme property or other assets of a registered scheme,
                                                          the assets held under an IDPS (other than by the client),
                                                          the client portfolio assets of an MDA service, or financial
                                                          products or a beneficial interest in financial products held
                                                          under a custodial service

                                client portfolio assets   Financial products and other property that are the client’s
                                                          contribution to an MDA service or that are derived directly
                                                          or indirectly from the client’s contributions

                                corporate director        The company named in ASIC’s record of the CCIV’s
                                                          registration as the corporate director or temporary
                                                          corporate director of the CCIV
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s1224(3) of the Corporations Act.

                                Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                                Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                                Regulations

                                custodial service         The service provided under an arrangement between the
                                                          provider and the client, or between the provider and
                                                          another person with whom the client has an arrangement
                                                          (whether or not there are also other parties to any such
                                                          arrangement), under which a financial product, or a
                                                          beneficial interest in a financial product, is held by the
                                                          provider in trust for, or on behalf of, the client or another
                                                          person nominated by the client unless the service is not a
                                                          custodial or depository service under s766E(3) of the
                                                          Corporations Act
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s766E for the term ‘provide a
                                                            custodial or depository service’.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                    Page 47
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                                Term                     Meaning in this document

                                custodial staff          Natural persons who have duties relating to:
                                                          holding assets;
                                                          record keeping for assets;
                                                          checking authorisations for instructions to transact; or
                                                          functions incidental to these powers (but does not
                                                           include functions that involve the exercise of a material
                                                           discretion whether under an arrangement with the
                                                           asset holder or a person engaged by the asset holder
                                                           other than in relation to an at-call deposit account of a
                                                           regulated deposit taker or transactions in foreign
                                                           exchange contracts)

                                custodian                A provider of a custodial service or a person that holds
                                                         scheme property of a registered scheme, assets held
                                                         under an IDPS, or client portfolio assets of an MDA
                                                         service

                                Div 2 (for example)      A division of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 2), unless otherwise specified

                                financial product        Generally, a facility through which, or through the
                                                         acquisition of which, a person does one or more of the
                                                         following:
                                                          makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                          manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                          makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                            Note: See Div 3 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                            definition. In addition to the general categories above, this
                                                            specifies certain things as being included or excluded from the
                                                            definition.

                                FSG                      A Financial Services Guide—a document required by
                                                         s941A or 941B to be given in accordance with Div 2 of
                                                         Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                            Note: This is a definition in s9.

                                GS 007                   Guidance Standard GS 007 Audit implications of the use
                                                         of service organisations for investment management
                                                         services, issued by the AUASB in October 2011

                                IDPS                     An investor directed portfolio service as defined in ASIC
                                                         Instrument 2023/669 or any instrument that amends or
                                                         replaces that instrument

                                IDPS Guide               A document provided by an IDPS operator instead of a
                                                         PDS to help retail clients decide whether they should use
                                                         the IDPS

                                IDPS operator            A public company that is a holder of an AFS licence that
                                                         is authorised to operate an IDPS and who provides an
                                                         IDPS or a function that forms part of the IDPS

                                licensed custody         A person who holds an AFS licence authorising the
                                provider                 licensee to provide a custodial service




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                  Page 48
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                                Term                     Meaning in this document

                                managed investment       Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                                scheme                      Note: A notified foreign passport fund is a managed
                                                            investment scheme for the purpose of the Corporations Act:
                                                            see s1213E.

                                master custodian         A person with primary contractual responsibility to an
                                                         AFS licensee, who is authorised by the licensee to
                                                         engage an asset holder

                                MDA                      Managed discretionary account

                                MDA provider             A person who holds an AFS licence with authorisations to
                                                         provide MDA services
                                                            Note: A detailed definition is contained in ASIC Instrument
                                                            2016/968.

                                MDA service              Has the meaning given in ASIC Instrument 2016/968

                                member                   A member of a registered scheme

                                Memorandum of            The Memorandum of Cooperation on the Establishment
                                Cooperation              and Implementation of the Asia Region Funds Passport

                                omnibus account          An account in which money, securities or derivatives for
                                                         more than one beneficial owner are co-mingled by a
                                                         custodian or a sub-custodian

                                participating economy    An economy that is a participant under the Memorandum
                                                         of Cooperation (while it is in effect) and has:
                                                          advised the Asia Region Funds Passport Joint
                                                           Committee that it has implemented the Asia Region
                                                           Funds Passport; and
                                                          not withdrawn from the Memorandum of Cooperation

                                passport fund            A regulated collective investment scheme, or sub-fund of
                                                         a regulated collective investment scheme, registered as a
                                                         passport fund in a participating economy
                                                            Note: Some regulated collective investment schemes, or sub-
                                                            funds of regulated collective investment schemes, that have
                                                            been deregistered as passport funds remain subject to
                                                            obligations as if they were still a passport fund.

                                Passport Rules           The requirements in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of
                                                         Cooperation, as incorporated into the domestic law of a
                                                         participating economy

                                PDS                      A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that must
                                                         be given to a retail client for the offer or issue of a
                                                         financial product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                         Corporations Act
                                                            Note: See s9 for the exact definition.

                                PF 209 (for example)     An ASIC pro forma (in this example numbered 209)

                                Pt 7.9 (for example)     A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                         7.9), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                   Page 49
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                                Term                     Meaning in this document

                                reg 7.6.04 (for          A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                                example)                 example numbered 7.6.04), unless otherwise specified

                                registered scheme        A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                         s601EB of the Corporations Act

                                regulated collective     A regulated collective investment scheme as defined by
                                investment scheme        the Passport Rules for a participating economy

                                responsible entity       A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined in
                                                         s9 of the Corporations Act

                                retail client            A client as defined in s761G and 761GA of the
                                                         Corporations Act and Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations
                                                         Regulations

                                RG 104 (for example)     An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered
                                                         104)

                                s912A (for example)      A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 912A), unless otherwise specified

                                scheme property          Means:
                                                         (a)   contributions of money or money’s worth to the
                                                               scheme;
                                                         (b)   money that forms part of the scheme property under
                                                               provisions of the Corporations Act or the ASIC Act;
                                                         (c)   money borrowed or raised by the responsible entity
                                                               for the purposes of the scheme;
                                                         (d)   property acquired, directly or indirectly, with, or with
                                                               the proceeds of, contributions or money referred to
                                                               in paragraphs (a), (b) or (c); and
                                                         (e)   income and property derived, directly or indirectly,
                                                               from contributions, money or property referred to in
                                                               paragraphs (a), (b), (c) or (d)
                                                            Note: This is a definition contained in s9 of the Corporations Act.

                                sub-fund                 Has the meaning given in s1222Q of the Corporations Act
                                                            Note: A sub-fund is established on the day on which it is
                                                            registered: see s1222T.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                                    Page 50
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             AFS licence, AFS licence conditions, AFS licensee obligations, asset holder,
                             assets, Australian financial services licence, CCIVs, client assets,
                             compliance plans, conflicts of interest, corporate collective investment
                             vehicle, crypto-assets, custodial service, custodian, IDPS, IDPS operator,
                             investor directed portfolio service, master custodian, licensed custody
                             provider, managed discretionary account, MDA, MDA provider, minimum
                             standards, obligation to separate scheme property, omnibus accounts,
                             organisational structure, primary production schemes, registered interest,
                             registered managed investment scheme, responsible entity, scheme property,
                             staffing, sub-custodian


                             Legislative instruments and pro formas

                             ASIC Corporations (Managed Discretionary Account Services) Instrument
                             2016/968

                             ASIC Corporations (Financial Requirements for Responsible Entities, IDPS
                             Operators and Corporate Directors of Retail CCIVs) Instrument 2023/647

                             ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services) Instrument
                             2023/669

                             ASIC Corporations (Asset Holding Standards for Responsible Entities)
                             Instrument 2024/16

                             ASIC Corporations (Custody Standards for Providers of Custodial and
                             Depository Services) Instrument 2024/17

                             PF 209 Australian financial services licence conditions


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general obligations

                             RG 105 AFS licensing: Organisational competence

                             RG 132 Funds management: Compliance and oversight

                             RG 136 Funds management: Discretionary powers

                             RG 166 AFS licensing: Financial requirements




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 51
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             RG 179 Managed discretionary accounts

                             RG 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest

                             RG 232 Agribusiness managed investment schemes: Improving disclosure
                             for retail investors

                             RG 259 Risk management systems of responsible entities


                             Legislation

                             AML/CTF Act

                             ASIC Act

                             Corporations Act, Chs 5C, 8A, Pts 9.4AAA, 5C.7, s9, 601FB, 601FC,
                             601FF, 766E, 911B, 912A, 912D, 912DAA, 912E, s1211, 1211A

                             Corporations Regulations, regs 5C.2.01, 5C.4.02, 5C.5.01, 7.6.01(1)(k),
                             8B.5.10(2)


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 141 Dealing and providing custodial or depository service as
                             secondary service

                             INFO 225 Crypto-assets

                             INFO 238 Whistleblower rights and protections

                             INFO 239 How ASIC handles whistleblower reports


                             Consultation papers and reports

                             CP 296 Funds management

                             REP 582 Response to submissions on CP 296 Funds management


                             Other documents

                             AS ISO 37301:2023 Compliance management systems—Requirements with
                             guidance for use

                             GS 007 Audit implications of the use of service organisations for investment
                             management services

                             ISO 27001 Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection—
                             Information security management systems—Requirements




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 52
                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 133: Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets




                             ISO 27002 Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection—
                             Information security controls

                             NIST CSF Cybersecurity framework

                             SSAE No. 18 Attestation standards: Clarification and recodification (PDF
                             956 KB)

                             Memorandum of Cooperation on the Establishment and Implementation of
                             the Asia Region Funds Passport




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2024                                         Page 53
