REGULATORY GUIDE 103

Confidentiality and release of
information
ASIC Law
Issued 27/11/1995
Updated 26/2/1996

From 5 July 2007, this document may be referred to as Regulatory
Guide 103 (RG 103) or Policy Statement 103 (PS 103). Paragraphs in
this document may be referred to by their regulatory guide number
(e.g. RG 103.1) or their policy statement number (e.g. PS 103.1).

Editor’s note: This guide replaces Superseded Policy Statement 17
[SPS 17], Superseded Policy Statement 78 [SPS 78], and the memo
“Section 127 of ASIC Law and liaison with other government agencies”.


Headnotes
ASIC Law s13, 18, 19, 25, 26, 28, 37, 49, 50, 68, 69, 76-83, 127,
127A; Corporations Law s313, 477(3), 788, 815 and 1181;
confidentiality; authorised use and disclosure; reputation; procedural
fairness; examinations and transcripts of examinations and related
books; documents obtained under notice; compulsory powers;
Director of Public Prosecutions; liquidators; Australian Stock
Exchange Ltd; Sydney Futures Exchange Ltd; costs; Johns v ASC; Ex
parte Wardley; Marcel v Commissioner of Police; NCSC v News
Corporation; Re Pergamon Press; Re Mining Houses of Australia; Re
Arrows Ltd (No 4); Rank Film Distributors v Video Information
Centre; Jarrett v Seymour; Martin v Pharmacy Restructuring
Authority; Pharmacy Restructuring Authority and Anor v Martin;
FCT v Nestle; Smith Kline & French Laboratories (Australia) Ltd and
Ors v Secretary, Department of Community Services and Health;
Shapowloff v Stirling Henry Ltd (in liq.).

             © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                       Page 1
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




               Contents
                        Purpose .........................................................................2
               Part I: Confidentiality.............................................................3
                      Information obtained under the co-operative scheme...5
               Part II: ASIC’s disclosure powers ........................................6
                      Release of transcripts and related books ......................6
                      Release of books produced under notice or warrant ....7
                      Disclosure permitted or required by other laws.............8
                      Disclosure for ASIC’s functions .....................................8
                      Disclosure to other agencies .........................................9
                      Disclosure to securities exchanges and futures
                      exchanges .....................................................................9
               Part III: Procedural fairness ..................................................11
                      Generally .......................................................................11
                      Matters affecting ASIC’s procedural fairness
                      obligations .....................................................................12
                      Extent of procedural fairness obligations in certain
                      circumstances................................................................14
               Part IV: Applications..............................................................18
                     Generally .......................................................................18




Purpose
RG 103.1        In this guide ASIC indicates the practices it will adopt
in relation to the disclosure of information obtained by the exercise of
its compulsory powers. The practices are adopted in the light of the
High Court’s decision in Johns v ASC (1993) 178 CLR 408.

RG 103.2      This guide is divided into the following parts:

(a) Part I describes ASIC’s confidentiality obligations, in particular
    s127 of ASIC Law and the Johns v ASC case (RG 103.4–
    RG 103.14);
(b) Part II outlines the operation of the various disclosure powers of
    ASIC (RG 103.15–RG 103.28); and
(c) Part III discusses how ASIC will carry out its procedural fairness
    obligations (RG 103.29–RG 103.53).
RG 103.3   In this guide, references to provisions are references to
ASIC Law unless otherwise specified.




              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                        Page 2
                      REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




Part I: Confidentiality
         RG 103.4      ASIC must take reasonable measures to prevent
         unauthorised use and disclosure of information it receives in
         confidence in connection with its statutory functions: s127(1). Certain
         uses and disclosures are taken to be authorised (s127(2)–(6)); see
         RG 103.23–RG 103.28.

         RG 103.5      Section 127 adopts, as a starting point, the equitable
         doctrine of confidentiality under which use and disclosure of
         information can be restrained if:

         (a) the information is confidential in fact (that is, not widely
             available); and
         (b) ASIC has received the information under circumstances which
             allowed its use and disclosure for limited purposes only.
         However s127 alters the equitable doctrine in two ways. It imposes a
         statutory obligation on ASIC to take all reasonable measures to
         prevent unauthorised use and disclosure of confidential information. It
         also authorises ASIC to make certain uses and disclosures of
         information, notwithstanding that it is confidential.

         RG 103.6      Dicta in Johns v ASC (1993) 178 CLR 408 suggest that,
         like the majority in the Federal Court, their Honours read s127(1)
         applying to information:

         (a) if ASIC receives it in the course of its statutory functions
             (whether or not in confidence); or
         (b) if it is received in confidence (whether or not in the course of
             ASIC’s statutory functions).
         RG 103.7       A more natural reading of the section is that it applies
         only to information which is received both in confidence and in the
         course of ASIC’s functions. Their Honours did not discuss this
         reading and ASIC does not regard the issue as finally settled. In most
         circumstances the difference between the two readings will be less
         than it may seem. Where ASIC receives information in confidence,
         but outside its statutory functions, its obligations under the general
         law of confidentiality are similar to those under s127(1).

         RG 103.8       Where ASIC receives information in the course of its
         statutory functions free from any obligation of confidence, use or
         disclosure of the information is necessarily authorised, so s127(1)
         does not apply in any case. It is ASIC’s view that s127(1) does not
         impose obligations of confidentiality where the information itself is
         not in fact confidential. Information obtained under ASIC’s

                       © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                                 Page 3
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




compulsory powers will not necessarily be confidential. Thus, for
example, if under one of its compulsory notices ASIC obtains a file of
newspaper clippings, the fact that the clippings were obtained
compulsorily does not mean that the information in the clippings
becomes confidential when it has already been publicly disclosed.
(The existence and composition of the file might be confidential,
however.)

RG 103.9        Nor does s127 impose an obligation on ASIC not to
disclose information in circumstances where the relationship between
the person who provided the information to ASIC and the person to
whom ASIC discloses it is such that no obligation of confidentiality
can arise. For example, if ASIC learns some sensitive business
information about a company in the course of an examination, and the
liquidator of the company wants access to that information, ASIC
owes the company no duty to withhold the information from the
liquidator, as the company itself has no right to withhold any of its
confidences from the liquidator. (However, it may be that a person
other than the company is owed a duty of confidentiality with respect
to the same information.)

RG 103.10 ASIC (and its staff) may be provided with information
which is confidential in two ways:

(a) voluntarily — for example, information provided in support of
    applications for discretionary relief and in respect of some
    complaints of alleged breaches of the law; and
(b) under compulsion — for example, under a notice to produce
    documents or during the course of an examination. (Compulsory
    powers for purposes relating to investigations are set out in Pt 3 of
    ASIC Law. Information may also be compulsorily obtained for
    purposes other than an investigation under various provisions of
    ASIC Law (such as the hearings power in Div 6 of Pt 3 and s49)
    and the Corporations Law (such as s313 and s788).)
RG 103.11 In Johns v ASC (1993) 178 CLR 408 the High Court
held that ASIC is authorised to use and disclose information for the
purposes for which it was obtained under ASIC Law or the
Corporations Law. Accordingly, if ASIC obtains information with a
view to instituting criminal, civil or administrative proceedings, the
use of the information in those proceedings is authorised use and any
disclosure incidental to the proceedings is authorised disclosure.

RG 103.12 Under equitable principles, ASIC would be able to use
confidential information it obtained either voluntarily or compulsorily
only for the purposes for which it was obtained, unless some other use
was impliedly or expressly authorised by the person who provided it,

              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                        Page 4
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




or the disclosure was to a person who was legally entitled to the
information. Section 127 extends the purposes for which ASIC may
use information it has obtained.

RG 103.13 The Court in Johns v ASC (1993) 178 CLR 408
emphasised that s127 does not restrain ASIC from making authorised
use and disclosure of information. Section 127(3) makes it clear that
ASIC may use confidential information in its possession for any of its
functions and powers. In addition to the authorised uses specified in
s127(2), (3), (4) and (4B), ASIC Law also specifically provides
(s127(6)) that nothing in any of these sections is to limit what might
otherwise constitute authorised use or disclosure. For example, ASIC
is entitled to rely on actual authorisation given by the person affected.


Information obtained under the co-
operative scheme
RG 103.14 Information which was obtained under the co-operative
scheme laws and which has since been provided to ASIC is affected
by s127A: see s127(7). The nature of the obligation and the test for
release are different. Section 127A imposes a prohibition on
unauthorised disclosure rather than a positive duty to prevent
unauthorised use or disclosure as with s127. Additionally, the
categories of disclosure of confidential information which are
permitted in s127A are markedly different to those in s127. However,
the content of procedural fairness in relation to proposed releases is
the same. ASIC proposes to administer s127A consistently with s127,
as far as possible.




              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                        Page 5
                        REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




Part II: ASIC’s disclosure powers
         RG 103.15 ASIC has express power under s25, 37 and 127 to
         disclose certain information for certain purposes. ASIC will exercise
         its powers and functions in the light of the decision of the High Court
         in Johns v ASC (1993) 178 CLR 408 and other authorities and, where
         there are no decisions, analogies from the decided cases. ASIC’s
         powers may be exercised either on the application of a relevant party
         or at the discretion of ASIC. The following paragraphs outline the
         nature of each of these powers.
          [Historical note: RG 103.15 amended 26/2/1996 by adding before the last sentence
         the words, “ASIC’s powers may be exercised either on the application of a relevant
         party or at the discretion of ASIC”.]


         Release of transcripts and related
         books
         RG 103.16 ASIC may release transcripts or related books as an
         authorised disclosure under s127 or under s25(1). Under s25(1) ASIC
         may release transcripts of examinations conducted by it under s19 and
         related books to a person’s lawyer if the lawyer satisfies ASIC that the
         person is carrying on, or is contemplating in good faith, a proceeding in
         respect of a matter to which the examination related. Subsection 25(2)
         limits the use which may be made of copies released under s25(1).
         ASIC may also impose additional conditions on the release of
         documents: see RG 103.37. In ASIC’s view plaintiffs/applicants and
         defendants/respondents to an action are entitled to apply for transcripts
         as well as intending plaintiffs and applicants: see Wardley v ASC (1991)
         9 ACLC 1565.

         RG 103.17 ASIC considers that the words “related books” refer to
         documents formally identified and incorporated in the record of
         examination, and also to documents referred to directly or indirectly in
         the record which would help people to understand the record. For
         example, if an officer of a company refers to a meeting which
         occurred on a particular day, the minutes of that meeting would
         constitute a related book.

         RG 103.18 In exercising its discretion as to whether it should
         release copies of transcripts using the power in s25(1), ASIC:

         (a) must be satisfied that the person is carrying on, or contemplating,
             a proceeding;




                         © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                                   Page 6
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




(b) must be satisfied that the proceeding is in respect of a matter to
    which the examination (or part of an examination) is related;
(c) will consider whether any of ASIC’s enforcement requirements
    — relating to the continued investigation, prosecution, instituting
    or intervening in civil proceedings or taking of administrative
    action — would be jeopardised by the release of the transcripts;
    and
(d) will consider whether other persons may be adversely affected by
    the release of the transcripts (see RG 103.52).
ASIC will also have a general discretion, taking into account factors
such as:

(a) its functions and powers;
(b) the objects of the Corporations Law and ASIC Law;
(c) interpretations by the court in decisions such as Wardley and
    Johns; and
(d) the public interest generally.
While ASIC will take all these factors into account, in the absence of
compelling reasons to the contrary ASIC will generally assist litigants
by disclosing transcripts as contemplated by s25(1).

RG 103.19 Section 25(3) provides ASIC with a general ability to
release transcripts and related books. In Johns v ASC (1993) 178 CLR
408, the High Court held that s25(3) is a machinery or facultative
provision: it merely enables the provision of transcripts and books and
the imposition of conditions, where the release is for a purpose
authorised in some other way (eg by one of the provisions of s127).
ASIC may impose conditions on releases under s25(3). A
contravention of a condition imposed under s25(3) is an offence
against s26.


Release of books produced under
notice or warrant
RG 103.20 Section 37(4) provides that where ASIC has books
obtained under notice or warrant it may use them, or permit the use of
them, for the purposes of a proceeding. Section 37 is within Div 3 of
Pt 3, and the exercise of powers within this division is prima facie to
be exercised only for the purposes provided in s28. However, s37(4)
appears not to be affected by s28 because s37(4) itself states the



              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                        Page 7
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




purposes for which ASIC may use the power which that subsection
confers.

RG 103.21 A person has a right to inspect documents which are in
ASIC’s possession if the person would otherwise be entitled to inspect
the documents (s37(7)(a)). The right may be exercised at any reasonable
time. Thus, for example, a liquidator would be able to rely on the power
to inspect given in s477(3) of the Corporations Law. The right to inspect
in s37(7)(a) also includes the right to obtain copies of documents.

RG 103.22 Section 37(7)(b) gives ASIC a general power to allow
any person to inspect documents in its possession. ASIC applies the
High Court’s conclusion on s25(3)–(7)(b), that is, it is a machinery or
facultative power which may only be used where the inspection is for
a purpose authorised in some other way.


Disclosure permitted or required by
other laws
RG 103.23 Section 127(2) authorises use and disclosure of
information as permitted or required under other laws of the
Commonwealth (and prescribed laws of the states, but none have been
prescribed). This provision authorises release for purposes to which
other Commonwealth laws relate. These other provisions may confer
discretions on ASIC which are wide or narrow, or no discretion at all.


Disclosure for ASIC’s functions
RG 103.24 ASIC can disclose information for the purposes of
performing the functions of ASIC: s127(3). The effect of this
subsection is that where ASIC obtains information in the course of the
exercise of one of its statutory functions, it is entitled to use that
information for any of its other functions and powers. This provision
authorises release for purposes to which other national scheme law
provisions relate which may confer discretions which are wide or
narrow or no discretion at all. Section 127(3) is the power by which
ASIC is authorised to disclose confidential information to the Director
of Public Prosecutions (DPP).

RG 103.25 Section 11 of ASIC Law delineates the functions and
powers of ASIC. In general terms the functions and powers of ASIC
are those which are conferred on it by the Corporations Law and ASIC
Law. Subsection 1(2) sets out the broad goals for which ASIC must
strive in performing its functions and exercising its powers. In

              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                        Page 8
            REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




addition to functions specifically authorised by statute (eg s815 and
1181 of the Corporations Law) ASIC may disclose information in the
performance of various incidental powers and duties such as fulfilling
obligations to provide documents for administrative review processes:
see FCT v Nestle (1986) 69 ALR 445 at 448; or providing information
to a person for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of
procedural fairness: Martin v Pharmacy Restructuring Authority
(1994) 34 ALD 534 at 536.


Disclosure to other agencies
RG 103.26 ASIC can disclose information to Australian and
overseas governments and their agencies, to enable or assist them to
perform their functions and exercise their powers (s127(4)). In Johns v
ASC (1993) 178 CLR 408, the High Court held that s127(4) specifies
a proper purpose for which information may be released. This means
that s127(1) does not prevent ASIC from releasing information in
accordance with a decision properly made under s127(4). “Agency” is
defined in s5 of ASIC Law as “an agency, authority, body or person”
and will include most requesting parties connected with a government.


RG 103.27 Information may be disclosed under s127(4) only if it
would “enable or assist” the performance or exercise of a function or
power of a government or agency. Where ASIC is aware that information
in its possession falls within the functions or powers of a government or
agency it will be able to determine whether this requirement has been
met. However, in most circumstances ASIC will ask the requesting
agency to confirm that the disclosure of the information will enable or
assist the agency to perform or exercise one or more of its functions or
powers: see RG 103.56. ASIC has signed Memoranda of Understanding
with a number of Australian and overseas agencies to facilitate the
operation of s127(4).


Disclosure to securities exchanges and
futures exchanges
RG 103.28 Section 127(4B) permits disclosure to a stock market or
futures market or a securities clearing house or the clearing house of a
futures exchange. Disclosure is permitted where the information will
enable or assist an exchange to monitor compliance with, enforce or
perform functions or exercise powers under the Corporations Law or the



              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                        Page 9
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




business rules, or listing rules of the exchange. The same principles apply
to a release under s127(4B) as to a release under s127(4).




              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                      Page 10
                      REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




Part III: Procedural fairness
         Generally
         RG 103.29 Use or disclosure of information for the purposes
         mentioned above is for a proper purpose. However, if ASIC must
         make a decision before it can use or disclose the information, a person
         directly and materially adversely affected by the decision should
         normally be accorded procedural fairness.

         RG 103.30 The content of procedural fairness will differ widely
         between different cases, depending on the effect on the person and the
         use or disclosure proposed to be made. Since use or disclosure which
         a person has authorised does not adversely affect their rights and
         expectations, no question of procedural fairness arises before ASIC
         may act on the authorisation. Where ASIC has no discretion whether
         or not to release information, and thus the content of procedural
         fairness is nil, it may be required to inform the person of the
         forthcoming disclosure in order that the person can take whatever
         action may be necessary to protect their interests: Marcel v
         Commissioner for Police [1992] 1 All ER 72.


         Person affected
         RG 103.31 In ASIC’s view a person whose reputation or
         confidences (among other things) would be directly adversely affected
         is entitled to procedural fairness. The person could be affected by
         disclosure of personal or business secrets, injury to their reputation or
         in other ways. However procedural fairness does not oblige ASIC to
         notify and hear every person whose economic interests may be
         affected by a particular decision: Pharmacy Restructuring Authority
         and Anor v Martin (1994) 53 FCR 589 at 597. The person affected is
         not always the person who provided the information. For instance,
         information obtained from an employee or bank may relate to the
         affairs of the employer or the bank’s client, but not to those of the
         employee or bank. Alternatively another person could be the subject
         of comments by an examinee which could cause damage to their
         reputation. In this case, ASIC would consider the interests of the
         person affected and accord that person procedural fairness.




                       © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                               Page 11
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




Matters affecting ASIC’s procedural
fairness obligations

Nature of the decision
RG 103.32 The purpose of giving a hearing to a person potentially
directly and materially adversely affected by an ASC decision is to
enable that person to make submissions on how ASIC should exercise
its discretion. There is no purpose in giving a person a hearing if the
person’s interests would be an improper consideration in making a
decision, or if ASIC has no discretion to exercise.

RG 103.33 Even if the person affected has no right to a hearing by
ASIC, the person’s interests should not be affected any more than is
necessary. ASIC may impose conditions on the use which may be
made of the information which is disclosed. It may be obliged to
ensure that the person is informed of the proposed publication: Marcel
v Commissioner for Police [1992] 1 All ER 72.


Conditions
RG 103.34 Whenever ASIC has a discretion to release confidential
information it also has the power to impose conditions.
Sections 127(4A) and 127(4D) provide specifically that ASIC may
impose conditions in relation to releases under s127(4) and 127(4B)
respectively. Section 25(3) allows ASIC to impose conditions on the
release of transcripts and related books. In Johns v ASC (1993) 178
CLR 408 the High Court decided that part of the requirement for
procedural fairness was that the person be able to make submissions
concerning the conditions which should be imposed in the event that
ASIC decides to release information. The Court also held that the
relaxation of any condition is subject to the same requirements to
exercise discretion and provide procedural fairness as is the release of
information.

RG 103.35 A person who has a copy of a transcript or related book
provided under s25(1) must not use or disclose it except in connection
with the relevant proceeding: s25(2). Also, a person who has custody
of a copy of a transcript or related book provided under s25(3) must
not contravene a condition ASIC has imposed under that subsection:
s26. In addition, a person must comply with conditions imposed in
relation to a release under s127(4B): s127(4E). Each of these
provisions creates an offence for misuse of the relevant information.


              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                      Page 12
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




RG 103.36 The conditions ASIC imposes may relate to the manner
in which the information may be used or may require an undertaking
that ASIC be notified before the information is published (for
example, used in open court). Additionally, ASIC may first delete
those portions of the information which contain confidences of other
persons. The conditions or deletions may nullify the potential for the
release to have a direct and material adverse effect on any person, in
which case no obligation of procedural fairness will arise.

RG 103.37 When releasing information to a statutory authority
ASIC may rely on statutory provisions imposing restrictions on the
use which the agency, or its staff, may make of information provided
to it. Alternatively, ASIC may release information on condition that
the agency only uses the material internally. In these circumstances
the release may not cause any detriment to any interested person, thus
averting any need to consult that person. If the agency later wishes to
use the information for other purposes or ASIC relaxes a condition
limiting its use, ASIC may have to accord procedural fairness to the
affected person or notify them of the intended use of the information.

RG 103.38 When ASIC discloses documents for use in proceedings
under s37(4), it will impose conditions similar to those in s25(2).


Publication
RG 103.39 A person is usually more directly and materially
adversely affected by the general publication of information affecting
them than by the restricted disclosure of the information. ASIC will
consider this when it is deciding what the requirements of procedural
fairness are in relation to the release.

RG 103.40 When there is a large volume of documents in ASIC’s
possession which are potentially relevant to a request for disclosure,
ASIC may permit the applicant to conduct a preliminary inspection of
documents, for the purpose of reducing the volume of documents to be
released. Before the inspection can occur, ASIC will have to be
satisfied that the disclosure falls within one of the authorised
categories referred to above.

RG 103.41 The person inspecting will be required to give
undertakings to use the information disclosed only for the purpose of
identifying those documents which are required. As this is only a
restricted disclosure the ASC believes that the content of procedural
fairness will generally be nil. Once the documents which are to be
considered for release are identified, procedural fairness will be
accorded if appropriate.


              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                      Page 13
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




RG 103.42 ASIC usually imposes a standard condition on releases
under s25(1) or s127(4). This condition is that a person who would be
affected by information being published (typically, when it is
produced in open court) should be given notice before it is used in
court. This will allow the person to apply to the court for orders to
protect their interests: Marcel v Commissioner of Police [1992] 1 All
ER 72. This will apply to other releases where it is likely that the
information would be published.

RG 103.43 Under Div 1 of Pt 3 ASIC is empowered to prepare a
report to the Minister in respect of matters which it has investigated.
As such a report may be published, prior to being sent to the Minister,
ASIC will provide any person directly and materially adversely
affected by the publication of the report an opportunity to make
submissions seeking to correct or contradict any material prejudicial
to them: NCSC v News Corporation (1984) 156 CLR 296 and Re
Pergamon Press [1971] 1 Ch 388.


Extent of procedural fairness
obligations in certain circumstances

Internal use by ASIC
RG 103.44 When ASIC uses a person’s information without
disclosing it to anyone but ASC staff, it will not consider the effect on
the relevant person. This is because internal use is authorised and no
decision has been made to release the information. ASIC will apply
the same principle when it gives information in confidence to counsel
and similar outside experts retained to advise it. The principle also
applies to briefs sent to the DPP, since ASIC initiates prosecutions
under s49 and the DPP then takes them over.


Internal use by other agencies
RG 103.45 Disclosures to other agencies for use in the
administration of Commonwealth, state or overseas law are made
under s127(4), which is a discretionary power. As noted in para 37,
release for the internal use of an agency may not directly and
materially adversely affect any person. If, however, the use of the
material by the agency would have such a material and adverse affect
on a person, ASIC may give the person affected opportunity to make
submissions on:

(a) whether the conditions for release are satisfied;

              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                      Page 14
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




(b) whether the public interest in the disclosure of the information
    outweighs the prejudice to that person;
(c) whether any information should be withheld; and
(d) what conditions should be imposed.
Where ASIC does not consider that it has an obligation to provide an
opportunity to be heard, ASIC may notify the person of the intended
release of the information.

RG 103.46 However, if the administration of justice would be
adversely affected by ASIC inviting the person to make submissions,
or notifying them of the proposed release because it would require the
disclosure of such things as:

(a) the identity of the agency to which the material is to be disclosed;
(b) confidential information provided by other persons;
(c) the nature of the information to be released; and
(d) background information which they would require in order to
    assess the effect on them and what submissions to make,
ASIC will not provide the person with the opportunity to be heard, or
notify them of the proposed release. ASIC will however consider the
person’s interests in deciding what to release and what conditions to
impose on its use.


Civil proceedings by ASIC
RG 103.47 Where confidential information is to be used as
evidence by the ASC in civil proceedings, ASIC does not believe that
a person will be adversely affected and does not believe that it is
obliged to accord procedural fairness. A person’s rights or reasonable
expectations are not adversely affected merely because a person is
required to provide evidence for court proceedings: Shapowloff v
Stirling Henry Ltd (in liq) [1972] 2 NSWLR 691. In general the
interests of a person whose evidence is to be used in litigation are
adequately protected by the investigation process itself: NCSC v News
Corporation Ltd (1984) 156 CLR 296; Re Pergamon Press [1971] 1
Ch 388; Re Mining Houses of Australia Ltd (1981) 5 ACLR 560. In
addition, if ASIC believes that a person may be adversely affected by
the use of information in evidence by ASIC it will either seek to have
restrictions imposed on the use of the information, or notify the
potentially affected party so that they are able to take steps to protect
their interests.


              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                      Page 15
             REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




Criminal prosecutions
RG 103.48 The use of confidential information in criminal
prosecutions is authorised, since the civil courts in general will not
attempt to control criminal proceedings: Re Arrows Ltd (No 4) [1993]
3 All ER 861; Rank Film Distributors Ltd v Video Information Centre
[1981] 2 All ER 76; Jarrett v Seymour (1993) 119 ALR 10. The
prosecutor’s duty to disclose all material necessary to ensure a fair
trial means that ASIC has little discretion as to the disclosure of
information to a defendant and thus the requirement for procedural
fairness is minimal. However ASIC will generally have an obligation
to notify an affected party of a proposed disclosure to a defendant.


Release under s25(1)
RG 103.49 If a person would be adversely affected by a release
under s25(1) and the purposes for which the material is released
include use in civil litigation, the person will generally be given the
opportunity to make submissions as to:

(a) whether the pre-conditions for release are satisfied;
(b) the scope of the release; and
(c) the conditions, if any, that should be imposed.
The affected person will be entitled to receive all information
necessary to enable them to make submissions to ASIC. However,
where draft pleadings have been provided to ASIC by the applicant on
a confidential basis, ASIC will not provide these to an affected party.


Provision of books to liquidators
RG 103.50 Liquidators pose a special problem, because they often
approach ASIC to say they are considering legal action, but not in
sufficient detail to attract s25(1). In such cases, ASIC will consider
whether the information is confidential in relation to the liquidator,
given that it may be the company’s information and the company has
no right to withhold information from the liquidator.

RG 103.51 ASIC may release information to the proper officer of
the company entitled to it, because the release is an authorised
disclosure at general law. Therefore, there is no question of procedural
fairness, unless different persons’ confidences are mixed or the
reputation of another person may be affected. In this case, ASIC will
seek submissions in respect of the disclosure or will consider



              © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                      Page 16
            REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




protecting the other person affected by imposing conditions or
deleting the matter concerning the other person.


Disclosure of privileged information
RG 103.52 ASIC Law contains a legislative scheme under which
ASIC may compel disclosure of certain information, although at
common law it would be subject to privilege against self-
incrimination or to legal professional privilege: s68 and 69. That
scheme also governs how information that was obtained under
compulsion may be used in proceedings: Pt 3 Div 9.

RG 103.53 In ASIC’s view, the rights and reasonable expectations
of a person are not adversely affected by the use of information in
accordance with s68 and 69. Accordingly, it does not regard the
partial loss of the benefit of privilege in those circumstances as
attracting the obligation to afford procedural fairness. However ASIC
may be obliged to ensure that the person is informed of the proposed
use of the information to enable them to take steps to protect their
interests.




             © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                     Page 17
                      REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




Part IV: Applications
         Generally
         RG 103.54 Requests for the release of information should cover any
         of the matters mentioned above which are relevant to the particular
         case. Applications should:

         (a) provide a detailed description of the information sought;
         (b) explain how the applicant proposes to use the information;
         (c) set out the power under which the release is authorised and any
             facts necessary to substantiate that the release is within that
             power;
         (d) set out the purpose for which the release is authorised and any
             facts necessary to substantiate that the release is within the scope
             of that purpose;
         (e) indicate, if known, the identity of any persons whose interests
             may be affected by the release of the information to the applicant
             and, if relevant, any submissions as to why these persons should
             not be contacted as part of ASIC’s obligation to provide
             procedural fairness;
         (f) undertake to give persons affected the opportunity to oppose
             publication of information in court where relevant; and
         (g) specify any grounds for limiting the scope of procedural fairness
             in relation to the release (eg prejudice to the applicant).
         RG 103.55 Applications should be made in writing addressed to the
         Regional Commissioner of the relevant Regional Office.


         Section 127(4) applications
         RG 103.56 A government or agency of the Commonwealth or state
         seeking release under s127(4) or an exchange seeking release under
         s127(4B) should make an application in accordance with Pro Forma
         138 and Pro Forma 139 respectively. Where ASIC has an agreement
         with the applicant governing the procedures for the release of
         information, the application should be made in accordance with that
         agreement. Such letters should be addressed to the Regional
         Commissioner of the relevant Regional Office of ASIC. An
         application made by a foreign government or agency should be



                       © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                               Page 18
               REGULATORY GUIDE 103: Confidentiality and release of information




addressed to the Manager, International, in the Office of the
Chairman, Sydney.
[Historical note: RG 103.56 amended 26/2/1996 by deleting the words “providing
the details set out in para 54.” from the end of the first sentence, and replacing them
with “in accordance with Pro Formas 138 and 139 respectively.”.]

RG 103.57 An application under s127(4) should specify which
persons would be affected by the release. It should also indicate
whether the administration of justice would be prejudiced by giving
any person affected an opportunity to oppose the release, and if so,
which person or persons. Any additional information needed to meet
the policy set out in this guide should be added.


Section 25(1) applications
RG 103.58        An application under s25(1) should set out:

(a) the applicant’s client or clients;
(b) the persons whose records of examination and related books are
    required (if known);
(c) the nature of the proceedings which the applicant is carrying on or
    contemplating;
(d) a copy of the statement of claim and all other pleadings filed in
    those proceedings (if the proceedings identified within the request
    are already in progress) and an indication as to whether the
    applicant consents to the provision of these documents to other
    persons as part of the procedural fairness process;
(e) a copy of any draft statement of claim intended to be filed on
    commencement of proceedings (if proceedings are being
    contemplated), and an indication as to whether the applicant
    consents to the provision of these documents to other persons as
    part of the procedural fairness process; and
(f) a statement explaining why the information is relevant to those
    proceedings, in the opinion of the applicant.


Costs
RG 103.59 If ASIC releases documents or transcript to a person, it
will normally charge the person an amount to recoup its costs
(including transcription, time and copying expenses).




                 © Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 1996
                                                                         Page 19
