REGULATORY GUIDE 136

Funds management:
Discretionary powers

June 2025




About this guide
This guide is for operators of registered managed investment schemes
(registered schemes), corporate collective investment vehicles (CCIVs) and
passport funds, their service providers and advisers.

It explains our approach to exercising ASIC’s exemption and modification
powers to grant individual relief from requirements under the Corporations
Act and, where relevant, the Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018 (Australian
Passport Rules) for managed investment schemes and Australian passport
funds.

It also explains:
    some of the more common situations when we have granted, and when
     we are likely to grant, relief; and
    when we will consider managed investment schemes as closely related
     so that they should be aggregated in determining if some exemptions
     for small schemes apply.
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in June 2025 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 136, issued July 2018
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 136 Managed investments: Discretionary
                                     powers and closely related schemes, issued August 1998, reissued
                                     September 2000, rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                             Page 2
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Purpose of this guide ...............................................................................4
                                    Our related reports and guidance ............................................................5
                             B      Our approach to individual relief .........................................................7
                                    ASIC’s powers to grant relief ...................................................................7
                                    Our general approach to relief under RG 51 ...........................................8
                                    Our approach to relief for managed investment schemes and
                                    Australian passport funds ........................................................................8
                                    Statutory preconditions for Australian Passport Rules relief .................11
                             C      Common forms of individual relief ....................................................13
                                    Compliance plan audits and compliance committees ...........................13
                                    Stapled securities ..................................................................................18
                                    Change of responsible entity .................................................................20
                                    Offers to foreign members in a restructure ............................................24
                                    Withdrawal arrangements ......................................................................24
                                    Deregistration of a registered scheme ...................................................32
                             D      Closely related schemes .....................................................................33
                                    Section 601ED determination ................................................................33
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................35
                             Related information .....................................................................................39




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                                          Page 3
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               This guide explains our approach to granting individual relief to managed
                               investment schemes and Australian passport funds.

                               It also explains:
                               • some of the more common situations when we have granted, and when
                                 we are likely to grant, relief; and
                               • when we will consider managed investment schemes as closely related
                                 so that they should be aggregated in determining if some exemptions for
                                 small schemes apply.




Purpose of this guide
              RG 136.1       The creation, operation, termination and offer of interests in managed
                             investment schemes is regulated under the Corporations Act 2001
                             (Corporations Act). Australian passport funds are also regulated by the
                             Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018 (Australian Passport Rules). This guide
                             explains our approach to granting individual relief from the requirements
                             under the Corporations Act and the Australian Passport Rules to managed
                             investment schemes and Australian passport funds.

                                   Note 1: Under s1211(2) of the Corporations Act, the Australian Passport Rules must be
                                   substantially the same as the Passport Rules set out in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of
                                   Cooperation on the Establishment and Implementation of the Asia Region Funds
                                   Passport (Memorandum of Cooperation). The Australian Passport Rules will be taken to
                                   be substantially the same when they, together with other provisions of the corporations
                                   legislation made by the responsible Minister, have substantially the same effect as the
                                   Passport Rules set out in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of Cooperation.

                                   Note 2: In this guide, references to sections (s), chapters (Chs) and parts (Pts) are to the
                                   Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.

              RG 136.2       ASIC has discretionary powers under the laws we administer to:
                             (a)   exempt a person or a class of persons from particular provisions; and
                             (b)   modify the application of particular provisions to a person or class of
                                   persons.
                                   Note: The exemption or modification power may relate to all entities, a specified class
                                   of entities (which may include operators, custodians and auditors), or a specified class
                                   of funds or specified funds.

              RG 136.3       Our general approach to relief—that is, how and when we might grant an
                             exemption from, or modification to, the laws we administer—is set out in




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                            Page 4
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             Regulatory Guide 51 Applications for relief (RG 51). RG 51 provides
                             general guidance on:
                             (a)    the types of applications for relief that can be made;
                             (b)    how to submit an application for relief through the ASIC Regulatory
                                    Portal, and what information we may need from an applicant to
                                    consider the application;
                             (c)    our general approach to relief; and
                             (d)    the different types of relief that may be available.

              RG 136.4       This guide supplements our general policy in RG 51. It is intended to give
                             greater transparency about how we exercise ASIC’s exemption and modification
                             powers under the Corporations Act and the Australian Passport Rules for
                             managed investment schemes and Australian passport funds. This includes:
                             (a)    some of the factors we may take into account in applying the principles
                                    under RG 51 when assessing applications for individual relief from the
                                    provisions in Chs 5C and 8A of the Corporations Act and the Australian
                                    Passport Rules (see Section B); and
                             (b)    the common types of individual relief we have granted to registered
                                    managed investment schemes (registered schemes) (see Section C); and
                             (c)    when we will consider managed investment schemes as closely related so
                                    that they should be aggregated in determining if some registration and
                                    product disclosure exemptions for small schemes apply (see Section D).


Our related reports and guidance
              RG 136.5       We aim to provide a level of transparency about decisions we make when
                             asked to exercise ASIC’s discretionary powers to grant relief.

              RG 136.6       We have also provided separate guidance on our approach to exercising
                             ASIC’s discretionary powers to grant relief for specific topics that may be
                             relevant to managed investment schemes and Australian passport funds.
                             Table 1 lists some of this guidance and provides a brief explanation of what
                             is covered in each guide.

Table 1:     Our related guidance on relief

 Guidance                                  Description

 Regulatory Guide 43 Financial             Provides guidance on the relief available from financial reporting
 reports and audit relief (RG 43)          requirements in the Corporations Act

 Regulatory Guide 49 Employee              Provides guidance on the relief available from the disclosure, Australian
 incentive schemes (RG 49)                 financial services (AFS) licensing, advertising, hawking, managed
                                           investment and on-sale provisions in the Corporations Act for an
                                           employee incentive scheme




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 5
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




 Guidance                                  Description

 Regulatory Guide 76 Related party         Provides guidance on the relief available from certain requirements in
 transactions (RG 76)                      the Corporations Act, as well as guidance to promote better disclosure
                                           and governance for related party transactions

 Regulatory Guide 80 Managed               Provides guidance on the relief available from the managed investment,
 investment schemes: Interests not for     AFS licensing, hawking and disclosure provisions of the Corporations
 money (RG 80)                             Act for managed investment schemes that do not involve raising money

 Regulatory Guide 87 Charitable            Provides guidance on the relief available from the fundraising, managed
 schemes and school enrolment              investment, debenture and AFS licensing provisions of the Corporations
 deposits (RG 87)                          Act to charities that wish to raise funds by issuing debentures or
                                           interests in a managed investment scheme

 Regulatory Guide 91 Horse breeding        Provides guidance on the relief available from the managed investment,
 schemes and horse racing                  AFS licensing and disclosure provisions of the Corporations Act for
 syndicates (RG 91)                        certain types of horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates

 Regulatory Guide 138 Foreign              Provides guidance on ASIC’s powers and responsibilities as a host
 passport funds (RG 138)                   regulator under the Asia Region Funds Passport, as well as our
                                           requirements for notified foreign passport funds and their operators
                                           seeking to enter, or operating in, Australia

 Regulatory Guide 140 Strata               Provides guidance on the relief available from the managed investment,
 schemes and management rights             AFS licensing and fundraising provisions of the Corporations Act for
 schemes (RG 140)                          promoters and operators of management rights schemes and serviced
                                           strata schemes

 Regulatory Guide 144 Mortgage             Provides guidance on the relief available from certain Ch 5C provisions
 investment schemes (RG 144)               of the Corporations Act for mortgage investment schemes

 Regulatory Guide 148 Platforms that       Provides guidance on the relief available from the managed investment,
 are managed investment schemes            fundraising, disclosure and other investor rights requirements in the
 and nominee and custody services          Corporations Act for operators of investor directed portfolio services
 (RG 148)                                  (IDPSs) and responsible entities of IDPS-like schemes

 Regulatory Guide 160 Time-sharing         Provides guidance on the relief available from the managed investment
 schemes (RG 160)                          and AFS licensing provisions of the Corporations Act for certain types of
                                           time-sharing schemes

 Regulatory Guide 161 Share and            Provides guidance on the relief available from the managed investment,
 interest sale facilities (RG 161)         AFS licensing and disclosure provisions in the Corporations Act for sale
                                           facilities and related purchase facilities

 Regulatory Guide 174 Relief for           Provides guidance on the relief available from the financial reporting
 externally administered companies         provisions of the Corporations Act for registered schemes being wound up
 and registered schemes being wound
 up (RG 174)

 Regulatory Guide 195 Group                Provides guidance on the relief available from the managed investment
 purchasing bodies for insurance and       and AFS licensing provisions of the Corporations Act for group
 risk products (RG 195)                    purchasing bodies




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                 Page 6
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




B          Our approach to individual relief

                               Key points

                               This section explains how our general approach under RG 51 applies to
                               granting individual relief from requirements under the Corporations Act and
                               the Australian Passport Rules for managed investment schemes and
                               Australian passport funds.

                               RG 51 remains our primary guidance on our approach to individual relief
                               applications.

                               This section also explains some of the factors we may take into account in
                               applying the principles under RG 51 when assessing applications for
                               individual relief from the provisions in Chs 5C, 8A and 8B of the
                               Corporations Act and the Australian Passport Rules.




ASIC’s powers to grant relief
              RG 136.7       ASIC has powers under the Corporations Act to exempt a person or a class
                             of persons from particular provisions and to modify the application of
                             particular provisions to a person or class of persons.

              RG 136.8       Some of these powers of exemption or modification apply in relation to
                             provisions that specifically affect managed investment schemes, corporate
                             collective investment vehicles (CCIVs) and Australian passport funds only.
                             These discretionary powers are to grant relief under:
                             (a)   s601QA from the provisions of Ch 5C (managed investment schemes)
                                   and from s253LA (special and extraordinary resolutions) as it relates to
                                   Ch 5C;
                             (b)   s1243 from certain provisions of Ch 8B (CCIVs);
                             (c)   s1217 from the provisions of Ch 8A (Australian passport funds); and
                             (d)   s1217A from the provisions of the Australian Passport Rules
                                   (Australian passport funds).

              RG 136.9       There are other exemption or modification powers under the Corporations
                             Act that also apply. These include the discretionary exemption or
                             modification powers in relation to:
                             (a)   the AFS licensing provisions (see s926A);
                             (b)   the financial services disclosure provisions (see s951B);
                             (c)   the conduct requirements relating to financial products and services (see
                                   s992B); and
                             (d)   the financial product disclosure provisions (see s1020F).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                             Page 7
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.10      If we grant an exemption or modification, the kind of relief granted, the
                             extent of relief and the situations when relief applies will depend on what is
                             appropriate in the circumstances.


Our general approach to relief under RG 51
              RG 136.11      RG 51 provides guidance on the types of applications for relief that can be
                             made, how to submit applications through the ASIC Regulatory Portal, our
                             general approach to applications and the types of relief available.

              RG 136.12      Under the general approach set out in RG 51, we will consider and
                             determine all applications for relief on the basis of the facts, circumstances
                             and merits of each individual application.


Our approach to relief for managed investment schemes and
Australian passport funds
              RG 136.13      When applying the general principles under RG 51 in the context of
                             assessing applications for individual relief from the provisions in Chs 5C and
                             8A, we may take into account:
                             (a)   the result of a cost–benefit analysis and the impact of the relief sought
                                   on affected persons (see RG 136.14–RG 136.16);
                             (b)   the impact of the relief sought on the regulatory objectives of the
                                   managed investment regime and the Asia Region Funds Passport
                                   regime (see RG 136.17–RG 136.21);
                             (c)   the relevance of any precedents (see RG 136.22);
                             (d)   the relevance of the nature, scale and complexity of the managed
                                   investment scheme or Australian passport fund seeking relief, and its
                                   operator (see RG 136.23); and
                             (e)   the adequacy of any alternative regulation (see RG 136.24–RG 136.26).
                                   Note: This list is not exhaustive. Relevant considerations will always depend on the
                                   applicable facts, circumstances and merits of each individual application. The weight
                                   given to any particular item or any other relevant consideration will also depend on the
                                   circumstances.


                             Cost–benefit analysis and impact on affected persons

              RG 136.14      When we undertake a cost–benefit analysis, we identify the persons whose
                             interests may be affected (whether adversely or otherwise) if the relief
                             sought is granted.

              RG 136.15      We then assess the likely impact of the relief sought on these affected persons.
                             This involves evaluating the financial impact and ensuring we take into account
                             all the relevant positive and negative consequences of granting relief.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                         Page 8
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.16      We may consider:
                             (a)   whether the persons who will be given the relief and others will receive
                                   any benefits from the exercise of ASIC’s relief powers, and to what
                                   extent;
                             (b)   whether strict compliance with the Corporations Act and the Australian
                                   Passport Rules will be impossible or disproportionately burdensome.
                                   This also involves identifying the persons bearing the costs; and
                             (c)   whether the likelihood and extent of detriment to potential clients
                                   (including retail clients) resulting from the relief sought is minimal. In
                                   part, this will involve considering whether people acquiring, holding or
                                   otherwise transacting interests in a managed investment scheme or an
                                   Australian passport fund will still have the protection intended by
                                   Parliament if the relief sought is granted.


                             Impact on regulatory objectives

              RG 136.17      When we consider the impact on regulatory objectives, we may consider
                             whether the relief sought promotes or is consistent with:
                             (a)   the general policy objectives of the Corporations Act; and
                             (b)   the specific policy objectives underlying the relevant provision(s) of the
                                   Corporations Act, and, where applicable, the Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 136.18      We will give appropriate weight to the value of promoting international
                             harmonisation, where relevant.

                             Corporations Act

              RG 136.19      Generally, the Corporations Act is intended to harmonise and raise standards
                             of conduct.

                             Managed investment schemes

              RG 136.20      Specific regulatory objectives for managed investment schemes include:
                             (a)   promoting commercial stability and efficiency in capital raising and
                                   capital formation; and
                             (b)   providing an appropriate level of regulation that adequately and
                                   effectively protects the interests of investors.

                             Australian passport funds

              RG 136.21      Specific regulatory objectives for Australian passport funds include:
                             (a)   facilitating cross-border offerings of passport funds by supporting
                                   regulatory consistency across participating economies;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                             Page 9
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             (b)   providing adequate regulatory standards for the management and
                                   distribution of passport funds that promote investor protection, and fair,
                                   efficient and transparent markets;
                             (c)   providing Australian investors with a greater diversity of investment
                                   opportunities through the availability of interests in notified foreign
                                   passport funds; and
                             (d)   facilitating Australian fund managers seeking to offer their products and
                                   services in other participating economies.

                             Relevance of any precedents

              RG 136.22      We may consider whether the relief sought involves the same or similar
                             terms as any relief we have granted in comparable situations. We do so to
                             promote consistency and predictability in our decision making when
                             exercising ASIC’s statutory exemption and modification powers to grant
                             relief.

                                   Note: See Section C for more information on common forms of relief we have granted.


                             Nature, scale and complexity of the applicant and fund

              RG 136.23      We may also assess whether the relief sought is appropriate and necessary
                             by considering the nature, scale and complexity of the applicant’s business
                             operations. This includes the scope of the relief and any applicable
                             conditions. At a minimum, we are likely to take into account:
                             (a)   the number of managed investment schemes and the size of their funds
                                   under management;
                             (b)   whether the fund is a managed investment scheme and whether it is also
                                   registered as an Australian passport fund;
                             (c)   the investment strategies and business activities of the managed
                                   investment scheme, including the extent to which the fund will use
                                   leverage;
                             (d)   whether the managed investment scheme is, or will be, listed or traded
                                   on a financial market;
                             (e)   the types of investments and investment locations;
                             (f)   the distribution model and investor base;
                             (g)   the activities, including the applicant’s investment approach;
                             (h)   the extent to which the applicant delegates material operational
                                   activities, and the level of oversight it has over its delegates;
                             (i)   the diversity and structure of the applicant’s operations (including the
                                   geographical spread of the operations and the extent to which any
                                   functions are outsourced);
                             (j)   the volume and size of the transactions the applicant is responsible for;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                   Page 10
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             (k)   whether the applicant’s main business is undertaking funds
                                   management; and
                             (l)   the number of staff in the applicant’s organisation.


                             ‘Adequacy’ of alternative regulation

              RG 136.24      We may also consider whether there would be any available adequate
                             alternative regulation or protection if the relief is granted.

              RG 136.25      This is aimed at both assessing the regulatory detriment of any relief and
                             considering whether relief can be granted to remove any unnecessarily
                             duplicated legislative or regulatory requirements.

              RG 136.26      When considering whether an alternative regulatory regime is ‘adequate’, we
                             may generally consider how effectively the regime addresses:
                             (a)   efficient, honest and fair service provision;
                             (b)   service provider resources and competence;
                             (c)   service provider compliance, conflicts management and risk
                                   management practices;
                             (d)   initial and ongoing disclosure to retail clients about the provision of a
                                   service;
                             (e)   protection of client assets;
                             (f)   financial and transaction record keeping;
                             (g)   access by retail clients to internal and external dispute resolution
                                   services; and
                             (h)   the provision of any advice to retail clients on a reasonable basis.



Statutory preconditions for Australian Passport Rules relief
              RG 136.27      We will only grant exemptions and modifications in relation to the
                             Australian Passport Rules for an Australian passport fund (as its home
                             regulator) if:
                             (a)   all of the relevant host regulators of the Australian passport fund have
                                   agreed to the terms of the relief sought (see RG 136.28–RG 136.31);
                                   and
                             (b)   we publish details of any relief granted (see RG 136.32–RG 136.33).

                             Agreement of all relevant host regulators

              RG 136.28      An exemption or modification in relation to the Australian Passport Rules
                             can only be granted for an Australian passport fund if all of the host
                             regulators have agreed to the exemption being granted or the declaration



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                              Page 11
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             being made: see s1217A(3)(a). The host regulators are the passport
                             regulators of the participating economies where the Australian passport fund
                             is permitted, or has applied, to offer interests.

              RG 136.29      This requirement is aimed at promoting the consistent and seamless
                             application of the Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 136.30      When we receive an application seeking relief from the Australian Passport
                             Rules, we may seek to confirm any information provided with any relevant
                             host regulator. We may also share the application with other passport
                             regulators and seek their views.

              RG 136.31      The application will need to explain whether the applicant has obtained or is
                             seeking agreement from each relevant host regulator for the relief sought. We
                             may seek confirmation that agreement has been provided by the relevant
                             passport regulators under the arrangements concerning cross-border
                             supervisory cooperation under Annex 4 to the Memorandum of Cooperation.
                             It is not possible for ASIC to grant relief from the Australian Passport Rules
                             for an Australian passport fund until all relevant host regulators have agreed
                             to the proposed relief.

                             Exemptions and modifications to be made publicly
                             available

              RG 136.32      If we grant an exemption or modification in our capacity as a home regulator
                             for an individual Australian passport fund, its operator or a person
                             responsible for compliance with a provision in the Australian Passport Rules,
                             we will generally publish the details of the exemption or modification on the
                             Asia Region Funds Passport Register. This includes any variation or
                             revocation.

                                   Note: Where we grant an exemption or modification in relation to a class of funds, we
                                   will not publish these details on the Asia Region Funds Passport Register.

              RG 136.33      This requirement promotes transparency around how the Asia Region Funds
                             Passport is being administered by all passport regulators.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                      Page 12
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




C          Common forms of individual relief

                               Key points

                               This section outlines and explains some of the more common forms of
                               individual relief we have granted.

                               The common forms of relief outlined in this section provide transparency
                               around the material considerations we have taken into account in past
                               decisions, so that prospective applicants for relief may have insight into the
                               factors we consider when deciding whether to exercise ASIC’s powers to
                               grant relief.

                               We assess applications for relief on a case-by-case basis and consider all
                               the relevant circumstances of each application. If we grant relief, it may be
                               based on conditions other than what is set out in this section.




Compliance plan audits and compliance committees
              RG 136.34      We may consider granting:
                             (a)   relief from the obligation to prepare and lodge a compliance plan audit;
                             (b)   an extension of time to establish a compliance committee; and
                             (c)   an extension of time to replace a compliance committee member.


                             Relief from the compliance plan audit requirements

              RG 136.35      Under s601HG(1), the responsible entity of a registered scheme must ensure
                             that, at all times, a registered company auditor, an audit firm or an authorised
                             audit company is engaged to audit compliance with the scheme’s compliance
                             plan.

              RG 136.36      Section 601HG(3) sets out the auditor’s powers and responsibilities, which
                             are to:
                             (a)   examine the compliance plan;
                             (b)   audit compliance by the responsible entity with the compliance plan;
                                   and
                             (c)   report to the responsible entity on whether the responsible entity has
                                   complied with the compliance plan during the financial year and
                                   whether the plan continues to meet the requirements of Pt 5C.4.

              RG 136.37      The auditor of the compliance plan must lodge with ASIC the compliance
                             plan audit report at the same time as the financial statements and reports for
                             the registered scheme: see s601HG(7).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 13
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.38      The purpose of a compliance plan audit is to identify whether there has been
                             any non-compliance with the compliance plan by the responsible entity, and
                             whether the plan continues to meet the requirements of Pt 5C.4.

              RG 136.39      We would generally only consider an application for individual relief from
                             the requirement to conduct a compliance plan audit and lodge a compliance
                             plan audit report with ASIC for a financial year if the responsible entity has:
                             (a)   complied with its compliance plan for the financial year to be covered
                                   by the relief sought;
                             (b)   not had any significant reportable breaches for the financial year to be
                                   covered by the relief sought;
                             (c)   lodged its compliance plan audit reports for previous financial years;
                                   and
                             (d)   provided us with information on any concerns raised by an auditor in
                                   previous compliance plan audit reports.

              RG 136.40      The requirement for a compliance plan audit is a fundamental obligation of
                             the managed investment regulatory regime. It provides that adequate
                             processes are in place to ensure that a registered scheme is operated in
                             accordance with the obligations contained in the constitution and the law. It
                             also ensures that the compliance plan meets the requirements of Pt 5C.4.

              RG 136.41      We would generally only grant relief from a requirement under s601HG if a
                             person could demonstrate that meeting the compliance plan audit provisions
                             would be impossible or disproportionately burdensome in the
                             circumstances—for example, if a scheme is being wound up or, for a short
                             period, pending deregistration.

              RG 136.42      Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include:
                             (a)   whether the benefits of conducting the compliance plan audit and
                                   preparing the compliance plan audit report are outweighed by the
                                   associated burden and costs. When we consider the benefits, we will
                                   take into account the likely relevant users of such reports and the likely
                                   nature and extent of their use. When we consider the costs and burden,
                                   we will take into account the amount and who will bear the expected
                                   compliance costs;
                             (b)   the ability of the likely relevant users of such information to
                                   independently obtain, in a timely manner, other reliable information on
                                   the registered scheme’s compliance; and
                             (c)   the underlying purposes of a compliance plan audit and audit report as
                                   set out at RG 136.38 and RG 136.40.

              RG 136.43      We will generally include a condition on any relief that requires the
                             responsible entity to publish a notice explaining the relief in a prominent
                             place on its website.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 14
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             Extension of time for compliance committee establishment

              RG 136.44      Under s601JA(1), the responsible entity of a registered scheme must
                             establish a compliance committee if ‘less than half of the directors of the
                             responsible entity are external directors’.

                                   Note: Section 601JA(2) provides a definition of an ‘external director’.

              RG 136.45      The responsible entity must establish the compliance committee within
                             14 days after it is required to do so under s601JA(1), unless we have agreed
                             in writing to a longer period: see s601JA(3). In agreeing to a longer period,
                             we may include conditions that the responsible entity must comply with.

              RG 136.46      We will consider granting an extension of time to establish a compliance
                             committee if:
                             (a)   there are exceptional circumstances that justify relief; or
                             (b)   it may be impractical to establish a committee with a sufficient number
                                   of external members within the 14-day period for reasons other than due
                                   to the responsible entity’s default.

              RG 136.47      However, we are generally not likely to grant an extension of time to
                             establish a compliance committee when a responsible entity is registering a
                             scheme. The responsible entity should not apply for registration unless it is
                             in a position to establish a board or compliance committee immediately after
                             the scheme is registered.

              RG 136.48      Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include
                             whether:
                             (a)   the responsible entity is doing all it can reasonably do to appoint
                                   sufficient external directors or to establish a compliance committee; and
                             (b)   any reduction in investor protection from the lack of a compliance
                                   committee is minimised.

              RG 136.49      If an extension of time is granted, we will generally include conditions on
                             the responsible entity requiring it to:
                             (a)   use its best endeavours to establish the compliance committee or
                                   appoint the required external directors to the board of the responsible
                                   entity as soon as practicable, and, in any event, before the extended time
                                   limit ends; and
                             (b)   appoint external auditors to carry out substitute compliance monitoring
                                   for the period of relief.

              RG 136.50      Extensions will be given only for a specified period and for as long as
                             appears necessary.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                 Page 15
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             Compliance committee membership
              RG 136.51      Under s601JB(1), a compliance committee must have at least three
                             members, and a majority of them must be ‘external members’.

                                   Note: ‘External members’ is defined under s601JB(2) and qualified by s601JB(3) and (4).

              RG 136.52      The need for a compliance committee may also arise due to changes in the
                             composition of the board of the responsible entity and an extension of time
                             may be sought to reconstitute the board with sufficient external directors.

              RG 136.53      We consider it is important that vacancies in the external members of a
                             compliance committee are filled quickly so that investor protection is not
                             reduced. Similarly, if at least half of the directors of a responsible entity are
                             not external, a compliance committee should be established quickly. This is
                             because a compliance committee with a majority of external members gives
                             investors protection by regularly monitoring compliance.

              RG 136.54      There will be costs associated with finding appropriate external compliance
                             committee members. However, this is an intended cost associated with
                             establishing appropriate investor protection and the responsible entity should
                             factor it into budgets at an early stage.

              RG 136.55      The Corporations Act imposes significant restrictions on who may be an
                             external member of a compliance committee or of the board of the
                             responsible entity. We consider that a member of a compliance committee
                             must be a natural person. An external member must not be, and may not
                             within the previous two years have been, substantially involved in business
                             dealings or involved in a professional capacity with the responsible entity or
                             a related body corporate: see s601JB(2)(b). These restrictions reflect the
                             importance for investor protection and credibility of regulation—for there to
                             be oversight by persons who are manifestly independent.

              RG 136.56      In our view, the reference to ‘substantially involved’ means that a person
                             who is employed by an entity that has had business dealings or a
                             professional relationship with the responsible entity, or a related body
                             corporate of the responsible entity, would not be excluded as an external
                             member or director merely because they have had a trivial involvement with
                             the dealings of, or a trivial relationship with, the entity. We also consider the
                             term ‘substantial’ qualifies the degree of an individual’s involvement, rather
                             than the nature of the business dealings or professional relationship. In our
                             view, the provisions should not be interpreted as meaning involvement in
                             substantial business dealings.

              RG 136.57      We consider the following persons are likely to be substantially involved in
                             business dealings or in a professional capacity with the responsible entity:
                             (a)   an employee of the auditor of the responsible entity who:
                                   (i)   has decision-making responsibility in relation to audits of the
                                         responsible entity; or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                         Page 16
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                                   (ii)   may have been exposed to any form of conflict of interest in acting
                                          as a compliance committee member because of involvement with
                                          the audits;
                             (b)   an employee or officer of a custodian for the responsible entity who:
                                   (i)    has decision-making responsibility in relation to the dealings
                                          between the custodian and the responsible entity; or
                                   (ii)   may have been exposed to any form of conflict of interest in acting
                                          as a compliance committee member because of their involvement
                                          in the business relationship with the responsible entity; or
                             (c)   a solicitor who is responsible for legal advice provided to the
                                   responsible entity.

              RG 136.58      A member of a partnership with a substantial involvement is also not eligible
                             as an external member: see s601JB(2)(c).

              RG 136.59      The requirements for being external are intentionally strict and are designed
                             to ensure the unambiguous appearance of independence, as well as actual
                             independence. Because of this, we will generally not grant relief that allows
                             a person who may not be external to be counted as external. We will
                             generally not grant relief on the basis of submissions that:
                             (a)   there is no actual conflict of interest—for example, a partner of a firm
                                   of solicitors who has no business dealings with the responsible entity in
                                   the case where the firm has substantial involvement in business dealings
                                   with the responsible entity; or
                             (b)   there are difficulties in finding alternative candidates.

              RG 136.60      Under s601JB(5), if the compliance committee ceases to satisfy the
                             membership requirements under s601JB(1), the responsible entity must
                             make appointments to the committee within 14 days after this requirement is
                             no longer satisfied. This is unless we have agreed in writing to a longer
                             period. Our consent to a longer period may be made subject to conditions
                             and there is a statutory obligation on the responsible entity to comply with
                             those conditions: see s601JA(6).

              RG 136.61      When a responsible entity needs to constitute or reconstitute a compliance
                             committee after a scheme is registered, we recognise that it may be
                             impracticable to find suitable compliance committee members within
                             14 days. For example, this may be difficult on the sudden death of an
                             external member of the compliance committee or board of the responsible
                             entity. It may be especially difficult for smaller, specialised registered
                             schemes and schemes based in remote locations. Similarly, when multiple
                             vacancies occur in a compliance committee, we recognise that compliance is
                             more likely to be impracticable.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 17
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.62      The responsible entity should apply promptly after it appears that an
                             extension is likely to be necessary. We may, however, extend the time after
                             the end of the 14-day period.

              RG 136.63      We will consider granting an extension of time if:
                             (a)   there are exceptional circumstances to justify relief; or
                             (b)   it may be impractical to appoint a sufficient number of external
                                   members within the 14-day period for reasons other than due to the
                                   responsible entity’s default.

                                   Note: See RG 136.61 for examples.

              RG 136.64      Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include
                             whether:
                             (a)   the responsible entity is doing all it can reasonably do to appoint the
                                   external member(s); and
                             (b)   any reduction in investor protection due to the compliance committee
                                   not having the required member composition is minimised.

              RG 136.65      If an extension of time is granted, we will generally include conditions on
                             the relief that require the responsible entity to:
                             (a)   use its best endeavours to appoint the required external member(s) to
                                   the compliance committee. This must be as soon as practicable, and, in
                                   any event, before the extended time limit ends; and
                             (b)   ensure that the number of external members as a proportion of the total
                                   number of members of the compliance committee does not become less
                                   than the proportion at the date the application for relief was made.



Stapled securities
              RG 136.66      Section 601FC(1) prescribes the duties of the responsible entity. This
                             includes to:
                             (a)   act in the best interests of members (see 601FC(1)(c)); and
                             (b)   not make use of information in order to gain an advantage for itself
                                   and/or any other person or cause detriment to the members of the
                                   scheme (see s601FC(1)(e)).

              RG 136.67      Similar duties apply to the officers of the responsible entity: see
                             s601FD(1)(c) and 601FD(1)(d). Section 601FD(1)(e) imposes a duty on
                             officers of the responsible entity not to make improper use of their position
                             as an officer to gain an advantage for themselves and/or any other person or
                             to cause detriment to members of the scheme.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 18
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.68      There is also a duty for employees of the responsible entity not to make
                             improper use of their position as an employee to gain an advantage for
                             themselves and/or any other person or to cause detriment to members of the
                             scheme: see s601FE(1)(a).

              RG 136.69      Section 601LC prohibits the giving of financial benefits by a responsible
                             entity to a related party of the responsible entity unless a relevant exception
                             is available.

              RG 136.70      We may consider granting relief for stapled securities, a component of which
                             is an interest in a registered scheme, from the following provisions:
                             (a)   s601FC(1)(c) and 601FC(1)(e)—to allow a responsible entity to
                                   consider the interests of the members or to use information, having
                                   regard to them being stapled security holders;
                             (b)   s601FD(1)(c), 601FD(1)(d), 601FD(1)(e) and 601FE(1)(a)—to allow
                                   officers or employees to consider the interests of the members or to use
                                   information or their position, having regard to them being stapled
                                   security holders; and
                             (c)   s601LC—to allow a responsible entity to give a financial benefit to
                                   itself or a related party where this increases stapled scheme property,
                                   while decreasing the property in the registered scheme.

              RG 136.71      We may consider granting relief for stapled securities where:
                             (a)   the stapled group consists of two or more financial products, including
                                   at least one interest in a registered scheme. This is where:
                                   (i)    under the terms on which each of the products is to be traded, they
                                          must be transferred together; and
                                   (ii)   there are no financial products in the same class as those financial
                                          products that may be transferred separately; and
                             (b)   each interest in the scheme must, under the terms upon which it is to be
                                   traded, only be transferred with one or more shares or interests.

              RG 136.72      We may grant relief for stapled securities to facilitate the operation and
                             management of the stapled group, rather than the component parts that make
                             up the stapled group. We consider there is no detriment to members given
                             they are also members of the other component parts of the stapled group.

              RG 136.73      Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief for stapled
                             securities include:
                             (a)   whether all interests in the registered scheme remain stapled with shares
                                   in a company (or interests in another scheme) on a one-for-one basis,
                                   and are traded as stapled securities;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 19
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             (b)   whether there is any ‘leakage’—that is, whether the stapled security
                                   holders own all of the shares in the stapled company and no benefit
                                   leaks from the stapled structure for the benefit of others; and
                                   Note: Benefits may be able to be paid from the scheme property to wholly-owned
                                   subsidiaries of a company that is wholly owned by the stapled security holders.

                             (c)   where the stapling occurs after members have acquired an interest in the
                                   scheme, we may request a copy of the proposed disclosure to be sent to
                                   members about resolutions to staple, to ensure that the disclosure is adequate.



Change of responsible entity
              RG 136.74      If the responsible entity of a registered scheme wants to retire, it must call a
                             members’ meeting to explain its reasons for wanting to retire and to enable
                             the members to vote on a resolution to choose a new responsible entity: see
                             s601FL(1). The resolution must be an extraordinary resolution if the scheme
                             is not listed.

              RG 136.75      Section 601FL provides registered scheme members with the opportunity to
                             exercise voting rights to choose a new responsible entity to replace a retiring
                             responsible entity. In our view, this is an important safeguard for the change
                             of responsible entity, which cannot be effected by too few members.

              RG 136.76      We may consider granting relief from the requirement to hold a members’
                             meeting for a change of responsible entity if:
                             (a)   the change is to a related body corporate of the responsible entity (see
                                   RG 136.77–RG 136.79);
                             (b)   there are a small number of members (see RG 136.80–RG 136.83); or
                             (c)   a significant percentage of the interests in the registered scheme are
                                   held by investment platforms that have a non-voting policy (see
                                   RG 136.84–RG 136.87).


                             Change to a related body corporate

              RG 136.77      We will consider granting relief from the requirement to hold a members’
                             meeting for a change of responsible entity if:
                             (a)   the existing responsible entity and the proposed new responsible entity
                                   are related companies and the change of responsible entity is unlikely to
                                   have an adverse impact on the administrative, custodial or asset
                                   management of the registered scheme or give rise to any significant
                                   changes in the manner in which the scheme operates; and
                             (b)   the existing responsible entity and the proposed new responsible entity
                                   are related companies and the costs of strict compliance with the
                                   meeting requirements under s601FL(1) are disproportionately
                                   burdensome compared to the benefits of holding a meeting.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 20
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.78      Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include whether:
                             (a)   the current and replacement responsible entity are related companies
                                   within the same corporate group;
                             (b)   the current and replacement responsible entity share or have the
                                   following in common:
                                   (i)     resources (including key staff);
                                   (ii)    corporate governance arrangements (particularly directors and
                                           compliance committee members); and
                                   (iii)   control structures (e.g. reporting lines, compliance systems and
                                           procedures for monitoring service providers, and accounting,
                                           computer and IT systems);
                             (c)   if relief is granted, there would be any adverse impact on members’
                                   interests;
                             (d)   if relief is granted, there would be substantial cost savings for the
                                   responsible entity, and, ultimately, for the members of the registered
                                   scheme; and
                             (e)   it is possible for the members’ meeting to be held as a virtual-only
                                   meeting under s252P(c) or as a hybrid meeting under s252P(b).

                                   Note: For further information on virtual meetings, see FAQs: Virtual meetings for
                                   companies and registered schemes on the ASIC website.

              RG 136.79      If relief is granted, we will generally include conditions on the relief that
                             require the responsible entity to:
                             (a)   notify members of the proposed change of responsible entity and
                                   include in the notice all the information that members would reasonably
                                   need to make an informed assessment as to whether to request an all-
                                   member vote to choose a new responsible entity;
                             (b)   give members 21 days to consider the notice and, if they wish, request
                                   that the responsible entity hold an all-member postal vote to choose a
                                   new responsible entity;
                             (c)   conduct a postal vote (based on the conditions set out in the relief) if
                                   100 members or members holding at least 5% of the total value of
                                   interests held by members eligible to vote request one; and
                             (d)   effect the change of responsible entity within three months.


                             Small number of members

              RG 136.80      We may consider granting relief from the requirement to convene and hold a
                             members’ meeting to change a responsible entity if:
                             (a)   there are only a small number of members and all of those members
                                   would be prevented from voting under s252R or 253E; or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                      Page 21
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             (b)   the only members are a small number of wholesale clients.

              RG 136.81      We may grant this relief to facilitate members being able to approve a
                             change of responsible entity when:
                             (a)   it may not be possible to convene and hold a meeting of members; or
                             (b)   due to the small number of members, the costs and effort of doing so are
                                   unnecessary—on the basis that the consent of members to the change of
                                   responsible entity can be obtained in a more cost-effective way.

              RG 136.82      Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include
                             whether:
                             (a)   the registered scheme is able to meet the quorum requirement of two
                                   members under s252R;
                             (b)   all members would be unable to pass a resolution to change the
                                   responsible entity in a members’ meeting because they would be
                                   prevented from voting on the resolution under s253E;
                                   Note: Section 253E provides that the responsible entity of a registered scheme and its
                                   associates are not entitled to vote on a resolution at a members’ meeting if either the
                                   responsible entity or the associate has an interest in the resolution or matter other than
                                   as a member. This restriction applies to the resolutions for retirement and replacement
                                   of the responsible entity under s601FL.

                             (c)   the registered scheme would incur unnecessary costs and inconvenience
                                   to convene and hold a members’ meeting; and
                             (d)   it is possible for the meeting to be held virtually or as a hybrid meeting.

              RG 136.83      If relief is granted, we will generally include conditions on the relief that
                             require:
                             (a)   the responsible entity to give members materials dealing with the change
                                   of responsible entity which are similar to the explanatory memorandum
                                   that would have been provided with a notice of meeting; and
                             (b)   unanimous member approval to ensure that there is no reduction of
                                   members’ rights because this is a higher threshold for member approval
                                   than that required by s601FL.


                             Investment platforms that have a non-voting policy

              RG 136.84      Member approval for a change of responsible entity may be difficult to
                             obtain when a significant proportion of the interests in the registered scheme
                             are held by investment platforms that have a policy of not voting. This may
                             make it difficult to obtain the requisite number of members to vote on a
                             change of responsible entity. This is particularly relevant for unlisted
                             schemes that require a change to be approved by an extraordinary resolution.

                                   Note: For more information on investment platforms and the requirements for them to
                                   have and disclose a voting policy, see RG 148.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                          Page 22
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.85      We will consider granting relief from s601FL(1) to facilitate a change of
                             responsible entity when a significant percentage of the interests in the
                             registered scheme are held by investment platforms that have a written
                             policy of not voting, and so abstain from voting. We will generally do this
                             by excluding these platform interests from the total votes that may be cast
                             under an extraordinary resolution.

              RG 136.86      Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include
                             whether:
                             (a)   the applicant provides evidence of the published voting policy of the
                                   relevant platform which demonstrates that the platform has a policy of
                                   not voting;
                                   Note: For example, for an IDPS, we would ordinarily request the relevant extract from
                                   the IDPS Guide.

                             (b)   all members had the opportunity to vote on the resolution, subject to the
                                   self-imposed voting practices of the platform operators that have a
                                   written policy of not voting;
                             (c)   the responsible entity has demonstrated that it is not possible for a
                                   sufficient number of members to vote on the resolution after having
                                   held a members’ meeting to consider the proposed resolution;
                             (d)   the platform operators have undertaken consultation with their own
                                   underlying clients about the proposed resolution;
                             (e)   the impact on members as a result of the change of responsible entity
                                   will be limited; and
                             (f)   there are other commercial benefits that would flow from granting
                                   relief, including any cost savings of pursuing alternatives and avoiding
                                   the entrenchment of a responsible entity that seeks to retire.

              RG 136.87      If relief is granted, we have generally included conditions on the relief that
                             require the responsible entity to:
                             (a)   notify all members in writing that if a platform operator has a policy of
                                   not voting and abstains from voting, the vote will exclude the members
                                   that are holding for platforms;
                             (b)   ensure a reasonable period of time passes before the meeting can be
                                   reconvened and the vote counted (which would then exclude the votes
                                   of any non-voting platforms); and
                             (c)   ensure members who have previously submitted proxies for the original
                                   meeting may, for a period of at least 10 business days, withdraw or
                                   change their proxies after they have been given notice of the adjourned
                                   meeting.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                     Page 23
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




Offers to foreign members in a restructure
              RG 136.88      Under s601FC(1)(d), a responsible entity has a duty to treat members who
                             hold interests of the same class equally and members who hold interests of
                             different classes fairly.

              RG 136.89      We will consider granting relief from s601FC(1)(d) so that foreign members
                             in a registered scheme can be treated differently from other members. We
                             will generally do this if it is impracticable or unlawful to offer or issue
                             interests to foreign members as part of a restructure of the scheme or similar
                             proposal involving the scheme.

              RG 136.90      Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include
                             whether:
                             (a)   the foreign members would have an equal opportunity to vote on the
                                   proposal;
                             (b)   it would be disproportionately burdensome for the responsible entity to
                                   comply with foreign fundraising laws due to:
                                   (i)    the number of foreign jurisdictions involved; and
                                   (ii)   there being a relatively small number and percentage of foreign
                                          members of the registered scheme;
                             (c)   any relevant costs of complying with such laws would be borne by all
                                   members of the registered scheme; and
                             (d)   the foreign members receive cash or are entitled to participate in a cash-
                                   out facility to dispose of their existing interests, which other members
                                   receive.

              RG 136.91      If relief is granted, we will generally include conditions on the relief that
                             require the responsible entity to:
                             (a)   fully inform foreign members of the proposed transaction; and
                             (b)   give foreign members an equal opportunity to vote on the proposed
                                   transaction.



Withdrawal arrangements
              RG 136.92      We may consider granting relief to enable:
                             (a)   withdrawal on hardship grounds from ‘frozen funds’ (see RG 136.93–
                                   RG 136.104);
                             (b)   ‘rolling’ withdrawal offers (see RG 136.105–RG 136.115); and
                             (c)   registered schemes that provide marketplace lending products to offer
                                   withdrawals when the scheme is non-liquid (also known as ‘illiquid’) (see
                                   RG 136.116–RG 136.119).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 24
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             Hardship relief for ‘frozen funds’

              RG 136.93      There are restrictions on members withdrawing from registered schemes: see
                             s601KA(3). The responsible entity of a registered scheme must not allow a
                             member to withdraw from a liquid scheme other than in accordance with the
                             scheme’s constitution. They also must not allow a member to withdraw from
                             an illiquid scheme other than in accordance with the scheme’s constitution
                             and s601KB–601KE.

              RG 136.94      The responsible entity of a registered scheme must also treat the members
                             who hold interests of the same class equally and members who hold interests
                             of different classes fairly: see s601FC(1)(d).

                             Relief available under ASIC Corporations (Hardship Withdrawals Relief)
                             Instrument 2020/778

              RG 136.95      We have provided hardship relief so that responsible entities can allow
                             members suffering hardship to withdraw from a ‘frozen fund’: see ASIC
                             Instrument 2020/778. For the purposes of the relief, a ‘frozen fund’ is a
                             registered scheme for which the responsible entity for the scheme has both:
                             (a)   suspended withdrawals from the scheme, whether or not the scheme is
                                   liquid; and
                             (b)   ceased to allow the issue of new interests in the scheme.

              RG 136.96      The instrument provides responsible entities with relief in relation to:
                             (a)   the duty to treat members of the same class equally (under
                                   s601FC(1)(d));
                             (b)   the withdrawal regime (under Pt 5C.6), by introducing a new hardship
                                   withdrawal regime; and
                             (c)   the requirement that a special resolution of members must approve a
                                   constitutional change (under s601GC(1)(a)). A responsible entity will
                                   be allowed to change the scheme’s constitution unilaterally to include
                                   provisions for a right of members to withdraw on hardship grounds
                                   following notice to members. However, if it receives requests to hold a
                                   meeting from members with at least 5% of the votes that may be cast, it
                                   must hold the meeting.

                                   Note: For the avoidance of doubt, relief is also granted from the constitution content
                                   requirements under s601GA(4) given the discretion that is available to the responsible
                                   entity under the new hardship withdrawal regime.

              RG 136.97      Under the relief, a responsible entity has the discretion to make a withdrawal
                             payment to a person who is a member, the beneficiary of the member’s
                             estate or an instructor (e.g. a member of the scheme making the request for a
                             person in their capacity as responsible entity or custodian of another registered
                             scheme) in response to a withdrawal request by the person. However, the
                             withdrawal request must meet one of the hardship criteria set out in Table 2.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                       Page 25
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




Table 2:     Hardship criteria a person must meet for a hardship withdrawal

 Type of hardship              Hardship criteria

 Urgent financial hardship     The person needs the amount requested to meet reasonable and immediate living
                               expenses for the person or any dependants.

 Unemployment                  The person has not been in gainful employment for at least three months and has
                               no other means of financial support (except government assistance, such as
                               unemployment benefits).

 Compassionate grounds         The person (or their dependant, as applicable) needs the amount requested to:
                                pay for medical costs (including related transport costs) to treat a life-threatening
                                 illness or injury, to alleviate acute or chronic pain, or to alleviate an acute or
                                 chronic mental disturbance. A registered medical practitioner must provide a
                                 certified statement confirming the medical condition;
                                pay for specific modifications to a principal place of residence or vehicle to
                                 accommodate a severe disability of the person or their dependant;
                                pay for funeral and other expenses related to the death of a member (paid to a
                                 beneficiary of the estate of the deceased member) or the death of a dependant
                                 of the person;
                                enable the person to provide care for another person who is dying from a
                                 terminal illness, including home care;
                                prevent a mortgagee or lender from selling the person’s principal place of
                                 residence; or
                                meet a binding financial obligation entered into by the person before the responsible
                                 entity suspended withdrawals (other than hardship withdrawals, if any).

                               The person or their dependant must not otherwise have the financial capacity to
                               meet the expense.

 Permanent incapacity          The person has ceased gainful employment due to mental or physical ill health.
                               The responsible entity must be satisfied that the person is unlikely to ever again
                               commence the type of employment for which the person is reasonably qualified by
                               education, training or experience.


              RG 136.98      The maximum amount a member can withdraw is capped at $100,000 per
                             calendar year. A responsible entity can grant a member four hardship
                             withdrawals per calendar year.

              RG 136.99      The relief is also subject to additional requirements. For example, the
                             responsible entity must:
                             (a)   notify ASIC of its intention to rely on the relief (notice of reliance) and
                                   when it stops relying on the relief (notice of cessation of reliance);
                             (b)   notify members that it is relying on the relief and the effect of the relief;
                             (c)   ensure the constitution includes the ability for members to withdraw on
                                   hardship grounds;
                             (d)   not allow a hardship withdrawal unless it is satisfied that, following the
                                   withdrawal, the scheme property will include adequate cash over the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                      Page 26
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                                   following six months for likely future hardship withdrawals and the
                                   day-to-day operation of the scheme;
                             (e)   act reasonably when exercising any discretion in relation to a hardship
                                   withdrawal;
                             (f)   document how and why a decision to permit or refuse a hardship
                                   withdrawal was made;
                             (g)   report quarterly data to ASIC, including details of the number of
                                   hardship requests received and number of requests satisfied. To help
                                   responsible entities comply with the reporting requirement, we have
                                   provided a template spreadsheet.
                                   Note: For more information on the relief available under the instrument, and the
                                   template quarterly reporting spreadsheet, see Information Sheet 249 Frozen funds—
                                   Information for responsible entities (INFO 249).


                             Individual relief we may grant

              RG 136.100     In some cases, a responsible entity will not be able to rely on the relief in
                             ASIC Instrument 2020/778 to allow members suffering hardship to withdraw
                             in priority to other members. When this occurs, we will consider granting the
                             responsible entity individual relief from s601FC(1)(d), Pt 5C.6 and s601GC.

              RG 136.101     Any relief application should clearly outline why the responsible entity
                             cannot meet the key parameters of the instrument. The key parameters
                             include that:
                             (a)   the scheme constitution gives members the ability to withdraw on
                                   hardship grounds;
                             (b)   the responsible entity has suspended redemptions and also ceased to
                                   allow the issue of new interests;
                             (c)   the hardship withdrawal request satisfies the hardship criteria for urgent
                                   financial hardship, unemployment, compassionate grounds or
                                   permanent incapacity; and
                             (d)   the hardship withdrawal is within the cap for a member (i.e. $100,000
                                   and four withdrawals a calendar year).

              RG 136.102     Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include:
                             (a)   whether there are persuasive reasons why the responsible entity cannot
                                   meet the parameters of the instrument;
                             (b)   whether there would be enough cash for likely future hardship
                                   withdrawals and for the day-to-day operation of the scheme;
                             (c)   whether one or more members have experienced hardship or are likely
                                   to experience hardship if they are not allowed to withdraw; and
                             (d)   the impact the relief would have on all members of the scheme
                                   (including members that are not able to withdraw on hardship grounds).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 27
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.103     If we grant individual relief, we will generally include requirements in the
                             relief. For example, we may require the responsible entity to:
                             (a)   notify members that it has been granted relief and the effect of the relief;
                             (b)   not allow a hardship withdrawal unless the responsible entity is satisfied
                                   that following the withdrawal the scheme would have enough cash for
                                   likely future hardship withdrawals and for the day-to-day operation of
                                   the scheme;
                             (c)   act reasonably in exercising any discretion in relation to a hardship
                                   withdrawal;
                             (d)   document how and why a decision to permit or refuse a hardship
                                   withdrawal was made; and
                             (e)   report quarterly data to ASIC through a spreadsheet, including details of
                                   the number of hardship requests received and number of requests
                                   satisfied.

                                   Note: See INFO 249 for the template quarterly reporting spreadsheet.

              RG 136.104     We may also limit the duration of the individual relief. Generally, this relief
                             will cease either at the end of a defined period or when the registered scheme
                             ceases to be frozen, whichever occurs first.


                             Relief to enable ‘rolling’ withdrawal offers

              RG 136.105     The requirements for a responsible entity to make a withdrawal offer to
                             members while a registered scheme is illiquid are outlined in Pt 5C.6. These
                             requirements include that:
                             (a)   a withdrawal offer must be made to all members (or members of a
                                   class);
                             (b)   the withdrawal offer must include specified content (including details of
                                   the assets that will be used to satisfy withdrawal requests, and the
                                   amount of money that is expected to be available when the assets are
                                   realised);
                             (c)   a copy of the withdrawal offer must be lodged with ASIC:
                             (d)   only one withdrawal offer may be open at any time; and
                             (e)   if there is an insufficient amount of money available from the assets
                                   specified in the withdrawal offer to satisfy all withdrawal requests, the
                                   requests are to be satisfied proportionately.

              RG 136.106     We consider the withdrawal regime in Pt 5C.6 provides an important
                             distinction between withdrawal offers for illiquid registered schemes and
                             liquid registered schemes. Liquid schemes can offer at-call withdrawal,
                             provided that the scheme has 80% of its assets in liquid assets.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                              Page 28
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.107     The illiquid provisions were designed so that withdrawal offers for illiquid
                             registered schemes could only be made to the extent that particular assets are
                             available and are able to be converted to money in time to satisfy
                             withdrawals.

              RG 136.108     The requirement in RG 136.105(b) provides members with the information
                             they need to decide whether they should participate in the withdrawal offer
                             (and to what extent). Members are able to consider the assets that will be
                             sold, the assets that will remain in the scheme and the amount of cash
                             available to satisfy requests.

              RG 136.109     To allow a responsible entity to implement a 12-month ‘rolling’ withdrawal
                             offer to members, we may consider granting relief from the requirements
                             under Pt 5C.6 to:
                             (a)   lodge a copy of each withdrawal offer with ASIC (s601KB(5));
                             (b)   only have one withdrawal offer open at any time (s601KC); and
                             (c)   include certain content in the withdrawal offer (s601KB(3)).

              RG 136.110     The purpose of the relief is to allow responsible entities of illiquid schemes
                             to provide members with periodic withdrawal opportunities with
                             administrative ease.

              RG 136.111     A ‘rolling’ withdrawal offer has the following standard features:
                             (a)   the offer must be open for a calendar year to all members in the scheme;
                             (b)   the responsible entity nominates the dates on which the withdrawal
                                   offer will be paid (e.g. at the end of the quarter); and
                             (c)   a member may lodge a withdrawal request at any time, including a
                                   standing withdrawal request to participate in any future withdrawal
                                   opportunities during the year.

              RG 136.112     Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include
                             whether:
                             (a)   the relief will improve members’ access to their money; and
                             (b)   changing or removing the content that must be specified in the
                                   withdrawal offer under s601KB(3)(b) and 601KB(3)(c) will not have a
                                   detrimental impact on members.

              RG 136.113     Where we grant relief, we will require the rolling withdrawal offer to
                             specify:
                             (a)   the number of withdrawal opportunities the responsible entity proposes
                                   to make over the 12-month term;
                             (b)   how often the opportunities would be made and the terms on which the
                                   opportunities would be made;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 29
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             (c)   the period during which the rolling withdrawal offer would remain
                                   open;
                             (d)   the basis on which money would be raised to pay for the withdrawal
                                   opportunities; and
                             (e)   the method for dealing with withdrawal requests if the money raised is
                                   insufficient to satisfy all requests.

              RG 136.114     We may also limit the relief to a defined period or until the registered
                             scheme becomes liquid.

              RG 136.115     We will generally include conditions on the relief that require the
                             responsible entity to:
                             (a)   provide all members with information on the amount of each
                                   withdrawal opportunity and how the withdrawal opportunity will be
                                   funded, before the withdrawal opportunity is open;
                             (b)   include reminders about members’ ability to participate in the rolling
                                   withdrawal in member communications (e.g. in any correspondence,
                                   statement or disclosure provided to members);
                             (c)   notify all members in writing of the outcome of each withdrawal
                                   opportunity within a reasonable period after the outcome is known;
                             (d)   maintain a website that contains all relevant and up-to-date information
                                   on the rolling withdrawal offer;
                             (e)   distribute all available cash to members for as long as withdrawal
                                   requests exceed available cash; and
                             (f)   provide ASIC with details for each withdrawal opportunity as soon as
                                   practicable after the withdrawal amounts are paid. This includes the
                                   amount made available to satisfy each withdrawal opportunity.

                             Relief for marketplace lending withdrawals

              RG 136.116     Section 601GA(4) requires that if members are to have a right to withdraw
                             from a registered scheme, the constitution must:
                             (a)   specify the right; and
                             (b)   if the scheme is illiquid, provide for the right to be exercised under
                                   Pt 5C.6 and set out adequate procedures consistent with Pt 5C.6.

              RG 136.117     We will consider granting relief from the requirements under s601GA(4) and
                             Pt 5C.6 to facilitate cash withdrawals for a registered scheme that provides
                             marketplace lending products where the scheme is illiquid. This means that:
                             (a)   the constitution would not be required to include provisions about a
                                   member’s right to withdraw from a scheme while it is illiquid; and
                             (b)   a withdrawal offer that complies with Pt 5C.6 would not need to be
                                   given to members who exercise their right to withdraw their cash.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 30
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.118     Factors we may consider when deciding whether to grant relief include
                             whether:
                             (a)   the policy rationale for fair and equal access to liquidity behind the
                                   withdrawal provisions in Pt 5C.6 is compromised, having regard to the
                                   impact on a particular member and the impact on the other members.
                                   When we consider whether the policy rationale is compromised, we will
                                   generally consider whether the member has access to information on
                                   their available cash balance and the withdrawal process. When we
                                   consider the impact on other members, we will generally consider
                                   whether each member’s interests comprise a separate class and are
                                   segregated from other members’ investments;
                             (b)   the requirements under Pt 5C.6 would be relevant or necessary for a
                                   withdrawal of a cash component of a member’s interest. This takes into
                                   account the commercial structure of the registered scheme and whether
                                   cash is funding any withdrawal; and
                             (c)   the relief would provide members with a choice to withdraw their
                                   money in a timely manner, rather than having it remain invested in the
                                   registered scheme.

              RG 136.119     If relief is granted, we will generally include conditions on the relief that
                             require the responsible entity to:
                             (a)   specify the procedures for withdrawal of the cash component in the
                                   registered scheme’s constitution;
                             (b)   disclose the following in the Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) and
                                   on the relevant online platform:
                                   (i)    the withdrawal procedures; and
                                   (ii)   prominent disclosure of any restrictions on the withdrawal right—
                                          for example:
                                          (A)   any money invested in a loan cannot be withdrawn during the
                                                term of the loan; or
                                          (B)   if a request exceeds any available balance, that a member can
                                                only withdraw up to that available balance;
                             (c)   remind members about their standing arrangement (if any) and how this
                                   may be amended upon completion of a member’s withdrawal request;
                             (d)   confirm to a member in writing how long it takes for a withdrawal
                                   request to be processed following a member’s request; and
                             (e)   determine that satisfaction of a member’s withdrawal request will not
                                   affect the assets of another member’s portfolio.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                             Page 31
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




Deregistration of a registered scheme
              RG 136.120     Under s601PA(1), the responsible entity of a registered scheme may lodge
                             an application for voluntary deregistration of the scheme with ASIC only if:
                             (a)   the scheme:
                                   (i)    has 20 or less members and all the members agree that the scheme
                                          should be deregistered; and
                                   (ii)   is not required to be registered by s601ED(1)(b) or (c);
                             (b)   the scheme is not required to be registered and all the members agree
                                   that the scheme should be deregistered—because of s601ED(2); or
                             (c)   the scheme is not a managed investment scheme.

              RG 136.121     On an application by an Australian passport fund operator, ASIC must
                             deregister the Australian passport fund as a registered scheme when:
                             (a)   the fund satisfies one of the criteria in RG 136.120(a)–RG 136.120(c);
                             (b)   there are no members of the fund who became members (whether in this
                                   jurisdiction or any host economy) after the fund became an Australian
                                   passport fund; and
                             (c)   there are no members of the fund who became members (whether in this
                                   jurisdiction or any host economy) on the expectation that the fund
                                   would become an Australian passport fund (see s601PBB(3)).

              RG 136.122     We have granted relief to allow a responsible entity to lodge an application
                             to deregister a scheme where all the members:
                             (a)   agree that the scheme should be deregistered;
                             (b)   were wholesale clients at the time they acquired (by way of issue or
                                   transfer) their interest in the scheme;
                             (c)   are wholesale clients at the time an application for deregistration is
                                   lodged; and
                             (d)   are each a body corporate.

              RG 136.123     We may grant this relief because s601PA(2) does not appear to address the
                             circumstances where retail client members of a registered scheme have
                             exited and the registered scheme becomes a scheme with only wholesale
                             client members. The provisions of Ch 5C are directed to retail client
                             protection. In our view, granting relief in circumstances where all of the
                             members of the scheme are wholesale clients will not compromise retail
                             client protection.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 32
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




D          Closely related schemes

                               Key points

                               This section explains when we will consider managed investment schemes
                               as ‘closely related’ and should be aggregated. This is relevant to
                               determining if some exemptions for small schemes apply.




Section 601ED determination
              RG 136.124     We may determine in writing that a number of managed investment schemes
                             are closely related (see s601ED(3)) and that each of them must be registered
                             when the total number of members of all of the schemes exceeds 20.

              RG 136.125     We will consider making a determination under s601ED(3) when:
                             (a)   the managed investment schemes are promoted by different persons but
                                   the circumstances and the similar nature of the schemes indicate that the
                                   promoters are likely to be associated;
                             (b)   the businesses or activities of the managed investment schemes are
                                   similar, the schemes form part of a systematic promotion and there is
                                   doubt about whether the schemes fit within s601ED(1)(a) or (b). This
                                   doubt may arise because:
                                   (i)    the interests being offered relate to separate pools or common
                                          enterprises and might not all be part of one scheme; or
                                   (ii)   the schemes might not have been promoted as a business; or
                             (c)   the managed investment schemes are:
                                   (i)    so similar that the one PDS might reasonably relate to offers of
                                          interests in the schemes; and
                                   (ii)   structured as separate schemes so that the offers do not require a
                                          PDS to be given, because no more than 20 issues are made in
                                          12 months for each scheme and s1012E applies.

                                   Note: Under s1012E, schemes that issue interests to no more than 20 members in
                                   12 months and raise up to A$2 million are exempt from the requirement to provide a
                                   PDS.

              RG 136.126     In our view, s601ED(3) is an anti-avoidance mechanism. It prevents
                             promoters avoiding the registration requirement by structuring their offers as
                             separate managed investment schemes with each having no more than
                             20 members—but which, in aggregate, have more than 20 members. We
                             consider it also allows us to prevent promoters from relying inappropriately
                             on the exclusion in s1012E (by calculating the 20 issues separately for each
                             separate but related scheme).


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 33
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




              RG 136.127     A managed investment scheme must also be registered if it is promoted by a
                             person who is in the business of, or whose associate is in the business of,
                             promoting managed investment schemes: see s601ED(1)(b). We can
                             determine that schemes are closely related and can require schemes to be
                             registered when their total membership is over 20: see s601ED(1)(c) and
                             601ED(3).

              RG 136.128     We may make a determination under s601ED(1)(c) to:
                             (a)   prevent avoidance by separate promoters offering similar schemes;
                             (b)   provide certainty when there are questions as to whether s601ED(1)(a)
                                   or (b) apply because it is not clear if:
                                   (i)    closely related common enterprises or pools may form part of one
                                          scheme; or
                                   (ii)   the promoters are in the business of promoting schemes; or
                             (c)   prevent use of the exclusion in s1012E when it is inappropriate. We
                                   think it is inappropriate to rely on that exclusion if the one PDS could
                                   cover the relevant schemes in a cost-effective way, but the schemes
                                   have been established separately for avoidance purposes. We will infer
                                   avoidance purposes unless a reasonable alternative explanation is
                                   provided to us.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 34
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                         the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                         on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                         services
                                                           Note: This is a definition in s9.

                               Asia Region Funds         An agreement between economies in the Asia region that
                               Passport                  allows passport funds established and regulated in one
                                                         participating economy to offer interests to investors in
                                                         another participating economy

                               Asia Region Funds         An ASIC register that includes prescribed details of
                               Passport Register         Australian passport funds, notified foreign passport funds,
                                                         deregistered Australian passport funds and funds that
                                                         have been removed as notified foreign passport funds

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Instrument           An ASIC instrument (in this example numbered
                               2020/778 (for             2020/778)
                               example)

                               Australian passport       A registered scheme or sub-fund of a retail CCIV that is
                               fund                      also registered as a passport fund under Pt 8A.3 of the
                                                         Corporations Act

                               Australian Passport       The Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018 made under
                               Rules                     s1211 and 1211A of the Corporations Act

                               Ch 5C (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 5C), unless otherwise specified

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               Div 2 (for example)       A division of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 2), unless otherwise specified

                               foreign passport fund     A passport fund with a home economy other than Australia

                               home economy              The participating economy in which a passport fund is
                                                         first registered, approved or authorised as a regulated
                                                         collective investment scheme

                               home regulator            The passport regulator in a passport fund’s home economy




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                   Page 35
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               host economy              A participating economy that is not the passport fund’s
                                                         home economy and either:
                                                          permits the fund to offer interests in the fund in that
                                                           economy under the Asia Region Funds Passport; or
                                                          has accepted an application from the fund to offer
                                                           interests in the fund in that economy under the Asia
                                                           Region Funds Passport (but not to register the fund as
                                                           a passport fund in that economy)

                               host regulator            The passport regulator in a passport fund’s host economy

                               hybrid meeting            A meeting that is held in accordance with s252P(b) of the
                                                         Corporations Act

                               IDPS                      An investor directed portfolio service as defined in ASIC
                                                         Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services)
                                                         Instrument 2023/669 or any instrument that amends or
                                                         replaces that instrument

                               IDPS Guide                A document provided by an IDPS operator instead of a
                                                         PDS to help retail clients decide whether they should use
                                                         the IDPS

                               IDPS-like scheme          An investor directed portfolio services-like scheme as
                                                         defined in ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio
                                                         Services Provided Through a Registered Managed
                                                         Investment Scheme) Instrument 2023/668, or any
                                                         instrument that amends or replaces that instrument

                               INFO 249 (for             An ASIC information sheet (in this example numbered 249)
                               example)

                               managed investment        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                               scheme                      Note: A notified foreign passport fund is a managed
                                                           investment scheme for the purpose of the Corporations Act:
                                                           see s1213E.

                               member                    A member of a registered scheme

                               Memorandum of             The Memorandum of Cooperation on the Establishment
                               Cooperation               and Implementation of the Asia Region Funds Passport,
                                                         available on the Asia Region Funds Passport website

                               notified foreign          A foreign passport fund that has become a notified
                               passport fund             foreign passport fund under s1213C of the Corporations
                                                         Act.

                               participating economy     An economy that is a participant under the Memorandum
                                                         of Cooperation (while it is in effect) and has:
                                                          advised the Asia Region Funds Passport Joint
                                                           Committee that it has implemented the Asia Region
                                                           Funds Passport; and
                                                          not withdrawn from the Memorandum of Cooperation




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                     Page 36
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               passport fund              A regulated collective investment scheme, or sub-fund of
                                                          a regulated collective investment scheme, registered as a
                                                          passport fund in a participating economy
                                                            Note: Some regulated collective investment schemes, or sub-
                                                            funds of regulated collective investment schemes, that have
                                                            been deregistered as passport funds remain subject to
                                                            obligations as if they were still a passport fund.

                               passport fund              An entity that operates a passport fund
                               operator

                               passport regulator         The entity that regulates passport funds in a participating
                                                          economy
                                                            Note: See also the definition of ‘passport regulator’ in
                                                            section 55 of the Australian Passport Rules.

                               Passport Rules             The requirements in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of
                                                          Cooperation, as incorporated into the domestic law of a
                                                          participating economy

                               PDS                        A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that must
                                                          be given to a retail client for the offer or issue of a
                                                          financial product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                          Corporations Act
                                                            Note: See s9 for the exact definition.

                               platform                   An investor directed portfolio service (IDPS) and IDPS-
                                                          like scheme
                                                            Note: This term does not extend to nominee and custody
                                                            services, superannuation master trusts or other
                                                            superannuation funds, self-managed superannuation funds, or
                                                            managed discretionary accounts, as defined in Regulatory
                                                            Guide 179 Managed discretionary accounts (RG 179).

                               Pt 5C.6 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                          5C.6), unless otherwise specified

                               registered scheme          A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                          s601EB of the Corporations Act

                               regulated collective       A regulated collective investment scheme as defined by
                               investment scheme          the Passport Rules for a participating economy

                               responsible entity         A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined in
                                                          s9 of the Corporations Act

                               responsible Minister       The Australian Minister responsible for the Asia Region
                                                          Funds Passport

                               retail client              A client as defined in s761G and 761GA of the
                                                          Corporations Act and Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations
                                                          Regulations

                               RG 51 (for example)        An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 51)

                               s1012E (for example)       A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 1012E), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                           Page 37
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               virtual-only meeting       A meeting that is held in accordance with s252P(c) of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                               wholesale client           A client who is not a retail client as defined in s761G of
                                                          the Corporations Act and Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the
                                                          Corporations Regulations




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 38
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




Related information

                             Headnotes
                             application for relief, Asia Region Funds Passport, Australian passport fund,
                             Australian Passport Rules, closely related schemes, compliance committee,
                             compliance plan, deregistration, discretionary powers, exemption, frozen
                             fund, hardship, managed investment scheme, members, modification,
                             operator, registered scheme, relief, responsible entity, stapled securities,
                             withdrawal arrangements


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 43 Financial reports and audit relief

                             RG 49 Employee incentive schemes

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 76 Related party transactions

                             RG 80 Managed investment schemes: Interests not for money

                             RG 87 Charitable schemes and school enrolment deposits

                             RG 91 Horse breeding schemes and horse racing syndicates

                             RG 138 Foreign passport funds

                             RG 140 Strata schemes and management rights schemes

                             RG 144 Mortgage investment schemes

                             RG 148 Platforms that are managed investment schemes and nominee and
                             custody services

                             RG 160 Time-sharing schemes

                             RG 161 Share and interest sale facilities

                             RG 174 Relief for externally administered companies and registered
                             schemes being wound up

                             RG 195 Group purchasing bodies for insurance and risk products


                             Information sheets
                             INFO 249 Frozen funds—Information for responsible entities




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 39
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 136: Funds management: Discretionary powers




                             Legislative instruments

                             ASIC Corporations (Hardship Withdrawals Relief) Instrument 2020/778


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act 2001, Chs 5C, 8A, 8B; Pts 5C.4, 5C.6; s252P, 252R, 253E,
                             253LA, 601ED, 601FC, 601FD, 601FE, 601FL, 601GA, 601GC, 601HG,
                             601JA, 601JB, 601KA, 601KB–601KE, 601LC, 601PA, 601PBB, 601QA,
                             926A, 951B, 992B, 1012E, 1020F, 1211, 1217, 1217A, 1243

                             Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018


                             Other documents

                             Memorandum of Cooperation on the Establishment and Implementation of
                             the Asia Region Funds Passport




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 40
