REGULATORY GUIDE 108

No-action letters

February 2025




About this guide
This guide is for persons (and their professional advisers) who want to ask
the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) for a
no-action letter (including a class no-action position).

It explains how to make an application for a no-action letter (including a
class no-action position) and sets out the factors ASIC considers when
dealing with such applications.
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in February 2025 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 108, issued 9 July 2008 and reissued
                                     December 2009
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 108, issued 17 June 1996, updated
                                     4 July 2001, rebadged as a regulatory guide on 5 July 2007

                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act, the National
                             Credit Act and other applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility
                             to determine your obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                         Page 2
                                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




Contents

                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    The purpose of no-action letters ........................................................ 4
                                    Requests for class no-action positions .............................................. 5
                                    How to apply for a no-action letter or class no-action position .......... 5
                                    Application fees ................................................................................. 5
                             B      What is a no-action letter? .............................................................. 6
                                    Role of no-action letters ..................................................................... 6
                                    Distinguishing no-action letters from other ASIC correspondence .... 8
                                    Class no-action positions ................................................................... 9
                                    Publishing no-action letters and class no-action positions ................ 9
                             C      How do I get a no-action letter or a class no-action position? . 10
                                    Why ASIC may give a no-action letter ............................................. 10
                                    When ASIC may give a class no-action position ............................. 12
                                    We may not provide a final decision ................................................ 12
                                    Applying for a no-action letter or class no-action position ............... 12
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 14
                             Related information ............................................................................... 15




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                                      Page 3
                                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               This guide details how we will deal with requests for no-action letters,
                               including class no-action positions.

                               An applicant should follow the process and provide the information outlined
                               in Section C.




The purpose of no-action letters
              RG 108.1       An ASIC no-action letter communicates to a particular person that we intend
                             to take no regulatory action over a particular state of affairs or conduct. A
                             no-action letter:
                             (a)   is an expression of our regulatory intent at the time the letter is given
                                   and is not a form of legal advice or relief;
                             (b)   is specific to a particular set of circumstances and does not generally
                                   have precedent value;
                             (c)   does not restrict our right to take action in the future, i.e. our intention
                                   of taking no action may be withdrawn at any time; and
                             (d)   is not intended to affect the rights of third parties to take legal action
                                   against the recipient of the letter.

                                   Note: For further information on the role of a no-action letter, see RG 108.11–RG 108.16.

              RG 108.2       We can give a no-action letter in relation to actual or possible conduct that
                             does not comply with the legislation ASIC administers, including:
                             (a)   past conduct;
                             (b)   ongoing or transitional conduct; or
                             (c)   future conduct.

              RG 108.3       When deciding whether we will give a no-action letter, we will consider:
                             (a)   the policy and intent of the legislation;
                             (b)   the facts at the time of the application; and
                             (c)   the other factors and requirements outlined in RG 108.32.

              RG 108.4       We will only give a no-action letter when we are of the view that it would
                             serve a clear regulatory purpose and it would not advance the policy of the
                             legislation to take other regulatory action in relation to the conduct in question.

                                   Note: Although ASIC considers all requests for no-action letters, in certain circumstances
                                   we may not give a no-action letter or class no-action position, or provide a final decision.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                        Page 4
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




Requests for class no-action positions
              RG 108.5       In some circumstances, we may give a no-action position to a class of people
                             or for a class of conduct. This is known as a class no-action position.

              RG 108.6       A class no-action position:
                             (a)   is not legal advice and is specific to the facts and circumstances;
                             (b)   will not restrict ASIC’s right to take action and may be withdrawn or
                                   revised; and
                             (c)   does not preclude third parties taking legal action.

              RG 108.7       We may take a class no-action position on our own initiation or in response
                             to a request. The principles that apply to ASIC giving no-action letters also
                             apply to class no-action positions.



How to apply for a no-action letter or class no-action position
              RG 108.8       An applicant must apply for a no-action letter or class no-action position
                             through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.

              RG 108.9       The process and requirements for applications for no-action letters and class
                             no-action positions are outlined in Section C.



Application fees
              RG 108.10      There is an application fee for no-action letters and class no-action positions:
                             see RG 108.46. The amount is set under legislation and available in
                             Information Sheet 30 Fees for commonly lodged documents (INFO 30).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                         Page 5
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




B          What is a no-action letter?

                               Key points

                               A no-action letter is an expression of ASIC’s regulatory intent and is not a
                               form of legal advice or relief. It is specific to a particular set of
                               circumstances. Therefore, it does not generally have precedent value.

                               In some circumstances, we may give a no-action position that relates to a
                               class of people or a class of conduct i.e. a class no-action position.

                               A no-action letter (including a class no-action position) does not restrict our
                               right to take action in the future and may be withdrawn at any time. It is not
                               intended to affect the rights of third parties to take legal action.

                               In general, we will not publish no-action letters (however, we reserve our
                               right to do so). From time to time, we may publish class no-action positions.



Role of no-action letters
              RG 108.11      ASIC has discretion to give a person a no-action letter in which we state that
                             we do not intend to take regulatory action against that person over a
                             particular state of affairs or conduct at a specific point in time.

              RG 108.12      A no-action letter is an expression of our regulatory intent at the time the
                             letter is given in relation to conduct regulated by:
                             (a)   the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act);
                             (b)   the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 (National Credit
                                   Act);
                             (c)   the National Consumer Credit Protection (Transitional and
                                   Consequential Provisions) Act 2009 (Transitional Act);
                             (d)   the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 (SIS Act);
                             (e)   the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC
                                   Act);
                             (f)   the Insurance Act 1973 (Insurance Act); or
                             (g)   any other legislation ASIC administers.

              RG 108.13      A no-action letter is intended to provide comfort and some level of certainty
                             to an applicant that we do not currently foresee that we will take regulatory
                             action in relation to the specified conduct. No-action letters are not legal
                             advice, relief, or a guarantee that ASIC will not take action in the future.
                             ASIC may withdraw a no-action letter at any time. No-action letters are not
                             intended to affect the rights of third parties to take legal action in relation to
                             any contravention.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                         Page 6
                                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




              RG 108.14      We may give a no-action letter to a person in relation to some areas where
                             we have no specific power to modify or grant an exemption (i.e. grant relief)
                             from the legislation we administer. We may also give a no-action letter
                             where there is an unintended contravention of the legislation as a result of
                             conduct that is not inconsistent with the spirit and policy of the relevant
                             legislation.

              RG 108.15      Communicating our regulatory intention in the form of a no-action letter is a
                             part of our function under s1(2) of the ASIC Act to:
                             (a)   maintain, facilitate and improve the performance of the financial system
                                   and entities within it in the interests of commercial certainty, reducing
                                   business costs, and the efficiency and development of the economy;
                             (b)   promote confident and informed participation of investors and
                                   consumers in the financial system; and
                             (c)   administer the laws effectively and with minimum procedural
                                   requirements.

                                   Note: See s1(2) of the ASIC Act for a complete statement of our regulatory purpose.

              RG 108.16      It is important to note that applying for a no-action letter does not substitute
                             for carefully considering your actions and their consequences. We will not
                             give a no-action letter simply for the convenience of applicants who have not
                             taken all reasonable measures to avoid the need for a no-action letter.


                             No-action letters are not legal advice

              RG 108.17      It is not part of ASIC’s function to provide legal advice on the interpretation
                             and application of the law. Therefore, no-action letters are not an expression
                             of our legal views.


                             No-action letters are not relief

              RG 108.18      No-action letters are not the same as relief from the operation of the law.
                             ASIC’s powers to grant relief are outlined in Regulatory Guide 51
                             Applications for relief (RG 51). No-action letters are not intended to be a
                             substitute for relief where ASIC otherwise has the power to grant relief. We
                             are unlikely to give a no-action letter where providing relief would be more
                             appropriate (see Table 1).


                             No-action letters are specific to a case

              RG 108.19      Any no-action letter is specific to the facts and circumstances of a particular
                             case. Therefore, they should not be considered as a de facto ‘rulings system’
                             indicating our view of whether particular types of conduct are legal. Further,
                             our no-action letters do not generally set a wider precedent given that they
                             are decided based on the particular facts and circumstances of each case.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                   Page 7
                                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




                             ASIC’s right to take future action is not restricted

              RG 108.20      A no-action letter is only a statement of our intentions on the basis of
                             information available to us at a particular time. Even after a no-action letter
                             has been given, we reserve our right to take action in the future. This is
                             especially so if there has been incomplete disclosure at the time the
                             application for the no-action letter was made.


                             ASIC may withdraw or revise no-action letters

              RG 108.21      We may at any time reconsider our view of the relevant legislation, its
                             legislative policy or our administrative policy and withdraw or revise a no-
                             action letter. We issue all no-action letters on this basis, regardless of
                             whether they include such a statement of our right to withdraw or revise our
                             views.

              RG 108.22      In revising or withdrawing a no-action letter, we will consider the
                             consequences for persons who have already acted in reasonable reliance on a
                             no-action letter provided to them.


                             Third parties are not precluded from taking legal action

              RG 108.23      A no-action letter does not preclude third parties (including the Director of
                             Public Prosecutions) from taking legal action in relation to the same conduct
                             or conduct of that kind or prevent a court from holding that a particular
                             conduct infringes the relevant legislation. We do not represent that the
                             conduct covered by our no-action letter will not be held to contravene the
                             relevant legislation by a court or undertake to intervene in an action brought
                             by third parties in respect of such conduct.



Distinguishing no-action letters from other ASIC correspondence
              RG 108.24      We also communicate our regulatory intent in correspondence other than
                             no-action letters. For example, we may give a ‘no further inquiry’ response
                             to a reportable situation by an Australian financial services (AFS) licensee,
                             or a ‘no further action’ response to a complaint. However, a person should
                             not regard such correspondence as being a no-action letter. Correspondence
                             from us will only be a no-action letter if it contains a clear statement that it is
                             a no-action letter given under RG 108.

                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees
                                   (RG 78).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                 Page 8
                                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




Class no-action positions
              RG 108.25      In some circumstances, we may give a no-action position to a class of people
                             or for a class of conduct. This is known as a class no-action position.

              RG 108.26      A class no-action position:
                             (a)   is not legal advice (see RG 108.17) and is specific to the facts and
                                   circumstances (see RG 108.19);
                             (b)   will not restrict ASIC’s right to take action (see RG 108.20) and may be
                                   withdrawn or revised (see RG 108.21–RG 108.22); and
                             (c)   does not preclude third parties taking legal action (see RG 108.23).



Publishing no-action letters and class no-action positions
              RG 108.27      We generally do not publish no-action letters (however, we reserve the right
                             to do so). From time to time, we may publish our class no-action positions.


                             Confidentiality

              RG 108.28      Under s127 of the ASIC Act, we must take reasonable measures to prevent
                             unauthorised use and disclosure of information received in confidence in
                             connection with our statutory functions. Certain uses and disclosure are
                             taken to be authorised.

                                   Note 1: ASIC also has express powers under s25 and s37 to disclose certain information
                                   for certain purposes.

                                   Note 2: For information about our approach to confidentiality, see Regulatory
                                   Guide 103 Confidentiality and release of information (RG 103).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                   Page 9
                                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




C          How do I get a no-action letter or a class no-
           action position?

                               Key points

                               ASIC will only give a no-action letter or a class no-action position under
                               certain circumstances and when we are of the view that it would serve a
                               clear regulatory purpose, having regard to the:
                               • policy and intent of the legislation;
                               • facts at the time of the application; and
                               • factors set out in Table 1.

                               An application for a no-action letter or class no-action position cannot be
                               made on a ‘without prejudice’ basis, and some applications will not receive
                               a final decision.




Why ASIC may give a no-action letter
              RG 108.29      Upon formal application, we can give a no-action letter in relation to actual
                             or possible conduct that does not comply with the legislation ASIC
                             administers, including:
                             (a)   past conduct;
                             (b)   ongoing or transitional conduct; or
                             (c)   future conduct.

              RG 108.30      ASIC’s decision to give a no-action letter will be based on considerations of
                             legislative policy, our interpretation of the relevant legislation, our
                             understanding of the intention of Parliament in enacting the legislation, and
                             the facts at the time of the application.

              RG 108.31      We will only give a no-action letter where we are of the view that:
                             (a)   it would serve a clear regulatory purpose to provide a no-action letter to
                                   an applicant—business facilitation is an example of a regulatory
                                   purpose; and
                             (b)   it would not advance the policy of the legislation to take other
                                   regulatory action in relation to the conduct in question.


                             Factors that ASIC will consider

              RG 108.32      The factors that we will consider in forming our view are set out in Table 1.
                             We will be more likely to give a no-action letter if your situation is similar
                             to, and your application addresses, these non-exhaustive factors.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                        Page 10
                                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




Table 1:     Factors making it more likely ASIC will give a no-action letter

 Our policy                        ASIC has not published any regulatory guidance on a subject or settled its
                                   views on a subject, or the circumstances leading to the application arise
                                   infrequently.

                                   The facts and circumstances giving rise to the application for the no-action
                                   letter were not the subject of an investigation or other ASIC regulatory action
                                   prior to the receipt of the application (if they were, see Information Sheet 151
                                   ASIC’s approach to enforcement (INFO 151)).

 No other relief                   There is no appropriate relief available.
                                     Note 1: We are unlikely to give a no-action letter where providing relief would be more
                                     appropriate (see RG 51), unless there is no specific relief available in the
                                     circumstances.
                                     Note 2: In particular, applicants should look at our guidance on comfort relief in RG 51.

 Nature of the conduct             There is room for doubt as to whether the relevant conduct would be lawful.

                                   Any contravention is transitional in nature and will be rectified as soon as
                                   practicable (particularly where the contravention will soon cease to be a
                                   contravention because of expected law reform).

                                   Any contravention does not suggest a serious flaw in your internal compliance
                                   controls.

                                   Any offence is merely regulatory in nature (i.e. a summary offence that ASIC
                                   would prosecute without reference to the Commonwealth Director of Public
                                   Prosecutions).

 Your actions                      Any contravention was due to inadvertence or lack of factual knowledge, with
                                   failure to ascertain the facts not being due to carelessness.

                                   You have taken available steps to alleviate any mischief resulting from the
                                   conduct. Where appropriate, you have taken prompt action to investigate and
                                   rectify the breach once identified.

 Your actions in applying          You have brought the matter to our attention without delay.
 for a no-action letter
                                   You acknowledge that we may publicly announce the no-action letter, along
                                   with matters relating to its circumstances, including material contained in your
                                   submission to ASIC requesting the letter.

 Your past actions                 Your compliance history is satisfactory.
                                     Note: We are less likely to give a no-action letter in relation to past conduct if that
                                     conduct is not an isolated incident (e.g. where past contraventions may demonstrate
                                     that your compliance systems are inadequate, where there are repeated
                                     contraventions over multiple years, or where there is an ongoing failure to monitor
                                     compliance with the conditions in a legislative instrument to ensure the relief continues
                                     to apply).

 Third parties                     The adverse effects on third parties are minimal.

                                   The contravention does not appear to reduce investor protection or the
                                   credibility or efficiency of the financial system.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                       Page 11
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




When ASIC may give a class no-action position
              RG 108.33      We may take a class no-action position on our own initiation or in response
                             to a request (including where an application made for an individual no-action
                             letter relates to circumstances or conduct that affects people in addition to
                             the applicant). An example would be a request from an industry or
                             professional association seeking a no-action position for its members.

              RG 108.34      The same principles and factors outlined in RG 108.30–RG 108.31 and
                             Table 1 will apply to an application for a class no-action position.



We may not provide a final decision
              RG 108.35      Although we will consider all requests for no-action letters or class no-action
                             positions, there may be instances where it is not appropriate for us to give a
                             final answer. We may also decide that we should not, as a matter of policy,
                             give no-action letters, or class no-action positions, in certain matters.

              RG 108.36      In all cases, we will notify you of the outcome of our assessment of the
                             application. ASIC’s decision about whether or not to provide a no-action
                             letter is not reviewable by the Administrative Review Tribunal.



Applying for a no-action letter or class no-action position
              RG 108.37      You must submit a request for a no-action letter or a class no-action position
                             through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.

              RG 108.38      In addition to this guide, when preparing your application, you should read
                             RG 51, and (where relevant) INFO 151.


                             What you should include in your application

              RG 108.39      Applications for no-action letters and class no-action positions should include:
                             (a)   all the information needed to address the considerations referred to in
                                   RG 108.30–RG 108.31;
                             (b)   the matters of policy and law that would lead us to decide that it is not
                                   in the public interest for ASIC to take action, having regard to each of
                                   the factors in Table 1;
                             (c)   any relevant information required by RG 51, which deals with
                                   applications for the exercise of our discretionary powers to grant
                                   relief—in particular, your application should include the information
                                   specified in Table 1 of RG 51 (as applicable); and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                       Page 12
                                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




                             (d)   specific information addressing why court-based relief (e.g. under
                                   s1318(2) of the Corporations Act or s183 if the National Credit Act) is
                                   not available or is inappropriate.

                             Full and frank disclosure

              RG 108.40      An application must contain full and frank disclosure of all relevant
                             information.

                             Prejudice and confidentiality

              RG 108.41      An application cannot be made on a ‘without prejudice’ basis and we may
                             use the material contained in it for any of our statutory functions.

              RG 108.42      Information supplied in support of an application for a no-action letter or class
                             no-action position will not usually be regarded as confidential. Where there is
                             a compelling reason for that information to be regarded as confidential, and
                             we agree that it should be treated as such, we will nevertheless retain our
                             rights to disclose that information under s127 of the ASIC Act.
                                   Note: For information about our approach to confidentiality, see RG 103.

                             Priority and urgent applications

              RG 108.43      We will not usually give applications for no-action letters or class no-action
                             positions priority over our other regulatory tasks.

              RG 108.44      In exceptional circumstances, we may consider applications on an urgent basis,
                             or within a specific time period. If your application is urgent, or a decision is
                             required by a specific date, you must set this out in your application.


                             Submitting your application

              RG 108.45      You must submit your application for a no-action letter or class no-action
                             position through the ASIC Regulatory Portal. For more information on the
                             process, see the related guidance on How to apply for relief and FAQs:
                             Apply for relief on our website.


                             Application fee

              RG 108.46      You will need to pay a fee for your application even if the application is
                             withdrawn or we do not give the no-action letter. Fees are set under
                             legislation and we must collect the prescribed fee. The application fee is
                             non-refundable and generally cannot be waived.

              RG 108.47      For more information, see INFO 30. Details about the payment options are
                             available through the ASIC Regulatory Portal.

                                   Note: Also see Sch 1 to the Corporations (Fees) Regulations 2001 and Sch 1 to the
                                   National Consumer Credit Protection (Fees) Regulations 2010 for current fee amounts.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                               Page 13
                                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                         2001

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               legislation ASIC          This refers to:
                               administers                the ASIC Act;
                                                          the Corporations Act;
                                                          the Insurance Act;
                                                          the National Credit Act;
                                                          the SIS Act;
                                                          the Transitional Act; or
                                                          any other legislation ASIC administers
                                                           Note: In some cases ASIC administers only part of the
                                                           legislation.

                               National Credit Act       National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009

                               RG 51 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example, numbered 51)

                               Transitional Act          National Consumer Credit Protection (Transitional and
                                                         Consequential Provisions) Act 2009




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                                   Page 14
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 108: No-action letters




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             application, business facilitation, class no-action position, discretion,
                             enforcement powers, individual no-action letter, no-action, regulatory intent,
                             regulatory purpose


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees

                             RG 103 Confidentiality and release of information


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 30 Fees for commonly lodged documents

                             INFO 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement


                             Legislation

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act, s1(2), 12A, 127

                             Corporations Act 2001, s1318(2)

                             Corporations (Fees) Regulations 2001, Sch 1

                             Insurance Act 1973

                             National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009, s183

                             National Consumer Credit Protection (Fees) Regulations 2010, Sch 1

                             National Consumer Credit Protection (Transitional and Consequential
                             Provisions) Act 2009

                             Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission February 2025                                     Page 15
