REGULATORY GUIDE 111

Content of expert reports

October 2020




About this guide
This is a guide for any person who commissions, issues or uses an expert
report.

It provides guidance on the content of an expert report and how an expert
can help security holders make informed decisions about transactions.
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This version was issued in October 2020 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 111, issued October 2007, reissued
                                     March 2011


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                           Page 2
                                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Reports covered by this guide ........................................................... 4
                             B      Analysing a transaction .................................................................. 7
                                    A recommended approach ................................................................ 7
                                    Control transactions ........................................................................... 8
                                    Demergers and demutualisations .................................................... 13
                                    Approval of a sale of securities under item 7 of s611 ...................... 14
                                    Compulsory acquisitions and buy-outs ............................................ 15
                                    Related party transactions ............................................................... 16
                                    Transfer of shares under s444GA ................................................... 18
                             C      Methodologies and assumptions ................................................. 21
                                    Choice of methodology .................................................................... 21
                                    Assumptions .................................................................................... 23
                                    Value ranges .................................................................................... 24
                                    Valuing assets ................................................................................. 24
                             D      Other key requirements ................................................................ 25
                                    Clear, concise and effective communication ................................... 25
                                    Statements should be supportable .................................................. 27
                                    Changes in circumstances............................................................... 30
                                    Inclusion of other information........................................................... 30
                                    Expertise .......................................................................................... 32
                                    Working papers ................................................................................ 33
                             E      Regulatory action .......................................................................... 35
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 36
                             Related information ............................................................................... 38




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                                        Page 3
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               This guide gives ASIC’s views on how an expert can help security holders
                               make informed decisions about transactions.

                               It gives guidance to experts on how to draft an expert report that satisfies
                               the requirements of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act).

                               This guide outlines our views on:
                               • how experts should analyse a proposed transaction (see Section B);
                               • the different valuation methodologies used by experts and the treatment
                                 of assumptions (see Section C);
                               • general requirements for all expert reports (see Section D); and
                               • the regulatory action we might take against an expert (see Section E).




Reports covered by this guide
              RG 111.1       This guide focuses on reports prepared for transactions under Chs 2E, 5, 6
                             and 6A of the Corporations Act, whether the reports are required by the
                             Corporations Act or are commissioned voluntarily. The principles in this
                             guide may also be relevant to independent expert reports commissioned for
                             other purposes—for example, specialist reports like geologist reports or
                             traffic forecast reports for inclusion in Ch 6D disclosure documents and Ch 7
                             product disclosure statements.

              RG 111.2       This guide does not apply to independent or investigating accountant reports.

              RG 111.3       Examples of transactions for which entities are required to commission an
                             independent expert report or may do so voluntarily to assist security holders
                             to make an informed choice are takeover bids, compulsory acquisitions and
                             buy-outs, schemes of arrangement, related party transactions and capital
                             reorganisations: see Table 1.

              RG 111.4       Where the Corporations Act or Australian Securities Exchange Limited
                             (ASX) Listing Rules require an entity to commission an independent expert
                             report, this is generally to ensure that shareholders receive an independent
                             analysis of transactions involving related parties or other persons of influence.
                             For example, s640 of the Corporations Act requires an independent expert
                             report where the bidder has a 30% voting power in the target company or the
                             bidder and target have common directors. It is important that an expert applies
                             close scrutiny to a transaction involving a related party or other person of
                             influence and critically analyses the information provided to it.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                           Page 4
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Table 1:     Examples of transactions for which entities commission an independent expert report

 Transaction                               Circumstances

 Takeover bids                              The target must commission an expert report when the bidder’s
                                             voting power in the target is at least 30% of the target or when the
                                             bidder and the target have common directors: s640.
                                            The bidder must commission an expert report when the
                                             consideration paid by the bidder for acquiring a pre-bid stake
                                             includes unquoted securities: s636(1)(h)(iii) and 636(2).
                                            Targets often commission expert reports to assist security holders,
                                             even if there is no requirement to do so.
                                            In joint bids the bidders must use their best endeavours to have the
                                             target engage an independent expert to prepare a report on whether
                                             the joint bid is fair and reasonable to target shareholders who are not
                                             associates of the bidders: see Table 9 in Regulatory Guide 9
                                             Takeover bids (RG 9) and RG 9.649.

 Schemes of arrangement                     The scheme company must commission an expert report when the
                                             other party to the scheme holds at least 30% of the voting shares of
                                             the scheme company or when they have common directors: reg 5.1.01
                                             and Sch 8, cls 8303 and 8306 of the Corporations Regulations 2001
                                             (Corporations Regulations).
                                            Scheme companies often commission an expert report when
                                             transactions are complex or effect a takeover.

 Compulsory acquisitions or buy-outs       The bidder in a compulsory acquisition must commission an expert
                                           report under s663B, 664C, 665B and 667A.

 Acquisitions approved by security         The company commissions an expert report (or, if it has the expertise,
 holders under item 7 of s611              a director’s report to the same standard) to discharge the requirement
                                           to disclose all material information on how to vote on the resolution:
                                           item 7(b) of s611.

 Selective capital reductions              An expert report should usually accompany the explanatory
                                           memorandum to satisfy the information requirements of fairness under
                                           s256C(4).

 Related party transactions                An expert report may be supplied to members as part of the material to
                                           accompany the notice of meeting: s218, 219, 220 and 221.

 Transactions with persons in a            Notices of meeting for approvals under ASX Listing Rule 10.10 must be
 position of influence                     accompanied by an expert report: ASX Listing Rule 10.10.2.

 Demutualisations of financial             An expert report must accompany a notice of meeting for a
 institutions                              demutualisation of a financial institution or friendly society: Sch 4, cl 29(4).

 Buy-backs                                 If a company proposes to buy-back a significant percentage of
                                           securities or the holdings of a major shareholder, it should consider
                                           providing an independent expert report with a valuation of the shares:
                                           Regulatory Guide 110 Share buy-backs (RG 110) at RG 110.18 and
                                           RG 110.20.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                     Page 5
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




 Transaction                               Circumstances

 Share transfers under s444GA              Share transfers under s444GA that require relief from s606 will
                                           generally require an expert report to help:
                                            ASIC in determining whether to grant relief from s606;
                                            members, creditors, interested persons and ASIC in their decision to
                                             oppose leave of the court; and
                                            the court in its decision to grant leave.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                              Page 6
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




B          Analysing a transaction

                               Key points

                               An expert should focus on the issues facing the security holders for whom
                               the report is being prepared: see RG 111.5–RG 111.7.

                               An expert should focus on the substance of the transaction rather than the
                               legal mechanism used to achieve that purpose: see RG 111.8–RG 111.34.

                               Some transactions will require a different form of analysis, particularly:
                               • demergers and demutualisations (see RG 111.35–RG 111.40);
                               • approval of a sale of securities under item 7 of s611 (see RG 111.41–
                                 RG 111.46);
                               • compulsory acquisitions and buyouts (see RG 111.47–RG 111.51); and
                               • share transfers under s444GA (see RG 111.64–RG 111.80).

                               When assessing whether a related party transaction is ‘fair and
                               reasonable’, an expert should consider the overall effect of the transaction:
                               see RG 111.53–RG 111.63.




A recommended approach
              RG 111.5       In deciding on the appropriate form of analysis for a report, an expert should
                             bear in mind that the main purpose of the report is to adequately deal with
                             the concerns that could reasonably be anticipated of those persons affected
                             by the proposed transaction. An expert should focus on the purpose and
                             outcome of the transaction, that is, the substance of the transaction, rather
                             than the legal mechanism used to effect the transaction.

              RG 111.6       The Corporations Act requires an expert to express the opinion using
                             particular language depending on the type of transaction. For example:
                             (a)   whether a takeover bid is ‘fair and reasonable’ under s640;
                             (b)   whether a scheme of arrangement is in ‘the best interests of the
                                   members of the company’ under Sch 8, cl 8303 of the Corporations
                                   Regulations; and
                             (c)   whether the proposed terms in the buy-out or acquisition notice give a
                                   ‘fair value’ for the securities under s667A(1).

              RG 111.7       Nevertheless, the form of analysis an expert uses to evaluate a transaction
                             should address the issues faced by security holders. The rest of this section
                             sets out our guidance on the form of analysis an expert should use for
                             particular types of transactions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                           Page 7
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Control transactions
              RG 111.8       A control transaction, when a person acquires, or increases, a controlling
                             stake in a company, can be achieved by way of a number of different legal
                             mechanisms, including, for example:
                             (a)   a takeover bid under Ch 6;
                             (b)   a scheme of arrangement under Pt 5.1;
                             (c)   approval of an issue of shares using item 7 of s611; and
                             (d)   a selective capital reduction or selective buy-back under Ch 2J.

                                   Note 1: Ch 6 extends to listed managed investment schemes and listed bodies that are
                                   not companies. For the purposes of this regulatory guide, references to a ‘company’ in
                                   the context of Ch 6 takeovers can be read as references to these bodies or schemes,
                                   when appropriate.

                                   Note 2: Not all transactions under item 7 of s611 involve the issue of shares. For those
                                   transactions that do not involve the issue of shares, see RG 111.41–RG 111.46.

              RG 111.9       It is important for an expert to focus on the substance of a control
                             transaction, rather than the legal mechanism used to effect it.


                             Takeover bids

              RG 111.10      It has long been accepted in Australian mergers and acquisitions practice that
                             the words ‘fair and reasonable’ in s640 establish two distinct criteria for an
                             expert analysing a control transaction:
                             (a)   is the offer ‘fair’; and
                             (b)   is it ‘reasonable’?

                             That is, ‘fair and reasonable’ is not regarded as a compound phrase.

              RG 111.11      Under this convention, an offer is ‘fair’ if the value of the offer price or
                             consideration is equal to or greater than the value of the securities the subject
                             of the offer. This comparison should be made:
                             (a)   assuming a knowledgeable and willing, but not anxious, buyer and a
                                   knowledgeable and willing, but not anxious, seller acting at arm’s
                                   length; and

                                   Note: Any special value of the ‘target’ to a particular ‘bidder’ (e.g. synergies that are
                                   not available to other bidders) should not be taken into account under this comparison,
                                   but see RG 111.13(e).

                             (b)   assuming 100% ownership of the ‘target’ and irrespective of whether
                                   the consideration is scrip or cash. The expert should not consider the
                                   percentage holding of the ‘bidder’ or its associates in the target when
                                   making this comparison. For example, in valuing securities in the target
                                   entity, it is inappropriate to apply a discount on the basis that the shares
                                   being acquired represent a minority or ‘portfolio’ parcel of shares.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                       Page 8
                                                                        REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.12      An offer is ‘reasonable’ if it is fair. It might also be ‘reasonable’ if, despite
                             being ‘not fair’, the expert believes that there are sufficient reasons for
                             security holders to accept the offer in the absence of any higher bid before
                             the close of the offer.

              RG 111.13      When deciding whether an offer is reasonable, an expert might consider:
                             (a)   the bidder’s pre-existing voting power in securities in the target;
                             (b)   other significant security holding blocks in the target;
                             (c)   the liquidity of the market in the target’s securities;
                             (d)   taxation losses, cash flow or other benefits through achieving 100%
                                   ownership of the target;
                             (e)   any special value of the target to the bidder, such as particular
                                   technology, the potential to write off outstanding loans from the
                                   target, etc;
                             (f)   the likely market price if the offer is unsuccessful; and
                             (g)   the value to an alternative bidder and likelihood of an alternative offer
                                   being made

              RG 111.14      For example, a bidder who controls a target and makes a takeover bid may
                             offer a price which is ‘not fair’ as it includes a minority discount. The offer
                             price may, however, be greater than the price at which the securities were
                             trading before the takeover bid was made. In such circumstances, it is
                             appropriate for the expert to consider whether the market price may fall if
                             the offer is unsuccessful: see RG 111.13(f). It would also be appropriate for
                             the expert to consider the matters set out in RG 111.13(d) and RG 111.13(f)
                             in assessing the likelihood that the bidder would increase its offer price,
                             including to a price that an expert would assess as ‘fair’.

              RG 111.15      A bidder may also offer a price which is ‘not fair’ where the target is in
                             financial distress. This is because the fair value of the target securities should
                             be determined on the basis of a knowledgeable and willing, but not anxious,
                             seller that is able to consider alternative options to the bid (e.g. an orderly
                             realisation of the target’s assets). Such an offer may nonetheless be
                             reasonable if the alternative methods of remedying the financial distress are
                             likely to be less attractive to security holders than a successful offer.

                                   Note: For the avoidance of doubt, funding requirements for a target that is not in
                                   financial distress (e.g. capital that is required to develop a project) should generally be
                                   taken into account when determining the fair value of target securities: see Northern
                                   Energy Corporation Limited [2011] ATP 2. Such funding requirements will generally
                                   be relevant to determining the value of the target securities assuming knowledgeable
                                   and willing, but not anxious, parties. These funding requirements will often be
                                   implicitly reflected in certain methodologies (e.g. the quoted price for listed securities).
                                   The expert may need to expressly determine to take funding requirements into account
                                   when using other methodologies (e.g. the discounted cash flow methodology).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                         Page 9
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.16      An expert concluding that an offer is not fair, but reasonable, should clearly
                             explain the meaning of this opinion, why the expert has reached this
                             conclusion and the significance of the conclusion to the decision to be made
                             by security holders (e.g. what it might mean for the security holder’s
                             decision making). Otherwise, depending on the circumstances, the report
                             might be misleading or deceptive. In describing the factors that are relevant
                             to a conclusion that an offer is reasonable, an expert should generally only
                             include the factors that are material to this conclusion.

              RG 111.17      To the extent reasonably practicable, and where it can do so with sufficient
                             precision to assist security holders, the expert should quantify the
                             reasonableness factors it considers to be material. For example:
                             (a)   if the expert comments that the share price may fall if the bid is
                                   unsuccessful, the expert should consider providing quantitative
                                   information such as the pre-announcement share price (or volume
                                   weighted average price) and the liquidity profile of the target’s shares;
                                   and
                             (b)   if the bidder controls the target, the expert should consider quantifying
                                   the size of the minority discount.


                             Control transactions by way of a scheme of arrangement

              RG 111.18      Schemes of arrangement can be used as an alternative to a Ch 6 takeover bid
                             to achieve substantially the same outcome. In these circumstances, we
                             expect the form of analysis to be substantially the same as for a takeover bid,
                             even though the wording of the opinion will also be whether the proposed
                             scheme is ‘in the best interests of the members of the company’. This
                             reflects that the legislative test for schemes of arrangement differs from that
                             applicable to a Ch 6 takeover bid.

              RG 111.19      When an expert report is required in a scheme of arrangement involving a
                             change of control, the expert is expected to apply the analysis and provide an
                             opinion as to whether the proposal is ‘fair and reasonable’ as set out in
                             RG 111.10–RG 111.17 as if:
                             (a)   the ‘bidder’ was the ‘other party’; and
                             (b)   the ‘target’ was the company that is the subject of the proposed scheme.

              RG 111.20      If an expert would conclude that a proposal was ‘fair and reasonable’ if it
                             was in the form of a takeover bid, it will also be able to conclude that the
                             scheme is in the best interests of the members of the company.

              RG 111.21      If an expert would conclude that the proposal was ‘not fair but reasonable’ if
                             it was in the form of a takeover bid using the analysis described in
                             RG 111.10–RG 111.17, it is still open to the expert to also conclude that the
                             scheme is ‘in the best interests of the members of the company’. The expert




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 10
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                             should clearly say that the consideration is not equal to or greater than the
                             value of the securities the subject of the scheme, but there are sufficient
                             reasons for security holders to vote in favour of the scheme in the absence of
                             a higher offer.

              RG 111.22      If an expert concludes that a scheme proposal is ‘not fair and not
                             reasonable’, then the expert would conclude that the scheme is not in the
                             best interests of the members of the company.

              RG 111.23      When a scheme of arrangement is used to acquire or increase a party’s
                             control, the report should address the interests of members who are bound to
                             give up rights under the scheme. The expert should separately consider the
                             interests of each class of those members under the scheme.


                             Other control transactions

              RG 111.24      An issue of shares by a company otherwise prohibited under s606 may be
                             approved under item 7 of s611 and the effect on the company’s shareholding
                             is comparable to a takeover bid. Examples of such issues approved under
                             item 7 of s611 that are comparable to takeover bids under Ch 6 include:
                             (a)   a company issues securities to the vendor of another entity or to the
                                   vendor of a business and, as a consequence, the vendor acquires over
                                   20% of the company incorporating the merged businesses. The vendor
                                   could have achieved the same or a similar outcome by launching a scrip
                                   takeover for the company; and
                             (b)   a company issues securities in exchange for cash and, as a consequence,
                                   the allottee acquires over 20% of the company. The allottee could have
                                   achieved the same or a similar outcome by using a cash-rich entity to
                                   make a scrip takeover bid for the company.

              RG 111.25      If this is the case, an expert should apply the analysis outlined in
                             RG 111.10–RG 111.17 —that is, the transaction should be analysed as if it
                             was a takeover bid under Ch 6. However, references to, for example, the
                             ‘bidder’ and the ‘target’ should be taken to mean the ‘allottee’ and
                             ‘company’ respectively.

              RG 111.26      An issue of shares for cash may have other benefits that should be
                             considered in deciding whether the transaction is reasonable. These benefits
                             may include:
                             (a)   the provision of new capital to exploit business opportunities;
                             (b)   a reduction in debt and interest payments; or
                             (c)   a needed injection of working capital.

              RG 111.27      There may be circumstances in which the allottee will acquire 20% or more
                             of the voting power of the securities in the company following the allotment




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 11
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                             or increase an existing holding of 20% or more, but does not obtain a
                             practical measure of control or increase its practical control over that
                             company. If the expert believes that the allottee has not obtained or increased
                             its control over the company as a practical matter, then the expert could take
                             this outcome into account in assessing whether the issue price is ‘reasonable’
                             if it has assessed the issue price as being ‘not fair’ applying the test in
                             RG 111.11.

              RG 111.28      A transaction otherwise prohibited under s606 for which approval is sought
                             under item 7 of s611 will not always involve the issue of shares. For the
                             analysis of other transactions under item 7 of s611, see RG 111.41–
                             RG 111.46.

              RG 111.29      Similar considerations apply in relation to control transactions by way of a
                             selective capital reduction or selective buy-back under Ch 2J.


                             Assessing non-cash consideration in control transactions

              RG 111.30      If the bidder is offering non-cash consideration in a control transaction, the
                             expert should examine the value of that consideration and compare it with
                             the valuation of the target’s securities, whether the transaction is effected by
                             a takeover bid, a scheme of arrangement or an issue of shares.

              RG 111.31      The comparison should be made between the value of the securities being
                             offered (allowing for a minority discount) and the value of the target entity’s
                             securities, assuming 100% of the securities are available for sale. This
                             comparison reflects the fact that:
                             (a)   the acquirer is obtaining or increasing control of the target; and
                             (b)   the security holders in the target will be receiving scrip constituting
                                   minority interests in the combined entity.

                             However, the expert may need to assess whether a scrip takeover is in effect
                             a merger of entities of equivalent value when control of the merged entity
                             will be shared equally between the ‘bidder’ and the ‘target’. In this case, the
                             expert may be justified in using an equivalent approach to valuing the
                             securities of the ‘bidder’ and the ‘target’.

              RG 111.32      If the expert uses the market price of securities as a measure of the value of
                             the offered consideration, the expert should consider and comment on:
                             (a)   the depth of the market for those securities;
                             (b)   the volatility of the market price; and
                             (c)   whether or not the market value is likely to represent the value if the
                                   takeover bid is successful.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 12
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.33      For example, trading after a bid is announced may reflect some of the
                             benefits of the combined entity, depending on whether the market has
                             confidence that the transaction will proceed.

              RG 111.34      If, in a scrip bid, the target is likely to become a controlled entity of the
                             bidder, the bidder’s securities can also be valued assuming a notionally
                             combined entity. However, the expert should still allow for the fact that
                             accepting holders are likely to hold minority interests in that combined
                             entity. The comparison should include the assets and liabilities of the target
                             and the dilution effect of the acquisition on the target’s earnings, asset
                             backing and dividends. The expert should also discuss the bases for
                             calculating the dilutions.

                                   Note: Reverse takeovers (either by takeover bid or scheme of arrangement) can raise
                                   special issues: see Regulatory Guide 60 Schemes of arrangement (RG 60) at RG 60.35–
                                   RG 60.37.




Demergers and demutualisations
              RG 111.35      Demergers and demutualisations might not involve:
                             (a)   a change in the underlying economic interests of security holders;
                             (b)   a change of control; or
                             (c)   selective treatment of different security holders.

              RG 111.36      In the absence of these factors, the issue of ‘value’ may be of secondary
                             importance (particularly in demutualisations). The expert should provide an
                             opinion as to whether the advantages of the transaction outweigh the
                             disadvantages. In some cases, it might still be appropriate to carry out a
                             valuation. In a demerger, the expert may still choose to value the demerged
                             businesses to test whether the value of the sum of the parts (the demerged
                             entities) is greater or less than the whole (the existing entity). If the expert
                             does not undertake such a valuation, to the extent reasonably practicable, and
                             where it can do so with sufficient precision to assist security holders, the
                             expert should quantify the advantages and disadvantages that it considers to
                             be material. For example, the expert may comment on the likelihood of a
                             ‘market re-rating’ by analysing the post-transaction performance of other de-
                             mergers.

              RG 111.37      If the demerger or demutualisation involves a scheme of arrangement and
                             the expert concludes that the advantages of the transaction outweigh the
                             disadvantages, the expert should say that the scheme is in the best interests
                             of the members.

              RG 111.38      In a demerger, security holders will typically have to balance issues such as
                             the benefits of a greater focus afforded to the demerged entities against
                             increased costs and reduction in diversified earnings streams.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                               Page 13
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.39      In a demutualisation, the advantages and disadvantages to be considered
                             might include questions of unlocking value for members and greater
                             management accountability as reasons to demutualise, as compared to the
                             loss of the benefits of being a mutual organisation.

              RG 111.40      An expert might need to consider whether using the form of analysis
                             described at RG 111.10–RG 111.17 is appropriate when demergers and
                             demutualisations involve one or more of:
                             (a)   a change in the underlying economic interests of security holders;
                             (b)   a change of control; or
                             (c)   selective treatment of different security holders.


Approval of a sale of securities under item 7 of s611
              RG 111.41      Approval for a sale of securities that would otherwise contravene s606 may
                             be sought under item 7 of s611. Item 7 of s611 envisages that security
                             holders not associated with such a transaction may approve it. In doing so,
                             these security holders may be forgoing:
                             (a)   the opportunity of receiving a takeover bid; and
                             (b)   sharing in any premium for control.

              RG 111.42      The expert should identify the advantages and disadvantages of the proposal
                             to security holders not associated with the transaction. In contrast with the
                             analysis for an issue of shares approved under item 7 of s611, the expert
                             should provide an opinion either:
                             (a)   that the advantages of the proposal outweigh the disadvantages; or
                             (b)   that the disadvantages of the proposal outweigh the advantages.

              RG 111.43      A specific issue the expert should determine is whether the vendor is to
                             receive a premium for control.

              RG 111.44      The greater the control premium, the greater the advantages of the transaction
                             to the non-associated holders would need to be to support a finding that the
                             advantages of the proposal outweighed the disadvantages. These other
                             advantages may come, for example, from a better long-term profit outlook as
                             the incoming security holder offers superior management skills.

              RG 111.45      The expert should also inquire whether further transactions are planned
                             between the entity, the vendor or any of their associates. If any are
                             contemplated, the expert should determine whether those transactions would
                             be on an arm’s length basis. If not, an implication arises that they may
                             compensate a vendor for a price that is too low.

              RG 111.46      An expert should also consider whether any proposed acquisition by way of
                             sale, if approved, might deter the making of a takeover bid for the entity.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 14
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Compulsory acquisitions and buy-outs
              RG 111.47      Chapter 6A prescribes the steps an expert must take in reaching an opinion
                             for compulsory acquisitions and buy-outs. Section 667A(1) requires an
                             expert to:
                             (a)   provide an opinion on whether the proposed terms in the buy-out or
                                   acquisition notice give a ‘fair value’ for the securities; and
                             (b)   set out the reasons for its opinion.

              RG 111.48      To determine what is ‘fair value’, s667C requires that an expert:
                             (a)   first assess the value of the entity as a whole;
                             (b)   then allocate that value among the classes of issued securities in the
                                   company (taking into account the relative financial risk and the voting
                                   and distribution rights of the classes); and
                             (c)   then allocate the value of each class pro rata among the securities in that
                                   class (without allowing any premium or applying a discount for
                                   particular securities or interest in that class).

              RG 111.49      In determining the fair value for securities, an expert must also take into
                             account the prices paid for securities in that class in the previous six months:
                             s667C(2).

              RG 111.50      The weight of judicial authority is that an expert should not reflect ‘special
                             value’ that might accrue to the acquirer (e.g. Capricorn Diamonds
                             Investments Pty Ltd v Catto (2002) 41 ACSR 376 at 431; Winpar Holdings
                             Ltd v Austrim Nylex Ltd [2005] VSCA 211 at [11]–[37]; Teh v Ramsay
                             Centauri (2002) 42 ACSR 354 at 359). In practice, the issue of ‘special
                             value’ might not be a critical issue. Special value might not be material once
                             it has been allocated pro rata to each security in the class, including the
                             securities of the party seeking to make the compulsory acquisition. An
                             expert should not add any premium for forcible divestment: see Capricorn
                             at 432.

                                   Note: Similar considerations apply as to whether consideration under a capital reduction
                                   ‘is fair and reasonable to the company’s shareholders as a whole’: see s256B(1)(a) and
                                   Re Goldfields Kalgoorlie; Winpar Holdings Ltd v Goldfields Kalgoorlie Ltd (2000)
                                   34 ACSR 737 at [69].

              RG 111.51      Our approach to nominating experts to provide valuations under Ch 6A is set
                             out in Regulatory Guide 10 Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts (RG 10) at
                             RG 10.173–RG 10.178.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                    Page 15
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Related party transactions
              RG 111.52      Experts who are asked to prepare a report for the following transactions
                             should comply with RG 111.53–RG 111.63:
                             (a)   a transaction with a related party that requires member approval under
                                   Ch 2E (including as modified by Pt 5C.7 for registered managed
                                   investment schemes); or
                             (b)   a transaction with a person in a position of influence that requires
                                   member approval under ASX Listing Rule 10.

              RG 111.53      When analysing related party transactions, it is important that an expert
                             focuses on the substance of the related party transaction, rather than the legal
                             mechanism. For example, where a related party transaction is made up of a
                             number of separate components, the expert should consider the overall effect
                             of the related party transaction.

              RG 111.54      Where the related party transaction is one component of a broader
                             transaction or a series of transactions involving non-related parties (such as a
                             control transaction), the expert should carefully consider what level of
                             analysis of the related party aspect is required: see also RG 111.4. In this
                             consideration, the expert should bear in mind whether the report has been
                             sought to ensure that members are provided with sufficient information to
                             decide whether to approve giving a financial benefit to the related party as
                             well as the broader transaction.


                             ‘Fair’ and ‘reasonable’ test

              RG 111.55      Generally, ASIC expects an expert who is asked to analyse a related party
                             transaction to express an opinion on whether the transaction is ‘fair and
                             reasonable’ from the perspective of non-associated members. This analysis
                             is specifically required where the report is also intended to accompany
                             meeting materials for member approval of an asset acquisition or disposal
                             under ASX Listing Rule 10.1.

              RG 111.56      Where an expert assesses whether a related party transaction is ‘fair and
                             reasonable’ (whether for the purposes of Ch 2E or ASX Listing Rule 10.1),
                             this should not be applied as a composite test—that is, there should be a
                             separate assessment of whether the transaction is ‘fair’ and ‘reasonable’, as
                             in a control transaction. An expert should not assess whether the transaction
                             is ‘fair and reasonable’ based simply on a consideration of the advantages
                             and disadvantages of the proposal, as we do not consider this provides
                             members with sufficient valuation information. See Regulatory Guide 76
                             Related party transactions (RG 76) at RG 76.105–RG 76.112 for further
                             details.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                           Page 16
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.57      A proposed related party transaction is ‘fair’ if the value of the financial
                             benefit to be provided by the entity to the related party is equal to or less
                             than the value of the consideration being provided to the entity. This
                             comparison should be made:
                             (a)   assuming a knowledgeable and willing, but not anxious, buyer and a
                                   knowledgeable and willing, but not anxious, seller acting at arm’s
                                   length; and

                                   Note: This is a separate test to the consideration of relevant factors and circumstances
                                   when determining whether the transaction is on ‘arm’s length’ terms for the purposes of
                                   s210: see Section C of RG 76.

                             (b)   for control transactions, on the basis referred to in RG 111.11.

              RG 111.58      Where the proposed transaction consists of an asset acquisition by the entity,
                             it is ‘fair’ if the value of the financial benefit being offered by the entity to
                             the related party is equal to or less than the value of the assets being
                             acquired. Where the financial benefit given by the entity is securities in the
                             entity and the consideration is securities in another entity held by a related
                             party, the value of the entity’s securities should be compared to the value of
                             the securities it is purchasing. If the expert uses the market price of either of
                             the securities as a measure of their value, it should consider, among other
                             things, the factors set out in RG 111.32(a)–RG 111.32(b).

              RG 111.59      In valuing the financial benefit given and the consideration received by the
                             entity, an expert should take into account all material terms of the proposed
                             transactions.

              RG 111.60      A proposed related party transaction is ‘reasonable’ if it is ‘fair’. It might
                             also be ‘reasonable’ if, despite being ‘not fair’, the expert believes there are
                             sufficient reasons for members to vote for the proposal.

              RG 111.61      If an expert concludes that a related party transaction is not fair, but
                             reasonable, it should clearly explain the meaning of this opinion, why the
                             expert has reached this conclusion, and the significance of the conclusion to
                             the decision to be made by security holders (e.g. what it might mean for the
                             security holders’ decision-making): see also RG 111.16–RG 111.17.

              RG 111.62      When deciding whether a proposed transaction is ‘reasonable’, factors that
                             an expert might consider include:
                             (a)   the financial situation and solvency of the entity, including the factors
                                   set out in RG 111.26, if the consideration for the financial benefit is
                                   cash;
                             (b)   opportunity costs;
                             (c)   the alternative options available to the entity and the likelihood of those
                                   options occurring;
                             (d)   the entity’s bargaining position;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                    Page 17
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                             (e)   whether there is selective treatment of any security holder, particularly
                                   the related party;
                             (f)   any special value of the transaction to the purchaser, such as particular
                                   technology or the potential to write off outstanding loans from the
                                   target; and
                             (g)   the liquidity of the market in the entity’s securities.

              RG 111.63      Generally an expert need only conduct one analysis of whether the
                             transaction is ‘fair and reasonable’, even if the report has been prepared for a
                             reason other than the transaction being a related party transaction (e.g. if
                             item 7 of s611 approval is also required).



Transfer of shares under s444GA
              RG 111.64      Section 444GA allows shares of a company in administration to be
                             transferred by an administrator as part of a deed of company arrangement
                             (DOCA). The transfer may only occur if shareholders consent or when the
                             court is satisfied that the transfer would not ‘unfairly prejudice’ the interests
                             of shareholders.

              RG 111.65      Where a transfer under s444GA will result in a person acquiring a relevant
                             interest in voting shares in a company subject to Ch 6 above 20%, relief
                             from s606 must be granted by ASIC.

              RG 111.66      ASIC generally requires an expert’s report to be prepared for s444GA
                             transactions to assist in determining whether to grant relief from s606. The
                             expert’s report is also included as part of an explanatory statement to:
                             (a)   assist members, creditors, interested persons and ASIC in determining
                                   whether to oppose the application for leave of the court under s444GA;
                                   and
                             (b)   provide further evidence to assist the court in its assessment of granting
                                   leave under s444GA.

                                   Note: Regulatory Guide 6 Takeovers: Exceptions to the general prohibition (RG 6) at
                                   RG 6.202(b) provides more information on the requirements for the explanatory
                                   statement.

              RG 111.67      In exceptional circumstances, where a company clearly holds assets of
                             negligible value and/or has no business, there may be limited benefit in
                             providing an expert’s report. In these circumstances, you should approach
                             ASIC early in the process to discuss whether or not an expert’s report is
                             required.

              RG 111.68      Provided the requirements in RG 6.202(b) are met, ASIC will generally grant
                             relief from s606 where the expert’s report concludes that shareholders’ equity
                             has no residual value. This aligns with the position of the courts when


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                 Page 18
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                             considering whether unfair prejudice exists. The courts consider that the
                             possibility of prejudice to a shareholder only arises if there is some residual
                             equity in the company: see Martin CJ in Weaver v Noble Resources Ltd [2010]
                             WASC 182 and White J in Lewis, In the matter of Diverse Barrel Solutions
                             Pty Ltd (subject to a Deed of Company Arrangement) [2014] FCA 53.

              RG 111.69      Experts who are asked to prepare a report for share transfers using s444GA
                             should generally comply with RG 111.70–RG 111.80.


                             Form and content of report

              RG 111.70      An expert’s report should provide an independent opinion of the value, if
                             any, of shareholders’ residual equity. The expert is not required to form a
                             view on the ‘fairness’ or ‘reasonableness’ of the transaction.

              RG 111.71      Shareholders’ residual equity should be derived by assessing the value of the
                             company’s assets and/or business operations, less borrowings, other
                             liabilities and creditors’ claims.

              RG 111.72      The value of shareholders’ residual equity should be assessed on the basis
                             that the company is in administration.

              RG 111.73      Consistent with the approach of the courts, an expert should generally value
                             shareholders’ residual equity in a company under administration on a ‘winding
                             up’ or ‘liquidation’ basis where that is the likely or necessary consequence of
                             the transfer of shares not being approved: see Re Mirabela Nickel Ltd (subject
                             to deed of company arrangement) [2014] NSWSC 836 at [42]; Re Nexus
                             Energy Limited (2014) 105 ACSR 246 at 254 [24].

              RG 111.74      Experts should:
                             (a)   value any underlying assets, and where necessary business(es), using
                                   the guidance in Part C, including crosschecks;
                             (b)   consider valuation evidence provided by the sales process conducted by
                                   the administrator (if any) as well as the value (if any) of potential
                                   recoveries for voidable transactions; and
                             (c)   seek specialist technical assistance, where relevant, consistent with the
                                   requirements in Section E of Regulatory Guide 112 Independence of
                                   experts (RG 112).

              RG 111.75      The selection of the appropriate approach and methods to value company
                             assets and/or businesses will depend on the facts and circumstances
                             involved, available data and the professional judgement of the expert. The
                             rationale for the selection of the approach and method used should be fully
                             disclosed in the report.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 19
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                             Asset and business valuations

              RG 111.76      We expect in many cases that it will be clear from the administration process
                             whether the company under administration holds a business (or businesses)
                             capable of sale or, rather, a series of assets that, but for the proposed DOCA,
                             would otherwise be sold on a piecemeal basis to realise value (if any).

              RG 111.77      Where a company under administration holds assets that form a business, the
                             expert should generally base the assessment on the higher of;
                             (a)   the sum of liquidation value of the underlying business assets; and
                             (b)   the value of the business as a whole.

              RG 111.78      A business will likely be subject to various constraints associated with the
                             company being under administration. These may affect the expected
                             performance of the business directly and/or perceptions of business risk to
                             potential acquirers. These should be considered by the expert in deriving the
                             expected sale value of the business and should be disclosed in the report.

              RG 111.79      Any assets that do not form part of the business may be valued assuming
                             liquidation value. Liquidation value is defined by the International Valuation
                             Standard 104: Bases of Value (effective 31 January 2020) at paragraph 80.1
                             as:
                                   the amount that would be realised when an asset or group of assets are sold
                                   on a piecemeal basis. Liquidation Value should take into account the costs
                                   of getting the assets into saleable condition as well as those of the disposal
                                   activity. Liquidation Value can be determined under two different premises
                                   of value:
                                   (a) an orderly transaction with a typical marketing period, or
                                   (b) a forced transaction with a shortened marketing period.

              RG 111.80      Valuations of residual company assets should generally be determined using
                             the premise of, ‘… an orderly transaction with a typical marketing period’.
                             The marketing period assumption should be disclosed by the expert.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                           Page 20
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




C          Methodologies and assumptions

                               Key points

                               An expert should:
                               • if possible use more than one valuation methodology and compare the
                                 values derived from using different methodologies to minimise the risk
                                 that the opinion is unreliable; and
                               • justify its choice of methodologies and describe the methods used: see
                                 RG 111.81–RG 111.90.

                               An expert’s opinion should be based on reasonable assumptions and all
                               material assumptions should be disclosed: see RG 111.91–RG 111.94.

                               An expert should usually give a range of values and that range should be
                               as narrow as possible: see RG 111.95–RG 111.96.

                               An expert might need to value individual assets in certain circumstances:
                               see RG 111.97–RG 111.100.




Choice of methodology
              RG 111.81      An expert should use its skill and judgment to select the most appropriate
                             methodology or methodologies in its report. The expert must have a
                             reasonable (or tenable) basis for choosing its valuation methodologies: Re
                             Matine (1998) 28 ACSR 268 at 290–291. An inappropriate choice might be
                             misleading: Re EPHS Ltd [2002] ATP 12. It might also lead to liability
                             because the expert did not take sufficient care and skill in the preparation of
                             the report: Duke Group Ltd v Pilmer (1999) 31 ACSR 213.

              RG 111.82      We consider that an expert should, when possible, use more than one
                             valuation methodology. We consider that this reduces the risk that the
                             expert’s opinion is distorted by its choice of methodology. We also consider
                             that an expert should compare the figures derived from using the different
                             methodologies and comment on any differences. Further, if the expert’s
                             valuation of a company’s securities differs materially from the price of the
                             company’s securities in the period leading up to the announcement of the
                             proposed transaction (together with a typical premium for control for such a
                             transaction), the expert should comment on this difference and the factors
                             underlying it. The expert should also comment if its valuation is less than the
                             price of the company’s securities in the period leading up to the
                             announcement of the transaction.

                                   Note: The expert should also consider whether the price of the company’s securities is
                                   an appropriate valuation methodology: see RG 111.86(d).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                    Page 21
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.83      However, we will not prescribe the valuation methodologies that an expert
                             should use in preparing its report since an expert should exercise its own
                             skill and judgment to choose methodologies that are appropriate in the
                             circumstances of the entity or the asset being valued.

              RG 111.84      An expert should justify its choice of methodology or methodologies
                             (including when the expert has used only one methodology, the basis for
                             doing so) and describe the method or methods used in the report. We
                             consider that an expert report that does this allows security holders to better
                             understand the expert report and determine the weight to be attached to the
                             report. It also allows another expert, professional adviser or institutional
                             investor to replicate the expert’s work and assess the valuation.

              RG 111.85      An expert should discuss how much weight is being placed on each
                             methodology used in the valuation. For instance, one methodology may be
                             identified as the primary methodology whereas another is used to provide a
                             cross-check to the valuation.

              RG 111.86      It is generally appropriate for an expert to consider using the following
                             methodologies:
                             (a)   the discounted cash flow method (see also RG 111.112–RG 111.118)
                                   and the estimated realisable value of any surplus assets;
                             (b)   the application of earnings multiples (appropriate to the business or
                                   industry in which the entity operates) to the estimated future
                                   maintainable earnings or cash flows of the entity, added to the estimated
                                   realisable value of any surplus assets;
                             (c)   the amount that would be available for distribution to security holders
                                   on an orderly realisation of assets;
                             (d)   the quoted price for listed securities, when there is a liquid and active
                                   market and allowing for the fact that the quoted price may not reflect
                                   their value, should 100% of the securities be available for sale; and
                             (e)   any recent genuine offers received by the target for the entire business,
                                   or any business units or assets as a basis for valuation of those business
                                   units or assets.

                                   Note: Some valuation methodologies include a premium for control while others do not.
                                   An expert needs to ensure that the choice of methodology or methodologies is
                                   appropriate for the circumstances of the transaction.

              RG 111.87      The amount an alternative bidder might be willing to offer if all the
                             securities in the target were available for purchase may provide a useful
                             framework for the application of methodologies (e.g. in selecting earnings
                             multiples) and in underpinning any overall judgment as to value.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                 Page 22
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.88      An expert should not take into account highly speculative alternative
                             proposals which are so unformulated that no sensible value could be placed
                             on them.

              RG 111.89      If an entity has recently conducted a sale process without success or has been
                             ‘in play’ for some period without an alternative bid emerging, it may be
                             possible to comment that no alternative acquirer appears likely to offer a
                             higher price.


                             Option valuations

              RG 111.90      The most commonly used methodologies for valuing unlisted or thinly
                             traded options are the Binomial Model and the Black–Scholes Model. In
                             selecting an approach, an expert should assess whether the assumptions used
                             in the methodology are appropriate for the options being valued.



Assumptions
              RG 111.91      An expert’s opinion should be based on reasonable assumptions. This
                             reduces the risk that the report will be misleading: s670A(2); s12DA of the
                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act);
                             MGICA (1992) Ltd v Kenny & Good Pty Ltd (1996) 140 ALR 313 at 356;
                             RAIA Insurance Brokers v FAI General Insurance Co Ltd (1993) 112 ALR
                             511 at 522.

              RG 111.92      An expert should disclose all material assumptions on which its report is
                             based. This allows security holders to assess the reasonableness of the report
                             and its main uncertainties: Re BNQ Sugar Pty Ltd and Others (1994) 12
                             ACSR 695 at 702; GIO Australia Holdings Pty Ltd v AMP Insurance
                             Investment Holdings Pty Ltd (1998) 29 ACSR 584 at 621–622.

              RG 111.93      The material assumptions disclosed should be specific and definite. All-
                             embracing assumptions of no specific relevance to the entity being valued
                             should not be included (e.g. the continued absence of war or the non-
                             occurrence of natural disasters). However, assumptions concerning specific
                             future economic conditions (such as assumed interest rates, exchange rates
                             and commodity prices) and the assessment of their impact on the report
                             should be disclosed.

              RG 111.94      If changes in material assumptions are likely to materially impact on a
                             report’s valuation (e.g. changes in the exchange rate or interest rate
                             assumptions), an expert should consider including a sensitivity analysis
                             which sets out the impact of such changes.

                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 170 Prospective financial information (RG 170) at
                                   RG 170.65–RG 170.66.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                   Page 23
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Value ranges
              RG 111.95      An expert should usually give a range of values. The value of securities is
                             typically subject to uncertainty and volatility. Placing a precise dollar value
                             on them is likely to imply a misleading accuracy to a valuation.

              RG 111.96      Nevertheless, the range of values should be as narrow as possible. If an
                             expert cannot give a narrow range because of uncertainty (e.g. start-up
                             companies), the expert should prominently explain in its report what factors
                             create this uncertainty and how the expert is able to justify its findings
                             despite the uncertainty. In our view, a broad range of values undermines the
                             usefulness of the report.



Valuing assets
              RG 111.97      An expert might need to value individual assets in undertaking the analysis
                             required to prepare its report, for example, if the assets are considered
                             ‘surplus’ to other business activities being valued. In valuing individual
                             assets, an expert may need to quantify and discuss any material differences
                             between its valuation and the market value of the asset used for accounting
                             purposes.

              RG 111.98      An expert may also need to assess the carrying value of an entity’s assets if
                             the primary valuation methodology it has employed results in a value that is
                             less than the entity’s reported net assets (after allowing for reasonable
                             realisation costs).

              RG 111.99      In such circumstances, the expert should ensure that it has the expertise to
                             value the assets (e.g. to value real property or exploration mining tenements)
                             or retain a specialist to do so.

              RG 111.100     Real property assets that are planned or are in the process of development
                             should be valued on the basis of their current market value rather than on an
                             ‘as complete’ basis.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 24
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




D          Other key requirements

                               Key points

                               An expert report should help security holders make their decision by clearly
                               disclosing key information: see RG 111.101–RG 111.106.

                               An expert’s opinion should be based on reasonable grounds. These
                               grounds should be discussed in the report: see RG 111.107–RG 111.118.

                               An expert might need to act on changes in circumstances after issuing its
                               report: see RG 111.119–RG 111.121.

                               Particular considerations apply to the inclusion of certain information
                               (e.g. disclaimers): see RG 111.122–RG 111.133.

                               An expert should have the relevant expertise to prepare the expert report:
                               see RG 111.134–RG 111.139.

                               An expert should maintain adequate records of the work undertaken to
                               prepare the expert report: see RG 111.140–RG 111.144.




Clear, concise and effective communication
              RG 111.101     An expert report should help security holders make their decision. The report
                             should:
                             (a)   address the varying information needs of a report’s audience;
                             (b)   clearly explain the meaning of the expert’s opinion and the significance
                                   of that opinion to the decision to be made by security holders;
                             (c)   highlight key information;
                             (d)   be easy to navigate and understand (e.g. through including an up-front
                                   summary of the expert’s opinion and the reasons for the opinion, the use
                                   of content tables, signposting, cross-references, numbered sections, sub-
                                   sections and the avoidance of jargon); and
                             (e)   be as brief as possible.

              RG 111.102     An expert report should only contain information that relates directly to the
                             decision to be made by security holders. Including extraneous information in
                             an expert report undermines the effectiveness of that report. Santow J dealt
                             with this issue in Re Australian Co-operative Foods Ltd (2001) 38 ACSR 71
                             at 77 in the following terms:
                                   Experts are responsible for what they say in their reports. They must ensure
                                   that their reports deal adequately with the kind of concerns that could
                                   reasonably be anticipated from those affected by the scheme, in reporting




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 25
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                                   on whether the relevant scheme proposal is fair and reasonable from their
                                   viewpoint … This is so those members can then make an informed decision
                                   with the benefit of a report that is as simple, clear and useful as possible. A
                                   plethora of peripheral information is more likely to distract than illuminate.

              RG 111.103     For example, an analysis of the industry in which the company (i.e. the
                             subject of the opinion) operates might be useful. However, copying material
                             out of an industry research database may merely add to the length of reports.
                             An expert should include an analysis of the material and relate the material
                             directly to its opinion.


                             Technical terms

              RG 111.104     Technical terms should be avoided when possible. If the expert uses
                             technical terms, it should use them consistently in a report and consistently
                             with the way they are used in the relevant industry. When appropriate, the
                             expert should provide a glossary, especially when the definition or
                             interpretation of specific terms is central to its report.


                             Concise or short form expert report

              RG 111.105     We encourage an expert to consider preparing a concise or short form expert
                             report. The commissioning party would make a longer expert report
                             containing additional, more technical or detailed information available on
                             request free of charge or ensure it is accessible online. This reflects a
                             developing market practice.

                                   Note: See RG 60.84 for information about the use of concise expert reports in schemes
                                   of arrangement.

              RG 111.106     The concise report would still need to contain sufficient information to help
                             security holders make their decision. The concise report should include the
                             information that we emphasise in the rest of this guide and in RG 112 (e.g.
                             material assumptions). If the longer report contained any ‘surprises’ for the
                             security holder who only read the concise report, this would indicate the
                             concise report was inadequate or misleading. Table 2 contains examples of
                             types of information that an expert might consider including and leaving out
                             of the concise report. Determining what information to include in the concise
                             report and what to leave out is a matter for the expert’s professional
                             judgment in the particular circumstances of the report. However, we are
                             happy to work with experts on these issues.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                  Page 26
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Table 2:     Examples of information that an expert might consider putting in and leaving out of
             a concise expert report

 Include in the concise expert         Expert’s conclusion
 report                                Meaning of conclusion and significance for the decision to be made
                                       Summary of reasons for conclusion
                                       Summary of valuation including:
                                         − methodologies used;
                                         − material assumptions; and
                                         − a justification of these
                                       Financial Services Guide

 Leave out of the concise              Industry overview
 expert report                         Disclaimers
                                       Detailed financial information
                                       Detailed profile of parties to the transaction
                                       Qualifications, declarations (e.g. indemnities) and consents
                                       Detailed share price analysis
                                       Details of capital structure (e.g. shareholder spread and directors’
                                        relevant interests if not linked to the expert’s analysis)
                                       List of previous ASX announcements
                                       List of sources of information




Statements should be supportable
                             Reasonable grounds

              RG 111.107     An expert’s opinion should be based on reasonable grounds. These grounds
                             should be set out in the report.

              RG 111.108     We consider that setting out the reasons for the opinion will assist security
                             holders to understand the expert’s opinion, to assess the weight to attach to that
                             opinion and to evaluate the validity of the expert’s conclusions: s636(2); 640(1);
                             667A(1)(c); Sch 8, cl 8303 of the Corporations Regulations and Makita
                             (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles (2001) 52 NSWLR 705 at 729 and following.
                             Further, security holders cannot make an informed decision without the benefit
                             of ‘sufficient supporting information’: Australian Co-operative Foods at 77.

                             Review of information

              RG 111.109     We expect an expert to:
                             (a)   critically evaluate the information provided to it; and
                             (b)   take note of any grounds held for questioning the truth, accuracy and
                                   completeness of the information.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                Page 27
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.110     An expert should conduct such critical analysis of the information on which
                             it relied to prepare the report as is reasonable in the circumstances and as the
                             law requires: Australian Co-operative Foods at 77. The more material the
                             information is to the conclusions reached by the expert, the greater the
                             responsibility on the expert to be satisfied that the information is not
                             materially inaccurate. If there are indications suggesting that the information
                             in question may not be reasonably relied on, then the expert should make
                             additional enquiries. We do not expect an expert to conduct an audit of the
                             subject matter of the report.

              RG 111.111     For example, the expert must review directors’ valuations and management
                             accounts, partly to detect changes in the way those valuations and accounts
                             have been prepared from period to period: see RG 111.113. If there are no
                             indications of irregularities or omissions, an expert will ordinarily be entitled
                             to take at face value valuations previously prepared by outside experts,
                             audited financial statements and the accounting records of the company. An
                             expert may also rely on management accounts if it has established
                             reasonable grounds: see RG 111.113.


                             Forward-looking information and use of the discounted
                             cash flow methodology

              RG 111.112     An expert should not include prospective financial information (including
                             forecasts and projections) or any other statements or assumptions about
                             future matters (together, ‘forward-looking information’) in its report unless
                             there are reasonable grounds for the forward-looking information. Otherwise
                             the opinion will be misleading under s670A(2) of the Corporations Act or
                             s12DA of the ASIC Act.

              RG 111.113     An expert should make sufficient inquiries to satisfy itself that forward-
                             looking information on which it has relied was prepared on a reasonable
                             basis. It is important that those producing such information to the expert
                             have used methods of analysis and presentations previously used by the
                             company (unless there is a sound reason to use a different approach), and
                             have not used new systems or approaches which favour their objectives. If
                             there are any material variations in method or presentation, the expert should
                             adjust for or comment on them in the report.

              RG 111.114     RG 170 gives detailed guidance on what we consider is a reasonable basis
                             for stating prospective financial information. While RG 170 is expressed to
                             apply to fundraising documents under Chs 6D and 7, it provides useful
                             guidance for inclusion of prospective financial information in expert reports.
                             We also consider that RG 170 provides useful guidance for inclusion of
                             forward-looking information that does not fall within the definition of
                             ‘prospective financial information’.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 28
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.115     However, we recognise that using the discounted cash flow (DCF)
                             methodology will involve the use of forward-looking information and
                             assumptions over a longer period than the two-year period in RG 170: see
                             RG 170.39–RG 170.41. As long as the focus of the disclosure in the expert
                             report is on the valuation rather than forward-looking information that
                             supports it, the expert does not need to commission an independent
                             accountant report for the DCF methodology: see RG 170.41. However, the
                             expert should undertake a critical analysis of the forward-looking
                             information used in applying the DCF methodology to ensure it is based on
                             reasonable grounds.

              RG 111.116     ASIC recognises that there may be a reasonable basis for the use of DCF
                             methodologies before a project generates cash flows as long as, at the date of
                             reporting, the expert has reasonable grounds for the forward-looking
                             information. Where the expert does not have reasonable grounds, other
                             valuation methodologies should be used.

              RG 111.117     When an expert includes forward-looking information in its report, the report
                             should include all information that may be required for users of the report to
                             assess the reasonableness of the methodology and assumptions used,
                             including:
                             (a)   the nature of the information, its limitations and the reason for its
                                   inclusion in the report;
                             (b)   the material inputs and assumptions used and the reason for using those
                                   assumptions;
                             (c)   if applicable, the discount rate selected and rationale;
                             (d)   the extent and nature of the adjustments made to the DCF (if any) to
                                   allow for the development stage risks attaching to these cash flows
                                   (whether through risk weighting cash flows, adjustments to discount
                                   rates or other methods);
                             (e)   the extent of inquiries and research undertaken by the expert and the
                                   compiler of that information;
                             (f)   the technical and financial qualifications of the expert and the compiler
                                   in relation to the relevant industry and asset; and
                             (g)   the specific period to which the information relates and the reason for
                                   the use of that period.

              RG 111.118     Full disclosure of the types of matters raised in RG 111.117 and any other
                             risk disclosure, warnings or cautionary language does not affect the
                             requirement for forward-looking information to be based on reasonable
                             grounds. It will also not prevent particular information from being
                             misleading.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                            Page 29
                                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Changes in circumstances
              RG 111.119     An expert who has delivered its report to the commissioning party should
                             notify that party as soon as possible if the expert becomes aware of a
                             significant change affecting the information in its report or if the expert
                             believes that a material statement in the report is misleading or deceptive.
                             The commissioning party should also notify the expert if that party becomes
                             aware of a significant change affecting the information in the expert report
                             prior to a meeting being held or during the offer period.

              RG 111.120     When a material change in circumstances has arisen since a report was
                             prepared, a failure by the expert to provide a supplementary report to its client
                             may constitute misleading or deceptive conduct. Security holders will rely on an
                             expert report when making their decision, not when they first receive the report:
                             ASIC v Solution 6 Holdings Ltd (1999) 30 ACSR 605 at 611. If an expert
                             becomes aware of a material change in circumstances, then depending on the
                             circumstances, it may be appropriate for a commissioning party to send a
                             supplementary report, even if security holders would receive the report:
                             (a)   shortly before a meeting is held; or
                             (b)   towards the end of an offer period.

                             See Troy Resources NL v Taipan Resources NL (2000) 36 ACSR 197.

                                   Note: Commissioning parties should consider what period is appropriate for security
                                   holders to have to consider any supplementary information: see also RG 60.92–RG 60.93.

              RG 111.121     Changes affecting valuations in reports are more likely to trigger the
                             supplementary report obligation than tactical events in the progress of
                             transactions, for example, the level of acceptances in a bid.


Inclusion of other information

                             Confidential information

              RG 111.122     While an expert should not omit material information from its report merely
                             because it is confidential, the expert may be able to adequately support an
                             opinion by careful disclosure without revealing confidential information.


                             Disclaimers

              RG 111.123     The purpose of an expert report is to give security holders an assessment on
                             which they can rely. A disclaimer defeats this purpose.

              RG 111.124     An expert cannot limit its statutory liability for the report through
                             disclaimers (e.g. that the expert will not be liable for any loss incurred
                             through reliance on its report). An expert report that purports to exclude the
                             expert from liability may be misleading.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                Page 30
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.125     An expert should consider refusing to give a report when it has not been given:
                             (a)   sufficient information or unimpeded access to an entity’s records; or
                             (b)   enough time to prepare the report.

              RG 111.126     When an expert decides that its report will assist security holders despite
                             limitations that the expert cannot resolve (e.g. because the expert does not
                             have time to investigate the reliability of certain information), the expert
                             should prominently explain the nature of the uncertainties and the impact on
                             its opinion so that security holders can assess what weight to attach to the
                             opinion.

              RG 111.127     When an expert is retained to provide a report on a limited matter, the expert
                             may disclaim responsibility for matters outside the scope of its retainer.


                             Indemnities

              RG 111.128     An expert may take an indemnity from the commissioning party (or any
                             other person) under which it is to be compensated for certain liability. An
                             acceptable indemnity would cover liability that arises because:
                             (a)   the expert relied on information provided by the person; or
                             (b)   the person did not provide the expert with material information.

              RG 111.129     Such an indemnity will not diminish the liability of an expert to security
                             holders. Nor will it reduce the expert’s responsibility to ensure that it has
                             reasonable grounds for its opinion and that the report is not misleading or
                             deceptive.

              RG 111.130     An expert report that implies that an indemnity relieves the expert from
                             liability to security holders is potentially misleading. ASIC expects reports to
                             explain the effect of any indemnity.


                             Additional disclosures

              RG 111.131     Security holders will generally expect that an expert report will have been
                             prepared on the following basis:
                             (a)   the expert has made all the inquiries that it believes are desirable and
                                   appropriate in order to prepare the report; and
                             (b)   the report has not omitted any matter that the expert regards as material
                                   to security holders’ assessment of the expert’s conclusions.

                                   Note: To the extent that there are any normally applicable standards and guidelines for
                                   valuing a particular class of assets (e.g. the Valmin Code for valuations involving
                                   mineral and hydrocarbon assets), security holders will generally expect that these have
                                   been complied with. The report should disclose if that is not the case as that will be a
                                   matter that is relevant to security holders’ assessment of the expert’s conclusions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                     Page 31
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.132     If an expert report has not been prepared on this basis, the report should
                             prominently explain why this is the case and the impact of this on the report.
                             If the report is unable to be prepared on such a basis, the expert may need to
                             consider refusing to give the report: see RG 111.125–RG 111.126.

              RG 111.133     An expert should also disclose to security holders, to the extent necessary to
                             help them assess what weight to give to reports:
                             (a)   the source of material used in the reports;
                             (b)   the inquiries made by the expert;
                             (c)   any unacceptable or unusual time constraints the expert worked under;
                             (d)   whether the expert is dissatisfied with the quality of the information
                                   used for the report; and
                             (e)   whether any concerned party to the relevant transaction has refused to
                                   provide adequate:
                                   (i)    access to information; or
                                   (ii)   explanations;

                                   if the information or the explanations might have impacted on the
                                   report’s conclusions.



Expertise
              RG 111.134     ASIC expects an expert preparing an expert report to be, in fact, an expert in
                             the relevant field. Section 9 defines an expert as ‘a person whose profession
                             or reputation gives authority to a statement made by him or her’. To this end,
                             we expect an expert and the commissioning party to ensure that:
                             (a)   the expert’s profession or reputation is relevant to the matters upon
                                   which the expert is to report;
                             (b)   the expert holds the licences or authorities necessary for providing the
                                   type of advice sought; and
                             (c)   the expert states in the report its qualifications and experience or, if the
                                   report is made by a corporation or firm, the qualifications and
                                   experience of the individuals responsible for preparing the report.

              RG 111.135     Gyles J observed in Reiffel v ACN 075 839 266 Ltd (2003) 45 ACSR 67 at 87:
                                   It is implicit … that such an expert will exercise the care, skill and
                                   judgment appropriate to the relevant field of expertise in forming and
                                   expressing the opinion.

              RG 111.136     For technical matters beyond the expert’s expertise, an expert should retain a
                             specialist to advise them (e.g. a geologist to provide an opinion on
                             recoverable ore the subject of mining tenements, or a traffic forecast report
                             in relation to a toll road): see RG 112.67–RG 112.70.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 32
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




              RG 111.137     An expert should ensure that staff preparing and supervising the preparation
                             of the report have sufficient skill, knowledge and experience to perform the
                             expert’s role.

              RG 111.138     Expert reports typically constitute the giving of financial product advice so
                             an expert must hold an Australian financial services (AFS) licence. An AFS
                             licensee should have sufficient human and technological resources to
                             provide the services specified in its licences and should ensure its staff are
                             adequately trained and competent to provide those services: s912A(1).
                                   Note: ASIC has taken action against an expert when the expert lacked the expertise to
                                   complete the task, failed to comply with the law and did not meet standards of good
                                   practice.

              RG 111.139     Detailed guidance on how we consider these licence obligations can be met
                             are contained in Regulatory Guide 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general
                             obligations (RG 104), Regulatory Guide 105 AFS licensing: Organisational
                             competence (RG 105) and Regulatory Guide 146 Licensing: Training of
                             financial product advisers (RG 146).



Working papers
              RG 111.140     In preparing an expert report, an expert should document its work and
                             maintain adequate working papers that record the basis of the report. The
                             expert should be able to readily draw on its working papers to demonstrate
                             that its opinion is reasonably based.
                                   Note: Much of the expert’s analysis will be described in the report. The requirement to
                                   document and maintain adequate working papers does not detract from the obligations
                                   of an expert with respect to the contents of an expert report.

              RG 111.141     Maintaining adequate working papers is an important aspect of an expert’s
                             quality control and review process. In our view, the duties imposed by the
                             Corporations Act on AFS licensees require licensees to keep adequate
                             records about their financial services business: see Regulatory Guide 175
                             Licensing: Financial product advisers—Conduct and disclosure (RG 175) at
                             RG 175.97 and RG 175.145.

              RG 111.142     Maintaining adequate working papers will also assist the expert in
                             demonstrating compliance with its legal obligations (including the
                             obligations described in this guide and RG 112 and its obligations as an AFS
                             licensee) and its internal procedures and processes.

              RG 111.143     Working papers should be compiled so that someone with no prior
                             involvement with the transaction can review them and understand the major
                             issues. They should include, for example:
                             (a)   documents supporting the expert’s choice of methodology;
                             (b)   documents supporting significant assumptions underpinning the
                                   expert’s opinion;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                    Page 33
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                             (c)   factual information relied on, or used by, the expert in preparing the
                                   report and material documenting the inquiries made by the expert in
                                   relation to that information;
                             (d)   analysis of any financial models that the expert has relied on. Where the
                                   expert has relied on a financial model, the expert should undertake a
                                   review of the model and document its analysis, including which aspects
                                   of the model have been reviewed by the expert and the extent of the
                                   review. We do not expect an expert to conduct an audit of the model;
                                   and
                             (e)   file notes of discussions and correspondence between the expert and the
                                   commissioning party: see RG 112.47.

              RG 111.144     All records relevant to the preparation of an expert report may be subject to
                             review by ASIC. Even where we do not have any particular concerns about
                             an expert report, we may review the report, the working papers and the
                             independence of the expert as part of our regular review of the independent
                             expert sector.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 34
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




E          Regulatory action

                               Key points

                               We will consider regulatory action if we consider there are material issues
                               with the content of an expert report or have concerns about the
                               independence of an expert.


              RG 111.145     We will consider regulatory action if we consider that there are material
                             issues with the content of the report (e.g. as to the adequacy and the
                             completeness of the expert’s analysis) or if we have concerns about the
                             independence of an expert.

              RG 111.146     We might write to the expert or the commissioning party or both to raise
                             concerns or request changes to an expert report. However, when delay might
                             prejudice the interests of security holders or the market, we might take
                             enforcement action without consulting the expert or the commissioning
                             party.

              RG 111.147     The action we might take could be one or more of the following:
                             (a)   in a takeover bid, an application to the Takeovers Panel for a
                                   declaration of unacceptable circumstances;
                             (b)   in a scheme of arrangement, opposition to the scheme at a court
                                   hearing;
                             (c)   action for contravention of misleading or deceptive conduct provisions;
                             (d)   action by us to revoke, suspend the expert’s licence or add a condition
                                   after a hearing: s915C; or
                             (e)   action by us to cease or suspend nominating the expert to prepare
                                   reports in compulsory acquisitions: s667AA and RG 10.173.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 35
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Key terms

                           Term                          Meaning in this document

                           administrator                 Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: The definition in s9 includes both deed administrators and
                                                           voluntary administrators.

                           AFS licence                   An Australian financial services licence under s913B of the
                                                         Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries out a
                                                         financial services business to provide financial services
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the Corporations
                                                           Act.

                           AFS licensee                  A person who holds an Australian financial services licence
                                                         under s913B of the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the Corporations
                                                           Act.

                           ASIC                          Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                           ASIC Act                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001

                           ASX                           Australian Securities Exchange Limited

                           bidder                        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                           Corporations Act              Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                           Corporations Regulations      Corporations Regulations 2001

                           DOCA                          A deed of company arrangement

                           DOCA proposal                 A proposed DOCA or proposed variation of a DOCA

                           DOCA proponent                A person who advocates for the DOCA proposal

                           expert                        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                           prospective financial         Financial information of a predictive character based on
                           information                   assumptions about events that may occur in the future and
                                                         on possible actions by an entity

                           related party                 Has the meaning given in s228 of the Corporations Act

                           reg 5.1.01 (for example)      A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this example
                                                         numbered 5.1.01)

                           RG 175 (for example)          An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 175)

                           s648A (for example)           A section of the Corporations Act (in this example, numbered
                                                         648A), unless otherwise specified

                           Sch 4 (for example)           A schedule of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 4), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                                     Page 36
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                           Term                          Meaning in this document

                           scheme of arrangement         A scheme of arrangement conducted under Pt 5.1

                           securities                    Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                           security holder               The holder of interests or securities

                           target                        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                           Valmin Code                   Code for the Technical Assessment and Valuation of Mineral
                                                         and Petroleum Assets and Securities for Independent Expert
                                                         Reports




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                             Page 37
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             experts, expert report, analysis of control transactions, substance of
                             transaction not legal mechanism used, assumptions, methodology, valuing
                             assets, clear communication, incorporation by reference, supportable
                             statements, prospective financial information, disclaimers, indemnities,
                             expertise, related party transactions


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 6 Takeovers: Exceptions to the general prohibition

                             RG 9 Takeover bids

                             RG 10 Compulsory acquisitions and buyouts

                             RG 60 Schemes of arrangement

                             RG 74 Acquisitions agreed to by shareholders

                             RG 76 Related party transactions

                             RG 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general obligations

                             RG 105 AFS licensing: Organisational competence

                             RG 110 Share buy-backs

                             RG 112 Independence of experts

                             RG 146 Licensing: Training of financial product advisers

                             RG 170 Prospective financial information

                             RG 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—Conduct and disclosure


                             Legislation

                             ASIC Act, s12DA

                             Corporations Act, Chs 2E, 2J, 6 and 7; Pt 5.3A; s9, 210, 218, 219, 220, 221,
                             256C(4), 444GA, 606, item 7(b) of 611, 636(1)(g), 636(1)(h)(iii), 636(2),
                             640, 663B, 664C, 665B, 667A, 667C, 670A(2), 766B(3), 766(4), 912A(1)
                             and Sch 4, cl 29(4)

                             Corporations Regulations, reg 5.1.01, Sch 8, cls 8303 and 8306




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 38
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                             Cases
                             ASIC v Solution 6 Holdings Ltd (1999) 30 ACSR 605

                             Re Australian Co-operative Foods Ltd (2001) 38 ACSR 71

                             Re BNQ Sugar Pty Ltd and Others (1994) 12 ACSR 695

                             Capricorn Diamonds Investments Pty Ltd v Catto (2002) 41 ACSR 376

                             Duke Group v Pilmer (1999) 31 ACSR 213

                             Lewis, In the matter of Diverse Barrel Solutions Pty Ltd (subject to a Deed
                             of Company Arrangement) [2014] FCA 53

                             Re EPHS Ltd [2002] ATP 12

                             Re Goldfields Kalgoorlie; Winpar Holdings Ltd v Goldfields Kalgoorlie Ltd
                             (2000) 34 ACSR 737

                             Re Mirabela Nickel Ltd (subject to a Deed of Company Arrangement) [2014]
                             NSWSC 836

                             Re Nexus Energy Limited (2014) 105 ACSR 246

                             GIO Australia Holdings Pty Ltd v AMP Insurance Investment Holdings Pty
                             Ltd (1998) 29 ACSR 584

                             Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles (2001) 52 NSWLR 705

                             Re Matine (1998) 28 ACSR 268

                             MGICA (1992) Ltd v Kenny & Good Pty Ltd (1996) 140 ALR 313

                             Northern Energy Corporation Limited [2011] ATP 2

                             RAIA Insurance Brokers v FAI General Insurance Co Ltd (1993) 112 ALR 511

                             Reiffel v ACN 075 839 266 Ltd (2003) 45 ACSR 67
                             Teh v Ramsay Centauri (2002) 42 ACSR 354
                             Troy Resources NL v Taipan Resources NL (2000) 36 ACSR 197

                             Weaver v Noble Resources Ltd [2010] WASC 182
                             Winpar Holdings Ltd v Austrim Nylex Ltd [2005] VSCA 211


                             Consultation papers and reports
                             CP 62 Better experts’ reports

                             CP 142 Related party transactions

                             CP 143 Expert reports and independence of experts: Updates to RG 111 and RG 112

                             CP 326 Chapter 6 relief for share transfers using s444GA of the Corporations Act



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 39
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 111: Content of expert reports




                             REP 233 Response to submissions on CP 142 Related party transactions

                             REP 234 Response to submissions on CP 143 Expert reports and independence of
                             experts

                             REP 670 Response to submissions on CP 326 Chapter 6 relief for share transfers
                             using s444GA of the Corporations Act


                             Miscellaneous
                             ASX Listing Rule 10
                             International Valuation Standard 104: Bases of Value (effective 31 January
                             2020)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2020                                          Page 40
