REGULATORY GUIDE 126

Compensation and insurance
arrangements for AFS
licensees

November 2024




About this guide
This guide is for AFS licensees and their representatives, advisers and
insurers.

It sets out how ASIC administers the compensation requirements for retail
clients under s912B of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act).
                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in November 2024 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. In December 2025, we updated
                             references to a remade instrument and made minor amendments including
                             consolidating the note to RG 126.77 into that paragraph.

                             Previous versions:
                                     Superseded Regulatory Guide 126, issued November 2007, reissued
                                      March 2008, October 2009, December 2010, August 2017, July 2020
                                      and July 2022


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                             Page 2
                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    The compensation requirements ....................................................... 4
                                    Our general approach ........................................................................ 5
                                    Complying with the compensation requirements ............................... 6
                                    AFS licensees with specific PI insurance requirements .................... 7
                                    Discharge of security bonds .............................................................. 7
                                    Disclosure to retail clients .................................................................. 8
                             B      Our general approach ..................................................................... 9
                                    Policy objective .................................................................................. 9
                                    Key principles .................................................................................. 10
                             C      Adequate PI insurance .................................................................. 12
                                    What is ‘adequate’? ......................................................................... 12
                                    Assessing adequacy ........................................................................ 14
                                    Which entities can provide the cover? ............................................. 19
                                    Distinction between PI insurance and alternative arrangements .... 19
                             D      Alternative arrangements ............................................................. 21
                                    How to apply for approval ................................................................ 21
                                    How we will assess applications ...................................................... 22
                                    Compensation arrangements during the assessment process ....... 23
                                    Discharge of security bonds ............................................................ 23
                             E      Exemptions..................................................................................... 24
                                    AFS licensees that are exempt under reg 7.6.02AAA(1) ................ 24
                                    Related AFS licensees .................................................................... 24
                                    Discharge of security bonds ............................................................ 25
                             F      Discharge of security bonds ........................................................ 26
                                    Security bonds ................................................................................. 26
                                    How to apply to have your security bond released .......................... 26
                             G      Disclosure to retail clients ............................................................ 28
                                    What to disclose .............................................................................. 28
                                    How to disclose ................................................................................ 29
                                    Action against misleading disclosure ............................................... 29
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 30
                             Related information ............................................................................... 33




w© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                                     Page 3
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              If you provide financial services to retail clients, you must have
                              arrangements for compensating those clients for breaches of Ch 7 of the
                              Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act). The primary way to comply with
                              this obligation is to have professional indemnity (PI) insurance.

                              We administer the PI insurance requirements in order to, as far as possible,
                              reduce the risk that an Australian financial services (AFS) licensee is
                              unable to provide compensation to a retail client because of insufficient
                              financial resources.

                              To reduce this risk, we aim to raise the standard of available PI insurance
                              for AFS licensees. However, PI insurance is not a guarantee that
                              compensation will be paid if there is a claim.




The compensation requirements
              RG 126.1       Under s912B of the Corporations Act, AFS licensees must have
                             arrangements for compensating retail clients for losses they suffer as a result
                             of a breach by the licensee or its representatives of their obligations in Ch 7
                             of the Corporations Act.

                                    Note 1: In this guide, references to sections (s), chapters (Chs) and parts (Pts) are to the
                                    Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified. References to regulations (regs) are to the
                                    Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations), unless otherwise specified.

                                    Note 2: Our guidance on compensation and insurance arrangements for credit licensees
                                    is set out in Regulatory Guide 210 Compensation and insurance arrangements for
                                    credit licensees (RG 210).

              RG 126.2       These arrangements must:
                             (a)    satisfy the requirements in the Corporations Regulations, which are that
                                    licensees must obtain PI insurance that is adequate, considering the
                                    nature of the licensee’s business and its potential liability for
                                    compensation claims (see reg 7.6.02AAA); or
                             (b)    be approved by ASIC as alternative arrangements.

              RG 126.3       Section C of this guide sets out what we regard as the minimum
                             requirements for adequate PI insurance. Section D provides information
                             about when we will approve alternative arrangements.

              RG 126.4       The Corporations Regulations also provide exemptions from the
                             requirements for some AFS licensees that are regulated by the Australian
                             Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) or are related to an entity regulated
                             by APRA: see reg 7.6.02AAA(3) and Section E of this guide.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                         Page 4
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




              RG 126.5       In this guide, the requirements in the Corporations Act and Corporations
                             Regulations are referred to as the ‘compensation requirements’.



Our general approach

                             Our objective

              RG 126.6       Our objective in administering the compensation requirements is to reduce
                             the risk that a retail client’s losses (due to breaches of Ch 7 for which an
                             AFS licensee is responsible) cannot be compensated by a licensee because of
                             a lack of financial resources (referred to in this guide as the ‘policy
                             objective’).


                             What this means for AFS licensees and consumers

              RG 126.7       Our approach to administering the compensation requirements means that all
                             AFS licensees that provide financial services to retail clients must have
                             PI insurance that meets the minimum standards in Section C, unless an
                             exemption applies.

              RG 126.8       It is important, however, to recognise the limitations of PI insurance as a
                             consumer protection mechanism.

              RG 126.9       PI insurance is not designed to protect consumers directly and is not a
                             guarantee that compensation will be paid. It is designed to protect the
                             insured (i.e. the AFS licensee) against the risk of financial losses arising
                             from poor quality services (e.g. poor advice or execution of services) and
                             other misconduct by a financial services provider (e.g. fraud by its
                             representatives).

              RG 126.10      The insurance is not intended to cover product failure or general investment
                             losses, claims for loss solely as a result of the failure (e.g. insolvency) of a
                             product issuer or where a return on a financial product has not met
                             expectations. Nor is it intended to underwrite the products of a product
                             issuer.

              RG 126.11      We recognise that the PI insurance that is currently available in the market is
                             unlikely to provide a source of funds when an AFS licensee has become
                             insolvent before the claim was brought. Ideally, insurance policies would
                             continue to cover the licensee after it has become insolvent or otherwise
                             ceased business, but we understand that this insurance is generally not
                             available in the current market to the average licensee. We also recognise
                             that insurers may exclude some areas of cover in policies for risk
                             management reasons.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                         Page 5
                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




Complying with the compensation requirements
              RG 126.12       Table 1 sets out what you must do to meet the minimum PI insurance
                              requirements.

Table 1:     What you must do to comply

 Who                      What you must do                                          When

 New AFS                  If you are applying for an AFS licence, you will need     When you apply for your AFS
 licensees                to confirm in your application that you have:             licence.
                           adequate PI insurance in place; or                      You must have the insurance
                           a process to ensure that you will have adequate PI      in place by the date your AFS
                            insurance in place when your AFS licence takes          licence commences.
                            effect.

                          We will ask questions about your proposed
                          compensation arrangements, including:
                           the insurer and the type and level of PI insurance
                            you have (or will have) in place;
                           the scope of the cover; and
                           whether the policy meets the minimum standards
                            (see Section C).

                          You must also provide ASIC with a certificate of
                          currency of the PI insurance policy before your AFS
                          licence will be granted.

 Existing AFS             You must have PI insurance that complies with the         Since 1 January 2010.
 licensees                standards set out in Section C, unless an exemption
                          applies or you have alternative arrangements in place
                          that we have approved.

 Alternative              You must lodge an application addressing the issues       When you want to have
 arrangements             set out in Section D.                                     alternative arrangements to
 (we may approve                                                                    PI insurance.
 alternative                                                                        You should allow enough time:
 arrangements to PI
                                                                                     for your application to be
 insurance)
                                                                                      assessed; and
                                                                                     to obtain the required
                                                                                      PI insurance if your
                                                                                      arrangements are not
                                                                                      approved.

 Exempt AFS               Some AFS licensees can rely on an exemption under         Not applicable.
 licensees                the Corporations Regulations: see Section E.
 (some AFS                If required, you must lodge an application for approval
 licensees are            of a guarantee.
 exempt)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                               Page 6
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




AFS licensees with specific PI insurance requirements
              RG 126.13      The following groups of AFS licensees are subject to specific PI insurance
                             requirements either as a condition of their AFS licence or under the terms of
                             an ASIC instrument:
                             (a)    responsible entities of registered schemes and corporate directors of
                                    retail corporate collective investment vehicles (CCIVs)—see Pro
                                    Forma 209 Australian financial services licence conditions (PF 209);
                             (b)    investor directed portfolio service (IDPS) operators—see ASIC
                                    Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services) Instrument
                                    2023/669 and Regulatory Guide 148 Platforms that are managed
                                    investment schemes and nominee and custody services (RG 148) at
                                    RG 148.52–RG 148.55; and
                             (c)    managed discretionary account (MDA) providers—see Regulatory
                                    Guide 179 Managed discretionary accounts (RG 179) at RG 179.93–
                                    RG 179.94.

              RG 126.14      If you fall within any of these groups, you will need to ensure that the cover
                             you hold meets these specific requirements.

              RG 126.15      Additionally, specific PI insurance requirements may apply to AFS licensees
                             that are also market participants. These requirements are set out in the ASIC
                             market integrity rules. Licensees that are also market participants should
                             refer to the ASIC market integrity rules as relevant to them to ensure that
                             they are meeting all their obligations. For this reason, an approval of
                             compensation arrangements under s912B(2)(a) may not satisfy, or relieve a
                             market participant from, the insurance requirements under the market
                             integrity rules.

                                    Note: See Regulatory Guide 265 Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for
                                    participants of securities markets (RG 265) and Regulatory Guide 266 Guidance on
                                    ASIC market integrity rules for participants of futures markets (RG 266) for further
                                    detail on the market integrity rules that apply to domestic licensed markets.

              RG 126.16      Some other regulatory regimes also require AFS licensees to hold
                             PI insurance. For example, some superannuation trustees are obliged to hold
                             PI insurance under APRA’s registrable superannuation entity (RSE) licence
                             regime. As their existing cover has been obtained under a different regime
                             with different objectives, such licensees still need to consider whether their
                             existing cover is adequate for the purposes of the Corporations Act.



Discharge of security bonds
              RG 126.17      Under previous transitional compensation arrangements, some AFS
                             licensees were required to:
                             (a)    lodge and maintain a security bond with ASIC; or


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                     Page 7
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




                             (b)    have PI insurance under the repealed Insurance (Agents and Brokers)
                                    Act 1984.

              RG 126.18      However, provided that you have PI insurance or ASIC-approved alternative
                             arrangements in place, you may apply to ASIC to have your security bonds
                             discharged and returned: see reg 7.6.02AA(4).

                                    Note: For information on how to apply to have your security bond released, see
                                    Section F.




Disclosure to retail clients
              RG 126.19      You must disclose to retail clients the kind of compensation arrangements
                             you have in place and whether these arrangements comply with s912B: see
                             regs 7.7.03A and 7.7.06B. The disclosure must be presented as a statement
                             in your Financial Services Guide (FSG) or website disclosure information
                             and the FSG or website disclosure information of your representatives: see
                             Section G of this guide.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                     Page 8
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




B          Our general approach

                              Key points

                              Our objective in administering the compensation requirements is to reduce
                              the risk that a retail client’s losses cannot be compensated by an AFS
                              licensee because of a lack of financial resources: see RG 126.20–
                              RG 126.21.

                              However, the compensation requirements are not a mechanism for
                              providing compensation directly to consumers and are not intended to
                              cover certain losses: see RG 126.22–RG 126.24.

                              The following key principles guide our approach:
                              • ‘adequate’ means fit for achieving the policy objective (see RG 126.26–
                                RG 126.28);
                              • AFS licensees are responsible for determining what is adequate in their
                                circumstances (see RG 126.29–RG 126.32); and
                              • An element of adequacy is the type of insurance that is practically
                                available at any given time (see RG 126.33–RG 126.36).




Policy objective
              RG 126.20      When it introduced the regulations, the Australian Government described the
                             objective of the compensation requirements as:
                                  … to reduce the risk that compensation claims to retail clients cannot be
                                  met by the relevant licensees due to the lack of available financial
                                  resources.

                                  Note: See Compensation arrangements for financial services licensees: Regulation
                                  impact statement to the Corporations Amendment Regulations 2007 (No. 6), p. 7.

              RG 126.21      Our policy objective is to administer the compensation requirements to
                             maximise their potential to meet the objective in RG 126.20 set out in the
                             regulation impact statement.

              RG 126.22      In any industry, from time-to-time, clients might suffer loss due to
                             inappropriate advice or other misconduct by a service provider. Individual
                             service providers or firms might not have sufficient resources to meet claims
                             arising from these losses. In the financial services industry, there needs to be
                             a mechanism to ensure that funds are likely to be available where retail
                             clients suffer loss due to breaches by AFS licensees or their representatives
                             of their obligations under the legislation.

              RG 126.23      The compensation requirements are not a mechanism for providing
                             compensation directly to consumers. Rather, they are a means of reducing
                             the risk that an AFS licensee cannot pay claims because of insufficient
                             financial resources.

© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                 Page 9
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




              RG 126.24      The compensation requirements are not intended to cover:
                             (a)    product failure or general investment losses;
                             (b)    all possible consumer losses relating to financial services;
                             (c)    claims for loss solely as a result of the failure (e.g. through insolvency)
                                    of a product issuer (i.e. it is not intended to underwrite the products of a
                                    product issuer); or
                             (d)    a return on a financial product that has not met expectations.



Key principles
              RG 126.25      Table 2 sets out the key principles that guide our administration of the
                             compensation requirements.

                             Table 2:      Key principles

                              Principle 1: Fit to achieve the      ‘Adequate’ means the compensation
                              policy objective                     arrangements are fit for achieving the policy
                                                                   objective.

                              Principle 2: Responsibility of       It is the basic responsibility of AFS licensees
                              AFS licensee to assess               to determine what is adequate for them.

                              Principle 3: Practical               An element of adequacy is what is practically
                              availability                         available at any given time.



                             Principle 1: Fit to achieve the policy objective

              RG 126.26      PI insurance is designed to protect the insured (in this case, the AFS licensee)
                             against certain risks. It is not designed to protect consumers and is not a
                             guarantee that compensation will be paid. PI insurance is a way of
                             reinforcing a licensee’s ability to meet any consumer losses caused by
                             negligence or a breach of duty by the licensee or its representatives by making
                             funds available to the licensee under the terms of the insurance policy.
                             Consumers generally have no direct right of access to these insurance policies.

              RG 126.27      The Corporations Regulations require:
                             (a)    AFS licensees to have PI insurance that is adequate, considering certain
                                    factors of their business and potential liability; and
                             (b)    ASIC to assess applications for alternative arrangements against the
                                    same factors.

              RG 126.28      The concept of what is ‘adequate’ is an important area for our guidance. We
                             will consider whether compensation arrangements are adequate with
                             reference to the policy objective—that is, whether the compensation
                             arrangements reduce the risk that a retail client’s losses (due to breaches of



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                              Page 10
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




                             Ch 7 for which an AFS licensee is responsible) cannot be compensated by
                             the licensee due to the lack of financial resources.

                                  Note: For information on what we consider to be ‘adequate’ PI insurance—that is,
                                  cover that we consider would be fit to achieve the policy objective, given the nature of
                                  PI insurance—see Section C.


                             Principle 2: Responsibility of AFS licensee to assess

              RG 126.29      We consider that compliance with the compensation requirements is part of
                             your overall risk management processes and your obligation in s912A to
                             provide financial services ‘efficiently, honestly and fairly’.

              RG 126.30      The Corporations Regulations reflect the fact that different AFS licensees
                             will have very different businesses and risks, which will affect what
                             compensation arrangements are adequate for them. Therefore, we consider
                             that you should undertake your own analysis of what is adequate for you.

              RG 126.31      Minimum standards set by relevant industry and professional bodies might
                             provide a guide. However, compliance with these standards does not
                             necessarily mean that an AFS licensee meets the requirements under the
                             Corporations Act.

              RG 126.32      You might find it helpful to engage external consultants, actuaries, brokers
                             or advisers to undertake a risk assessment of your business and provide
                             advice on the amount and type of cover that you should obtain.


                             Principle 3: Practical availability

              RG 126.33      We consider that one of the elements of adequacy is what is practically
                             available at any given time.

              RG 126.34      The nature and extent of coverage of PI insurance is limited by what the
                             PI insurance market will provide, and the market is subject to fluctuations.
                             This can have a material impact on the scope and effectiveness of
                             PI insurance. There may be times in the future when PI insurance is also less
                             freely available (e.g. during a future ‘hard’ insurance market). These
                             limitations mean that insurance that achieves the policy objective may not
                             always be available.

              RG 126.35      Through our consultation and research we have considered and will continue
                             to consider what standard of PI insurance is currently available for AFS
                             licensees in the market.

              RG 126.36      We understand from industry feedback that there is no market for automatic
                             run-off cover. Accordingly, we do not currently require AFS licensees to
                             obtain automatic run-off cover. We will continue to monitor the availability
                             of automatic run-off cover and may reassess our position if such cover
                             becomes available.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                   Page 11
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




C          Adequate PI insurance

                              Key points

                              AFS licensees must hold PI insurance that is adequate. ‘Adequacy’
                              depends on several factors, including the amount of cover, its scope, the
                              terms and conditions, and AFS licensee resources: see RG 126.37–
                              RG 126.45.

                              You should assess what is adequate PI insurance to meet your obligations
                              under s912B. You should undertake initial and ongoing assessments,
                              noting our minimum requirements and factors to consider: see RG 126.51–
                              RG 126.53.

                              Generally, you must obtain PI insurance from insurers that meet particular
                              characteristics: see RG 126.54–RG 126.55.

                              A contract of insurance that is not labelled PI insurance but has the same
                              broad effect as PI insurance may be adequate if this is the case in
                              substance: see RG 126.56–RG 126.58.



What is ‘adequate’?
              RG 126.37      The Corporations Regulations require you to hold PI insurance that is
                             adequate, considering:
                             (a)    your liability for claims brought through the Australian Financial
                                    Complaints Authority (AFCA) scheme (see reg 7.6.02AAA(1)(a)); and

                                    Note: You should take into account ‘the maximum liability that has, realistically, some
                                    potential to arise’ in connection with any particular claim against you and all claims for
                                    which you could be found liable—see reg 7.6.02AAA(1)(a).

                             (b)    the nature of the financial services business carried on by you, including:
                                    (i)     the volume of business;
                                    (ii)    the number and kind of clients;
                                    (iii)   the kind or kinds of business; and
                                    (iv)    the number of representatives (see reg 7.6.02AAA(1)(b)).

                                    Note: The Explanatory Statement to the Corporations Amendment Regulations 2007
                                    (No. 6) explains that reg 7.6.02AAA(1)(b) should capture liability for claims brought
                                    outside an external dispute resolution scheme (e.g. through the courts).

              RG 126.38      This is not an exhaustive list of the factors that you need to take into account
                             in assessing what PI insurance is adequate in your circumstances. Certain
                             AFS licensees are also subject to specific PI insurance requirements, either
                             as a condition of their AFS licence or under the terms of an ASIC
                             instrument: see RG 126.13. These licensees must ensure that they also meet
                             these requirements on an ongoing basis.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                      Page 12
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




                             Amount of cover

              RG 126.39      To be adequate overall, a PI insurance policy must have an adequate amount
                             of cover. To be adequate, the limit of indemnity under the policy should
                             cover a reasonable estimate of retail clients’ potential losses.


                             Scope of cover

              RG 126.40      Section 912B requires that the insurance must cover loss or damage suffered
                             by retail clients due to breaches of obligations under Ch 7 by the AFS
                             licensee and its representatives. This obligation extends to all financial
                             services covered by Ch 7. Losses caused by negligent, fraudulent or
                             dishonest conduct that amounts to a breach of Ch 7 and gives rise to liability
                             to retail clients must be covered.

                                  Note: For example, an AFS licensee may have liability to retail clients under s953B,
                                  953C, 991A, 1022B, 1022C or 1041I.


                             Terms and exclusions

              RG 126.41      If exclusions in a PI insurance policy undermine the policy objective, it is
                             hard to see how the cover can be adequate. This applies especially to
                             exclusions that relate directly to the minimum scope of cover described in
                             RG 126.40.

              RG 126.42      Of special concern are exclusions that mean cover is not available for
                             breaches of obligations under Ch 7 (by an AFS licensee or its
                             representatives) for services (most often advice) that relate to moving a
                             client from products that are outside the licensee’s approved product list to
                             products that are on the licensee’s approved product list.


                             Financial resources

              RG 126.43      Financial resources are a necessary part of PI insurance and are a factor in
                             determining the adequacy of PI insurance. The Corporations Regulations
                             require AFS licensees to assess adequacy based on an estimate of claims that
                             may be made against the licensee and based on other relevant factors of their
                             business. One of these factors is whether a licensee has the financial
                             resources to make the PI insurance work in practice.

              RG 126.44      There is generally an excess on insurance policies and those insured need to
                             consider how they will cover the excess. You must assess what financial
                             resources are required (to cover the excess and gaps in cover due to various
                             exclusions) and ensure that you have such financial resources available. You
                             should be able to demonstrate to yourself, and to ASIC, if necessary that you
                             have such financial resources available.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                 Page 13
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




              RG 126.45      You must retain records of this assessment. These records should indicate
                             how the financial resources were calculated using either capital, cash flow,
                             overdraft or support from a parent company.

                                  Note: For guidance on measuring financial resources, see Regulatory Guide 166 AFS
                                  licensing: Financial requirements (RG 166).




Assessing adequacy
              RG 126.46      As discussed in RG 126.37–RG 126.49, whether a particular PI insurance
                             policy is adequate for you depends on all the facts and circumstances—
                             including the nature, scale and complexity of your business, and your other
                             financial resources. Therefore, it is up to you to determine what is adequate
                             PI insurance for you to meet your obligations under s912B and obtain such
                             insurance.

              RG 126.47      Table 3 gives guidance on the process we consider you should follow to
                             determine what is adequate PI insurance for you. However, we will not
                             ‘approve’ your PI insurance arrangements.

              RG 126.48      You should also have a process of ongoing assessment of your PI insurance
                             to ensure that it remains adequate.


                             Initial assessment

              RG 126.49      If you are applying for an AFS licence, we suggest that you use the
                             assessment process in Table 3 to determine what will be adequate
                             PI insurance for you.

Table 3:    Initial assessment process

 Step 1: Assess the           Review your business, taking into account any proposed changes to the business.
 business                     Review your claims history (if any) and risk management procedures.

 Step 2: Assess               Determine ‘the maximum liability that has, realistically, some potential to arise’: see
 potential liability          reg 7.6.02AAA(1)(a). We suggest you do this by making a reasonable estimate of
                              the following factors:
                               the maximum exposure to a single client (‘worst loss scenario’ per client);
                               the number of claims that could arise from a single event (potential for multiple
                                claims); and
                               the number of claims that might be expected during the policy period.

                              See RG 126.39 and Table 4.

 Step 3: Approach             Ask insurers or insurance brokers for a list of key policy features, exclusions and
 insurers/brokers             available extensions (based on full disclosure of your assessment in Steps 1 and 2).

                              See RG 126.54–RG 126.55 about authorised insurers.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                              Page 14
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




 Step 4: Assess amount        Consider whether the amount of cover is adequate. It should at least meet our
 of cover                     minimum requirements.
                              See RG 126.39 and Table 4.

 Step 5: Assess scope         Consider whether the scope of cover is adequate.
 of cover                     See RG 126.40 and Table 4.

 Step 6: Review policy        Review the policy features using the questions in Table 4. Identify any gaps in cover.
 terms and exclusions         See RG 126.41–RG 126.42 and Table 4.

 Step 7: Consider             Check that you have the financial resources to pay the excess on the estimated
 financial resources          number of claims and cover any gaps and legal costs (if necessary).
                              Consider how you will cover these claims and retain records of the assessment (e.g.
                              through capital, cash flow, overdraft or support from a parent company).
                              See RG 126.43–RG 126.44 and Table 4.



                             What the policy should cover

              RG 126.50      Table 4 sets out our view on the features a PI insurance policy should have
                             in order for it to be ‘adequate’. We have included what we consider are the
                             minimum requirements for these features, and some factors you should
                             consider when determining what is adequate depending on your business and
                             individual circumstances.

Table 4:    Features of adequate PI insurance

 Policy feature            Minimum requirements and factors to consider

 Amount of cover           Minimum requirement: We consider that, to be adequate, a PI insurance policy must
                           have a limit of at least $2 million for any one claim and in the aggregate for AFS
                           licensees with total revenue from financial services provided to retail clients of
                           $2 million or less.

                           For AFS licensees with total revenue from financial services provided to retail clients
                           greater than $2 million, minimum cover should be approximately equal to actual or
                           expected revenue from financial services provided to retail clients (up to a maximum
                           limit of $20 million).
                             Note 1: Revenue has the same meaning in this context as in Australian Accounting Standard
                             AASB 15 Revenue from contracts with customers and, for not-for-profit entities, Australian
                             Accounting Standard AASB 1058 Income of not-for-profit entities. You can download copies of
                             these standards from the Accounting standards page on the Australian Accounting Standards
                             Board (AASB) website.
                             Note 2: For the purposes of this minimum requirement, an AFS licensee’s revenue should be
                             calculated including the revenue any authorised representatives receive from providing
                             financial services to retail clients.

                           Revenue may be calculated based on the financial year ended before taking out the
                           insurance policy and reassessed on each policy renewal. For new AFS licensees, or if
                           a licensee believes revenue is likely to substantially change, the licensee should make
                           an estimate of expected revenue.

                           Some AFS licensees will require a higher limit of indemnity in order for the insurance
                           to be adequate. Licensees must retain records of how they determined what amount
                           was adequate for them.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                 Page 15
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




 Policy feature            Minimum requirements and factors to consider

 Amount of cover           Factors to consider:
 (continued)                Is the level of indemnity adequate to cover claims brought both inside and outside of
                             AFCA?
                                Note: The regulation prescribes AFCA membership as a key factor in assessing the
                                adequacy of PI insurance arrangements. However, an estimate of claims under AFCA
                                might not always provide an accurate guide to an AFS licensee’s potential liability, as
                                claims could be brought outside AFCA, such as through the courts.
                            Does the policy cover claims made by wholesale clients or claims that fall outside
                             the scope of s912B? If so, this might reduce the amount of cover available for
                             claims that fall within s912B and AFS licensees might need to increase the amount
                             of cover accordingly.
                            Does the business carry a higher risk of claims (e.g. does it give advice on higher
                             risk products) or is it exposed to a higher volume of claims and therefore requires a
                             larger amount of PI insurance?
                            Have weaknesses been identified in your compliance systems, such as a high
                             number of claims or high-risk products/practices, which might mean a higher level of
                             cover is required?

 Scope of cover            Minimum requirement: The policy must indemnify the AFS licensee against liability
                           for loss or damage suffered by retail clients because of breaches of Ch 7 by the
                           licensee or its representatives. This includes liability:
                            for fraud or dishonesty by officers, employees and other representatives of the
                             licensee (but fraud cover is not required for sole traders or for companies that have
                             one director who is also the company’s only financial adviser or representative, and
                             the company’s only shareholder and employee); and
                            under AFCA awards.
                             Note 1: The policy need not explicitly refer to ‘breaches of Ch 7’ or ‘AFCA awards’. However,
                             the policy must have the effect of providing cover for breaches of the relevant obligations
                             under Ch 7 and AFCA awards.
                             Note 2: The policy must be a contract of PI insurance. This means it must cover negligence,
                             fraud and other misconduct (relating to retail clients) ordinarily covered by a contract of PI
                             insurance.

 Exclusions                Minimum requirement: The policy must not have the effect of excluding:
                            AFCA scheme awards;
                            loss caused by the conduct of representatives generally;
                            fraud and dishonesty by officers, employees and other representatives (but fraud
                             cover is not required for sole traders or for companies that have one director who is
                             also the company’s only financial adviser or representative, and the company’s only
                             shareholder and employee);
                            claims for misrepresentations about services;
                            claims arising from incidents that have been notified to ASIC (e.g. through a
                             reportable situation transaction) on the basis that, by merely making the notification,
                             the AFS licensee has admitted liability and as a result the insurance policy will not
                             cover the claim); or
                            awards by state boards and specialist tribunals for claims against trustee
                             companies (as defined in s601RAB) in relation to their role as guardians and
                             administrators of estates.
                                Note 1: A policy may include a term prohibiting the AFS licensee from admitting liability for
                                any claim, loss or demand provided that it does not prevent the licensee from notifying
                                ASIC of the reportable situation as required under s912DAA.
                                Note 2: Under reg 5D.1.04, trustee companies remain subject to relevant state and territory
                                laws on matters relating to their role as guardians and administrators of estates.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                      Page 16
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




 Policy feature            Minimum requirements and factors to consider

 Persons covered           Minimum requirement: The policy must cover the acts of the AFS licensee and all of
                           its representatives (either under the policy or separately covered by a policy under
                           which the licensee has a right of indemnity).
                                Note 1: AFS licensees need to take into account all of their representatives (i.e. not just
                                authorised representatives) when considering the type and extent of cover that will be
                                adequate. A client will generally have the same remedies against the licensee as it has
                                against its representatives.
                                Note 2: The AFS licensee’s policy does not need to indemnify the licensee for acts of
                                its representatives if such acts are adequately covered by the representatives’ own
                                PI insurance and the licensee has a contractual right to be indemnified by its
                                representatives.

                           Factors to consider:
                            Are there many representatives and are they geographically dispersed? If so, the
                             limit of indemnity might need to be higher to manage this risk.
                                Note: In our experience, the greater the number of representatives that are working for an
                                AFS licensee, and the more geographically dispersed they are, the greater the potential for
                                client losses to occur. The number and distribution of representatives might affect the
                                licensee’s ability to adequately supervise its representatives, and a licensee with a greater
                                number of representatives is likely to provide services to a greater number of clients.

 Automatic                 Minimum requirement: The policy must include at least one automatic
 reinstatements            reinstatement.
                                Note 1: Automatic reinstatement means that if the limit of the policy is exhausted before
                                the end of the policy period, the limit of indemnity is reinstated for the balance of the period
                                to cover any new claims that might arise. This is important, as AFS licensees must ensure
                                their PI insurance is adequate at all times.
                                Note 2: Automatic reinstatement is not necessary where the limit is at least twice the
                                minimum amount of cover referred to in the ‘Amount of cover’ policy feature above.

 Excess/deductibles        Factors to consider:
                            Is the excess at a level that the business can confidently sustain as an uninsured
                             loss, taking into account the AFS licensee’s financial resources?
                                Note 1: A business with a lower cash flow available to meet claims might require a larger
                                amount of cover and/or cover with a lower excess. If there is a limited asset base available
                                to meet claims, a policy with a lower excess might be preferable. We understand that
                                currently available PI insurance policies generally have an excess. We consider that
                                whether an AFS licensee has sufficient cash flow to meet the excess for a reasonable
                                estimate of claims is a relevant consideration in determining whether a PI insurance policy
                                is adequate for that licensee.
                                Note 2: If a PI insurance policy has a significant excess or deductible in proportion to the
                                limit of indemnity, it may not be adequate. However, if the AFS licensee can demonstrate
                                that for other reasons (e.g. other financial resources, systems and controls in place) that
                                their arrangements are adequate overall, they may wish to apply to have this kind of
                                arrangement considered as an alternative arrangement.

 Legal costs               Minimum requirement: Defence costs must be ‘in addition’ to the minimum limit or
                           the level of cover must be sufficiently increased to take into account these costs.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                         Page 17
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




 Policy feature            Minimum requirements and factors to consider

 AFCA scheme               Minimum requirement: The policy must cover AFCA scheme awards.
 awards
                           Factors to consider:
                            Does the policy cover agreed decisions reached through the AFCA conciliation
                             process? (If not, you will be effectively self-insuring to cover any conciliated
                             agreements through the AFCA scheme.)
                            Do lower sub-limits apply to AFCA awards and how are claims aggregated for the
                             purpose of these limits? Again, you will be effectively self-insuring to cover claims
                             outside these limits.
                                 Note: A policy will not be inadequate merely because it contains a lower sub-limit on the
                                 amount that can be claimed as a result of an AFCA award.

 Fraud/dishonesty/         Minimum requirement: The policy must cover fraud/dishonesty/infidelity by officers,
 infidelity                employees and other representatives of the AFS licensee (but fraud cover is not
                           required for sole traders or for companies that have one director who is also the
                           company’s only financial adviser or representative, and the company’s only
                           shareholder and employee).

 Approved product          Minimum requirement: The policy must be able to cover legitimate switching cases
 list                      where a client is being switched from a fund or product that is not on an approved
                           product list to another fund or product that is on an approved product list.
                           Factors to consider:
                            AFS licensees should review the product list on a regular basis and inform the
                             insurer if there are other products that should be included on the product list.
                            ASIC considers that this is a key area of potential retail client loss and encourages
                             AFS licensees to endeavour to get cover generally for exposure to claims arising
                             from moving a client from a product that is not on an approved product list to a
                             product that is on an approved product list as part of their overall risk management
                             strategy.

 Retroactive cover         Minimum requirement: If the AFS licensee had an immediately previous
                           PI insurance policy, the policy must provide retroactive cover to the earlier of:
                            the retroactive date specified in the immediately previous PI insurance policy; or
                            the commencement date of the first PI insurance policy in the series of continuous
                             policies.

 ‘Run-off’ cover           Not required: For the avoidance of doubt, the policy is not required to include
                           automatic run-off cover as it is not currently available in the market. We will continue
                           to monitor the availability of automatic run-off cover and may reassess our position
                           should automatic run-off cover become available.



                             Ongoing assessment

              RG 126.51      We expect you to review your PI insurance or other compensation
                             arrangements at least annually to ensure that they continue to be adequate
                             (e.g. when your existing policy is due for renewal). We also expect you to
                             review the adequacy of your compensation arrangements in light of any
                             major changes in your business (e.g. if you start providing new services or
                             products or engage more representatives).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                     Page 18
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




              RG 126.52      From time to time, we may ask you to provide a copy of your PI insurance
                             policy or a certificate of currency and other information relating to your
                             compensation arrangements. For example, we may ask for these documents
                             when conducting a compliance review.

                             Compliance controls

              RG 126.53      We expect you to ensure that a senior officer or manager is accountable for
                             ensuring that your PI insurance policy is renewed when required, that
                             premiums are paid on time and that your policy or other compensation
                             arrangements continue to be adequate. You will need to make provision in
                             your internal dispute resolution systems for ensuring that claims that are
                             brought to your attention are promptly notified to insurers.



Which entities can provide the cover?
              RG 126.54      Generally, the cover needs to be obtained from an insurer regulated by
                             APRA or operating under an exemption under the Insurance Act 1973.

              RG 126.55      Under the Financial Sector Legislation Amendment (Discretionary Mutual
                             Funds and Direct Offshore Foreign Insurers) Act 2007, all direct offshore
                             foreign insurers must be authorised under the Insurance Act 1973, unless
                             they can rely on an exemption. You can obtain PI insurance provided by an
                             APRA-regulated direct offshore foreign insurer. However, not all direct
                             offshore foreign insurers are regulated by APRA.



Distinction between PI insurance and alternative arrangements
              RG 126.56      If a contract of insurance is not labelled ‘PI insurance’ specifically but has
                             the same broad effect as PI insurance, we will consider whether the cover
                             provided is adequate in substance to meet the policy objective.

              RG 126.57      For example, you may consider that the following arrangements fall within
                             the category of PI insurance:
                             (a)    some types of trustee liability insurance held by superannuation
                                    trustees;
                             (b)    group insurance, where a small number of associated AFS licensees are
                                    covered by one policy; and

                                    Note: You will still need to consider whether the insurance is adequate for each
                                    individual AFS licensee. For example, the limit of indemnity will need to be
                                    appropriately higher. A minimum cover of $2 million would be insufficient.

                             (c)    a PI insurance policy provided under a group master scheme.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                       Page 19
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




              RG 126.58      Because the Corporations Regulations require AFS licensees to obtain a
                             contract of PI insurance, membership of a discretionary mutual fund would
                             not satisfy the requirements. If you believe that membership of a
                             discretionary mutual fund would provide no less protection than adequate
                             PI insurance, you can submit an application for approval of this membership
                             as an alternative arrangement: see Section D.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                        Page 20
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




D          Alternative arrangements

                              Key points

                              You can apply to ASIC for approval of alternative compensation
                              arrangements under s912B(2)(b): see RG 126.59–RG 126.62.

                              We will assess applications for approval of alternative arrangements on a
                              case-by-case basis: see RG 126.63–RG 126.67.

                              Existing compensation arrangements must remain in place while new
                              alternative arrangements are assessed: see RG 126.68.




How to apply for approval
              RG 126.59      You will need to submit an application to ASIC if you are an existing AFS
                             licensee and you wish to apply for approval of alternative arrangements. If
                             you are a new AFS licensee, you can apply for approval (if you choose to do
                             so) as part of your licence application process.

              RG 126.60      Your application to ASIC for approval of alternative arrangements should
                             address the following issues:
                             (a)    which AFS licensees will be covered by the arrangements (e.g. Do the
                                    arrangements cover a group of related licensees or an industry sector?);
                             (b)    how the arrangements meet the criteria for assessing adequate
                                    PI insurance under the Corporations Regulations (see Section C);
                             (c)    any benefits, risks or costs to retail clients arising from the licensees
                                    using these arrangements as opposed to PI insurance; and
                             (d)    any circumstances particular to the licensee or the industry sector that
                                    make these arrangements more appropriate than PI insurance.

              RG 126.61      We will generally ask for an expert report (e.g. actuarial report) to be
                             submitted with the application to assess whether the arrangements give no
                             less protection than PI insurance.

              RG 126.62      You should make and submit your application for an approval of alternative
                             arrangements through the ASIC Regulatory Portal using the transaction titled
                             ‘Apply for an ASIC approval, consent, statement, nomination, or other’. You
                             will need to pay fees for your application. We have provided details about
                             payment options in the portal. For more information, see how to apply for
                             relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                          Page 21
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




How we will assess applications
              RG 126.63      We will assess each application on its merits. We will give priority to group
                             applications (e.g. for an industry sector or sub-sector).

              RG 126.64      We will only approve arrangements that give no less protection than
                             adequate PI insurance. We recognise that some alternative arrangements
                             may in fact provide more protection than PI insurance.

              RG 126.65      Under s912B(3), we are required to consider:
                             (a)    the nature of the financial services covered; and
                             (b)    whether the arrangements provide cover after the AFS licensee ceases
                                    the business and, if so, for how long.

              RG 126.66      In approving alternative arrangements, we must take into account the factors
                             used to assess adequacy of PI insurance in reg 7.6.02AAA(1). This means
                             that any alternative arrangements must also be adequate considering:
                             (a)    the AFS licensee’s membership of AFCA, taking into account the
                                    maximum liability that has, realistically, some potential to arise;
                             (b)    the volume of business;
                             (c)    the number and kind of clients;
                             (d)    the kind or kinds of business; and
                             (e)    the number of representatives.

              RG 126.67      An important feature of PI insurance is that it is provided by a third party,
                             which offers some security that the arrangements will be enforceable in the
                             event of fraud by agents or officers of the AFS licensee. Therefore, one
                             factor that we will consider in assessing alternative arrangements is the
                             degree to which the arrangements are provided on arm’s length terms.


                              Example: Industry compensation fund

                              Alternative arrangements proposed by an industry body may be approved
                              by ASIC. For example, an industry body’s members might wish to set up a
                              compensation fund supported by compulsory levies of members.

                              This could be in addition to PI insurance (i.e. to compensate clients where
                              a member’s insurance is inadequate or they cease trading or become
                              insolvent) or instead of PI insurance. Approval of a fund would depend on
                              the amount of compensation that would be available for clients and the
                              circumstances in which the fund would compensate clients.

                              We encourage industry bodies to consider whether an alternative
                              arrangement is appropriate for their members and we are keen to discuss
                              any such arrangements further with them.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                          Page 22
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




Compensation arrangements during the assessment process
              RG 126.68      Assessing and approving applications for alternative arrangements will take
                             time. If you are applying for approval of alternative arrangements, you
                             should:
                             (a)    continue to hold any PI insurance you have previously obtained; or
                             (b)    keep in place any other ASIC-approved alternative arrangements you
                                    have previously implemented.



Discharge of security bonds
              RG 126.69      If you have alternative arrangements approved by ASIC, you can apply for
                             release of any existing security bonds: see RG 126.79–RG 126.81.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                          Page 23
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




E          Exemptions

                              Key points

                              Certain AFS licensees that are APRA-regulated are exempt from the
                              compensation requirements under the Corporations Regulations: see
                              RG 126.70.

                              AFS licensees that are related to APRA-regulated entities are also exempt
                              if they have a guarantee from the APRA-regulated entity and the guarantee
                              has been approved by ASIC: see RG 126.71–RG 126.74.

                              ASIC has a discretion to discharge security bonds submitted to ASIC by
                              AFS licensees that are exempt from the compensation requirements: see
                              RG 126.75–RG 126.76.




AFS licensees that are exempt under reg 7.6.02AAA(1)
              RG 126.70      The Corporations Regulations provide that certain AFS licensees are exempt
                             from the compensation requirements: see reg 7.6.02AAA(1). This applies to
                             general insurance companies, life insurance companies and authorised
                             deposit-taking institutions regulated by APRA as defined in
                             reg 7.6.02AAA(3).



Related AFS licensees
              RG 126.71      AFS licensees that are related to the APRA-regulated entities in RG 126.70
                             are also exempt where they have a guarantee from the APRA-regulated
                             entity that has been approved by ASIC: see reg 7.6.02AAA(3).

              RG 126.72      If you wish to apply for approval of a guarantee, you will need to submit an
                             application to ASIC. In deciding whether to approve a guarantee, we will
                             consider the same factors as outlined in Section C for adequate PI insurance.

              RG 126.73      We understand that APRA-regulated entities are permitted to give
                             guarantees that are limited in time and amount and we have no in-principle
                             objection to such limits in guarantees put to ASIC for approval (assuming, of
                             course, that the limits are appropriate).

              RG 126.74      You should make and submit your application for an approval of a guarantee
                             through the ASIC Regulatory Portal using the transaction titled ‘Apply for
                             an ASIC approval, consent, statement, nomination, or other’. You will need
                             to pay fees for your application. We have provided details about payment
                             options in the portal. For more information, see how to apply for relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                        Page 24
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




Discharge of security bonds
              RG 126.75      We have the discretion to discharge security bonds submitted to ASIC by
                             AFS licensees that are exempt under reg 7.6.02AAA(1) (i.e. general
                             insurance companies, life insurance companies and authorised deposit-taking
                             institutions regulated by APRA). These licensees do not need to apply to
                             ASIC for the release of any existing security bonds.

              RG 126.76      Related AFS licensees with a guarantee that has been approved by
                             ASIC must apply for release of any existing security bonds: see RG 126.79–
                             RG 126.81.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                        Page 25
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




F          Discharge of security bonds

                              Key points

                              Some AFS licensees were required to lodge and maintain a security bond
                              with ASIC: see RG 126.77–RG 126.78.

                              If these AFS licensees have PI insurance or an ASIC-approved alternative
                              arrangement in place, they may apply to have their security bonds released:
                              see RG 126.79–RG 126.81.




Security bonds
              RG 126.77      Under previous transitional compensation arrangements, some AFS
                             licensees were required to:
                             (a)    lodge and maintain a security bond with ASIC; or
                             (b)    have PI insurance under the repealed Insurance (Agents and Brokers)
                                    Act 1984: see reg 7.6.02AA and PF 209.

              RG 126.78      However, if you have PI insurance or ASIC-approved alternative
                             arrangements in place, you may apply to ASIC to have your security bonds
                             discharged and returned: reg 7.6.02AA(4).



How to apply to have your security bond released
              RG 126.79      To have a security bond released, you should:
                             (a)    publish a notice in a daily newspaper of general circulation in Australia,
                                    following the wording of Form 702 Application for discharge of security
                                    but replacing, in point 1, the words ‘dealers and investment advisers
                                    licence’ with the words ‘Australian financial services licence’; and
                             (b)    three months after publication, lodge with ASIC:
                                    (i)     a copy of Form FS20 Change of details for an Australian financial
                                            services licence (see the guide attached to the form for the current
                                            fee and lodgement address);
                                    (ii)    an original or photocopy of the newspaper advertisement, clearly
                                            showing the date of publication; and
                                    (iii)   a statement that, to the best of your knowledge, no person has, or is
                                            likely to have, a claim against you for pecuniary loss due to your
                                            failure, or the failure of your agents or employees, to carry on
                                            business under the AFS licence adequately or properly, and that
                                            compensation arrangements are in place that are adequate to cover
                                            claims to which the security bond could otherwise apply.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                          Page 26
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




              RG 126.80      We will release the security bond three months after publication of the
                             notice, if there have not been any claims made against it.

              RG 126.81      In making the statement described in RG 126.79(b)(iii), you can take into
                             account your own financial resources (e.g. if you cannot obtain retroactive
                             insurance for potential claims against the security bond).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                        Page 27
                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




G          Disclosure to retail clients

                              Key points

                              You and your representatives must disclose to retail clients about the kind
                              of compensation arrangements you have in place and whether these
                              arrangements comply with s912B: see RG 126.82–RG 126.87.

                              We may take action if we believe that disclosure about compensation
                              arrangements is misleading: see RG 126.88.




What to disclose

                             AFS licensees with PI insurance

              RG 126.82      If you have PI insurance, you and your representatives must:
                             (a)    disclose that you have PI insurance in place; and
                             (b)    explain whether the insurance will cover claims in relation to the
                                    conduct of representatives and/or employees who no longer work for
                                    you (but who did at the time of the relevant conduct)—see regs 7.7.03A
                                    and 7.7.06B.


                             AFS licensees with alternative arrangements

              RG 126.83      If you are an AFS licensee with alternative arrangements, you and your
                             representatives must:
                             (a)    disclose that you have alternative arrangements to PI insurance that are
                                    approved by ASIC; and
                             (b)    explain whether the alternative arrangements will cover claims made in
                                    relation to the conduct of representatives/employees who no longer
                                    work for you (but who did at the time of the relevant conduct)—see
                                    regs 7.7.03A and 7.7.06B.


                             Licensees that are exempt

              RG 126.84      The Explanatory Statement to the Corporations Amendment Regulations
                             2007 (No. 6) suggests that, to provide clarity, exempt and related AFS
                             licensees might also wish to provide appropriate disclosure about their
                             compensation arrangements in their FSGs (p 5).

              RG 126.85      You should disclose that you are exempt from the requirement if you
                             are regulated by APRA or have an ASIC-approved guarantee from the
                             APRA-regulated entity.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                          Page 28
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




How to disclose
              RG 126.86      You must make your disclosure in your FSG. You should include in your
                             FSG and the FSG of your representatives a statement about the kind of
                             compensation arrangements you have in place and whether these
                             arrangements comply with s912B.

              RG 126.87      When providing financial product advice to a retail client, or dealing in a
                             financial product for the purpose of implementing that advice, you or your
                             representative may choose to fulfil the FSG obligation by providing website
                             disclosure information: see Div 2A of Pt 7.7 and section 8 of ASIC
                             Corporations (Financial Services Guide, General Advice Warning and
                             Advertising Related Relief) Instrument 2025/234.

                                  Note: Further information about FSG disclosure to retail clients is set out in Information
                                  Sheet 291 FAQs: FSGs and website disclosure information (INFO 291).




Action against misleading disclosure
              RG 126.88      We may take action if we believe that disclosure about compensation
                             arrangements is misleading. Disclosing that PI insurance is in place (or
                             alternative arrangements to PI insurance that are approved by ASIC) is
                             unlikely to be misleading if true. However, references made to
                             ‘compensation’ or ‘adequate insurance’ may be misleading to consumers
                             unless there is a full explanation of what those terms mean and any
                             limitations that relate to them (e.g. the limitations are set out at RG 126.34–
                             RG 126.36). You should be careful if you choose to refer to these terms.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                   Page 29
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




Key terms


                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              AASB 15 (for              An accounting standard issued by the Australian
                              example)                  Accounting Standards Board (in this example numbered
                                                        15)

                              AFCA                      Australian Financial Complaints Authority—the external
                                                        dispute resolution scheme for which an authorisation
                                                        under Pt 7.10A of the Corporations Act is in force

                              AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                        the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                        on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                        services
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9.

                              AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                        Corporations Act

                              APRA                      Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

                              ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                              automatic                 If the limit of the policy is exhausted before the end of the
                              reinstatement             policy period, on payment of a new premium by the
                                                        insured, the limit of indemnity is reinstated for the balance
                                                        of the period to cover any new claims that may arise. The
                                                        number of automatic reinstatements refers to the number
                                                        of times the limit of indemnity may be reinstated

                              CCIV                      A corporate collective investment vehicle—a company
                                                        that is registered as a corporate collective investment
                                                        vehicle under the Corporations Act
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9.

                              Ch 7 (for example)        A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                        numbered 7), unless otherwise specified

                              compensation              The requirements in s912B of the Corporations Act and
                              requirements              reg 7.6.02AAA of the Corporations Regulations

                              corporate director        The company named in ASIC’s record of a CCIV’s
                                                        registration as the corporate director or temporary
                                                        corporate director of the CCIV
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s1224(3) of the Corporations Act.

                              Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                        purposes of that Act

                              Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                              Regulations




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                    Page 30
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              deductible or excess      The first part of a loss, which is borne by the insured. The
                                                        insured is responsible for the loss up to the deductible
                                                        amount and the insurer pays the remainder of the loss,
                                                        up to the policy limit

                              exclusion                 A provision of an insurance policy that precludes
                                                        coverage in particular circumstances

                              financial product         Generally, a facility through which, or through the
                                                        acquisition of which, a person does one or more of the
                                                        following:
                                                         makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                         manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                         makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                          Note: See Div 3 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                          definition. In addition to the general categories above, this
                                                          specifies certain things as being included or excluded from the
                                                          definition.

                              financial service         Has the meaning given in Div 4 of Pt 7.1 of the
                                                        Corporations Act

                              FSG                       A Financial Services Guide—a document required by
                                                        s941A or 941B to be given in accordance with Div 2 of
                                                        Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9.

                              market integrity rules    Rules made by ASIC, under s798G of the Corporations
                                                        Act, for trading on domestic licensed markets

                              market participant        A participant of a financial market
                                                          Note: Participant has the meaning given by s767A(4) and (5)
                                                          of the Corporations Act

                              PI insurance              Professional indemnity insurance—liability insurance that
                                                        covers loss arising from an error, omission or negligent
                                                        act occurring in conduct of the holder’s professional
                                                        business

                              policy objective          As defined in RG 126.6

                              product list              A list of products, agreed between the insurer and the
                                                        insured and covered by the policy, for which the licensee
                                                        and its representatives provide financial services

                              reg 7.6.02AA (for         A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                              example)                  example numbered 7.6.02AA), unless otherwise specified

                              registered scheme         A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                        s601EB of the Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                  Page 31
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              representative            Means:
                                                         an authorised representative of the AFS licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of the AFS licensee;
                                                         an employee or director of a related body corporate of
                                                          the AFS licensee; or
                                                         any other person acting on behalf of the AFS licensee
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s9 of the Corporations Act.

                              responsible entity        A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined in
                                                        s9 of the Corporations Act

                              retail client             A client as defined under s761G and 761GA of the
                                                        Corporations Act and Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations
                                                        Regulations

                              retroactive cover         Where a ‘claims made’ policy extends cover into the past
                                                        to cover a period of time before the policy was obtained
                                                        (up to the retroactive date)

                              retroactive date          A date in a ‘claims made’ policy on or after which acts or
                                                        omissions are covered

                              revenue                   As defined in AASB 15 or, for a not-for-profit entity,
                                                        AASB 1058

                              RG 166 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered
                                                        166)

                              run-off cover             Cover for claims made after the insurance policy has
                                                        ended that have arisen from the acts or omissions of the
                                                        insured during the period of insurance. The cover
                                                        is negotiated upfront at the commencement of the
                                                        PI insurance policy, rather than separately

                              s912B (for example)       A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                        numbered 912B), unless otherwise specified

                              website disclosure        The statements and information on the website of an AFS
                              information               licensee or authorised representative that would be
                                                        required to be in an FSG given by that licensee or
                                                        representative
                                                          Note: This is a definition in s943J of the Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                                      Page 32
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             adequate professional indemnity insurance, AFCA, AFS licence, AFS
                             licensee, alternative arrangements, authorised insurer, compensation
                             arrangements, direct offshore foreign insurer, duty to act efficiently,
                             honestly and fairly, financial services, Financial Services Guide (FSG), PI
                             insurance, retail clients, representatives, risk management, security bond


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 148 Platforms that are managed investment schemes and nominee and
                             custody services

                             RG 166 AFS licensing: Financial requirements

                             RG 179 Managed discretionary accounts

                             RG 210 Compensation and insurance arrangements for credit licensees

                             RG 265 Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for participants of
                             securities markets

                             RG 266 Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for participants of futures
                             markets


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 291 FAQs: FSGs and website disclosure information


                             Legislative instruments and pro formas

                             ASIC Corporations (Financial Services Guide, General Advice Warning and
                             Advertising Related Relief) Instrument 2025/234

                             ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services) Instrument
                             2023/669

                             PF 209 Australian financial services licence conditions


                             Legislation

                             Compensation arrangements for financial services licensees: Regulation
                             impact statement to the Corporations Amendment Regulations 2007 (No. 6)

                             Corporations Act 2001, Ch 7; Pt 7.7 Div 2A; s601RAB, 912A, 912B,
                             912DAA, 953B, 953C, 991A, 1022B, 1022C, 1041I


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                        Page 33
                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 126: Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensees




                             Corporations Regulations 2001, regs 5D.1.04, 7.6.02AA, 7.6.02AAA(3),
                             7.6.02AAA(1), 7.7.03A, 7.7.06B

                             Explanatory Statement to the Corporations Amendment Regulations 2007
                             (No. 6)

                             Financial Sector Legislation Amendment (Discretionary Mutual Funds and
                             Direct Offshore Foreign Insurers) Act 2007

                             Insurance Act 1973

                             Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Act 1984 (repealed)


                             ASIC forms

                             Form 702 Application for discharge of security

                             Form FS20 Change of details for an Australian financial services licence


                             Other documents

                             AASB 15 Revenue from contracts with customers

                             AASB 1058 Income of not-for-profit entities

                                  Note: You can download copies of these standards from the AASB Standards Portal on
                                  the AASB website.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2024                                             Page 34
