Note: From 27 July      REGULATORY GUIDE 102
2020, applications
for relief should be
submitted through
the ASIC Regulatory     Tender offers by vendor
Portal. For more
information, see how    shareholders
you apply for relief.   Chapter 6 — Acquisition of shares
                        Issued 2/10/1995

                        From 5 July 2007, this document may be referred to as Regulatory
                        Guide 102 (RG 102) or Policy Statement 102 (PS 102). Paragraphs in
                        this document may be referred to by their regulatory guide number
                        (e.g. RG 102.1) or their policy statement number (e.g. PS 102.1).


                        Headnotes
                        Sections 615(1), 615(4), 622A, 641, 648, 665, 666, 697, 698, 708, 728,
                        730, 732, 746, 1043, 1078; acquisition; controlling parcel;
                        subsequent takeover; substantial shareholding; tender process; relief
                        for prospective and successful tenderers.




                                      © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                                              Page 1
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




               Contents
               Purpose...................................................................................2
               Small parcels..........................................................................3
               Tender formats.......................................................................4
               Vendors...................................................................................5
               Joint vendors .........................................................................7
               Escalation clauses.................................................................8
               The successful tenderer .......................................................9
               Section 701 — compulsory acquisition...............................11
               Role of target board...............................................................12
               Section 698 — benefits to offerees......................................12
               Price-sensitive information...................................................13
               Disclosure to the market.......................................................14
               Tender by agreement to sell into bid...................................14
               Regional office to oversee tender process .........................14
               Consultation ...........................................................................16
               Summary.................................................................................16
               Enforcement and surveillance .............................................17
               Applications ...........................................................................17


Purpose
RG 102.1       This guide indicates the circumstances in which the
ASC will exercise its discretionary powers in order to facilitate the
sale of shares by tender where at least 20% of a company’s shares are
being offered for sale. It also sets out the procedures the ASC will
require of any shareholders seeking to sell their shares in this manner.

RG 102.2       Single shareholders, or groups of shareholders, who
believe that the value of their shares would be enhanced if sold in a
single large parcel, may seek to sell their shares by way of tender.

RG 102.3       Although the legislation does not prohibit shareholders
from offering a parcel of shares for sale by tender, offering more than
20% of the voting shares in a company will contravene some
provisions of the Corporations Law (Law) unless relief is granted by
the ASC.

RG 102.4       In a successful tender process under this guide, by the
time a full takeover is made for all shares in the target company, it is
likely that control of the company will have passed to the successful
tenderer. Therefore, control of the target company is not determined
by a public auction in a successful takeover, but by the auction
conducted in the tender process. Accordingly, the ASC will not grant

               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                       Page 2
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




relief unless it is convinced that the tender process has been a serious
test of the market.

RG 102.5      However, in noting that control of the company may
pass before the takeover bid is made, two things must be borne in
mind. The first is that minority shareholders quickly receive an
opportunity to accept the same price for their shares as received by the
persons who initiated the tender (the vendor).

RG 102.6         The second is that self-interest of the vendor, in
extracting the highest possible price for its control parcel, works in the
interests of the minority shareholders. The vendor is likely to be able
to extract a control premium because of the size of its parcel and its
better knowledge of the target which it can use in selling its shares.
The vendor is likely to have added information or insight into the
target because of its controlling position in the target company. As
well, it is likely to be a professional investor who has specialised
resources to monitor its large investments.

RG 102.7      If control of the company passes at too low a price,
nothing prevents a further offeror making a rival bid at a higher price.
This may induce the successful tenderer to sell its recently acquired
parcel or induce the successful tenderer to increase its bid to achieve
compulsory acquisition of the target.

RG 102.8        The policy of Chapter 6 of the Law is not to maximise
the price received by minority shareholders. It is to promote
information efficiency and ensure that all shareholders in a company,
as far as practicable, receive equal opportunity to share in the benefits
which accrue to shareholders under any proposal under which a
person would acquire a substantial interest in the company. Therefore,
although the ASC’s policy will facilitate the vendor achieving the
highest price for itself and for minority shareholders, it is not
specifically designed or structured to maximise the sale price. The
ASC’s policy is designed to ensure equal opportunities for all
shareholders while facilitating the sale by the major shareholder(s) of
their shares.


Small parcels
RG 102.9      This guide may be applied to parcels other than a clearly
controlling parcel of shares in the target company. For example, the
target may have a diffused register and the largest parcel of shares in
the target company may be 25%. Alternatively, there may be more
than one parcel of more than 20% in the target and the smaller one is
sought to be sold by tender.

               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                       Page 3
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




RG 102.10 In these cases control may not necessarily pass with the
sale of the parcel. However, the ASC will provide relief under the
terms of this guide to allow these parcels to be sold by tender.

RG 102.11 Where the parcel is only slightly greater than 20%, the
premium payable for the parcel as a whole may not be sufficiently
great to warrant the costs and delay of the tender process and
subsequent takeover. The ASC expects this guide will be used mainly
for parcels significantly greater than 20%.


Tender formats
RG 102.12      A tender offer will usually take the following form:

(a) a decision will be taken by a person to offer (or by a group of
    persons to offer jointly) a parcel of shares for sale by way of
    tender;
(b) an invitation to tender will be advertised;
(c) prospective tenderers may be allowed access to information on
    the target company, by the vendor or the company;
(d) tenderers will prepare and submit their offers;
(e) tenders will be received by the vendors and the successful
    tenderer notified; and
(f) the successful tenderer will make a takeover offer (Part A or Part
    C) for the remaining shares in the company.
RG 102.13 Alternatively, the vendor may not sell its parcel of
shares immediately to the successful tenderer. Instead, the vendor may
enter into an agreement with the successful tenderer that the tenderer
will make a takeover offer for all the shares in the target company, and
that the vendor, in its turn, will accept the tenderer’s takeover offer for
all of its shares.

RG 102.14 Both processes involve three groups of participants: the
vendors; the prospective tenderers; and the successful tenderer. They
will involve a fourth group if the board of the target, once the
company is “in play”, wishes to be involved to maximise the price
offered to the minority shareholders. If this alternative is adopted, the
target board will definitely be involved in the takeover but not
necessarily in the tender process. The responsibilities of each of these
three groups are considered in turn.

RG 102.15 The ASC considers that sale of the tender parcel into a
takeover bid is preferable to the process of purchase followed by a

               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                       Page 4
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




takeover bid for the remaining shares. Its reasons for this view
include:

(a) all shareholders are likely to receive their consideration at the
    same time;
(b) all shareholders’ contracts (including the vendor’s) are subject to
    the same conditions (such as prescribed occurrences); and
(c) the process is arguably more transparent to the market.
RG 102.16 A purchase followed by a takeover bid for the
remaining shares may require closer scrutiny to ensure equality of
treatment between all shareholders in the target company.


Vendors

Prospectus provisions: Secondary sale of shares

Quoted shares
RG 102.17 Following the Corporate Law Reform Act 1994, a
prospectus is not required to offer quoted shares for secondary sale.
This is providing that the shares were not issued to the vendor for the
purpose of on-sale, in which case s1030 applies.

Unquoted shares
RG 102.18 The provisions of Div 3A of Pt 7.12 regulate the
disclosure required for advertising and secondary sale of unquoted
securities. They do not apply to excluded offers (s66(3), s1043A and
reg 7.12.06), nor to securities issued for the purpose of on-sale.

RG 102.19 The vendor must lodge a notice which conforms with
either s1043C (if the tender parcel is 30% or more of the voting
shares, or a class of voting shares, in the company) or s1043D (if it is
less than 30%). A notice under s1043C will closely resemble a
prospectus in information content (reg 7.12.08B). A notice under
s1043D need only contain the information prescribed (reg 7.12.08C).

RG 102.20 The vendor must attach a copy of the relevant notice to
any document it issues containing the offer of the tender shares.




               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                       Page 5
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




Advertising
RG 102.21 The vendor may broadcast or publish an advertisement
offering the tender shares for sale. However, an advertisement
offering unquoted shares must state that the vendor will provide a
copy of the relevant notice free of charge to anyone who asks for it.
Any advertisement must not be false or misleading.

Relationship between advertising and sharehawking
RG 102.22      However, if:

(a) the offers do not meet any of the exceptions in s1077A or s1078
    (eg, the shares are unlisted, they are not exempt securities and the
    minimum parcel which may be purchased is less than $500,000);
    and
(b) they are sent by post, telephone or other eligible communication
    service,
the vendors may breach s1078(1). The ASC, pursuant to its powers
under s1084, will consider applications to modify s1078(1) to allow
the advertising, on condition that the notices do not contain false or
misleading matter.


Sharehawking
RG 102.23 Section 1078(1) prohibits a person going from place to
place offering shares for sale. This includes sending written offers.
There is no test of offering to the public.

RG 102.24 There are various exceptions to the prohibition in
s1078(1): see s66(3), s69A, s1077A, s1078(3A), s1078(4), reg 7.12.06
and reg 7.12.17. These apply if, inter alia:

(a) the minimum purchase amount is more than $500,000 (this will
    normally include most tender offers to which this guide relates);
    or
(b) the shares are listed, this is stated in the offer, and the offers are
    made by a licensed securities dealer by way of an eligible
    communications service (see definition in s9); or
(c) the offer is made by a securities dealer:
    (i) with whom the offeree has a written agreement appointing
        the dealer as dealer or securities adviser to the offeree; or




                © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                        Page 6
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




    (ii) through whom the offeree has acquired securities in the
         previous 12 months; or
(d) the offer is one of certain excluded offers; or
(e) the securities are exempt securities under s69A.
RG 102.25 The ASC will consider applications for modifications to
and exemptions from s1078(1) from shareholders wishing to offer
shares for sale by tender, and may grant such applications pursuant to
its powers under s1084(6). In considering these applications, the ASC
will take into account, inter alia, the amount of information generally
available about the security to be offered and the nature of the
information which the vendor under the tender offer intends to provide
to prospective tenderers.


Joint vendors
RG 102.26 Where the shares the subject of the tender process are to
be offered for sale jointly by two or more previously unassociated
shareholders who wish to combine their holdings, those shareholders
must ensure that:

(a) the substantial shareholding provisions of the Law are not
    contravened; and
(b) the joint tenderers, and any of their associates, do not acquire
    voting shares in the target company in contravention of s615.


Substantial shareholding provisions
RG 102.27 Shareholders who wish to combine their holdings, in
order to make a joint tender offer of a parcel of shares which
constitutes more than 20% of the issued capital, may apply to the ASC
for a certificate under s708(3) and for an exemption from s615
pursuant to the ASC’s powers under s728.

RG 102.28 The ASC will only grant a s708(3) certificate on
condition that the joint vendors advise the market, concurrent with
calling for tenders, of their association and its extent.


Section 615
RG 102.29 The ASC will only grant an exemption from s615 for
shareholders to come together as joint vendors on two conditions.
Those conditions are: first, that the agreement and association between


               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                       Page 7
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




the joint vendors falls away if the sale does not proceed; and, second,
that neither party purchases shares from the other, which would
breach s 615 in the absence of the relief.

RG 102.30 The ASC’s relief under this guide does not allow a joint
vendor to purport to acquire shares in the target in the six months after
the sale was unsuccessful under s618 on the basis that the shares of
the other joint vendor should be counted under “VD” in the
calculation in s618(1)(b).

RG 102.31 For the rest of this guide, joint and single vendors are
referred to in the singular.


Escalation clauses
RG 102.32 The ASC will not modify s697 to allow a vendor to
include an escalation clause in the tender agreement. It is open for the
vendor to negotiate with the successful tenderer how the sale will
proceed. The vendor may sell prior to the takeover, or it may sell into
a takeover scheme or announcement.

RG 102.33 If the vendor sells into a takeover scheme, an escalator
clause will be unnecessary because the vendor will receive the
statutory escalator clauses under s654(2), s665 or s666. If the vendor
sells into a takeover announcement, it will have certainty and must
trade off the benefits of early payment against no statutory escalator.

RG 102.34 If the vendor chooses to sell its shares to the tenderer
prior to the takeover it will receive two benefits: it will receive
payment earlier than other shareholders, and it will have a certain
contract rather than one dependant on prescribed occurrences.

RG 102.35 It is inappropriate to allow the vendor the benefits of
early payment and certainty and also the benefit of an escalator clause
where other shareholders receive only the benefit of the statutory
escalator clauses.


Prospective tenderers
RG 102.36 Where a parcel of shares is offered for sale by way of
tender, the submission of a tender to purchase the shares may breach
s615(4). However, s615(4) is ancillary to s615(1), and the ASC will
consider favourably applications for exemptions from s615(4) from
persons wishing to submit tenders. The ASC is required to publish all
instruments of exemption in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette.


               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                       Page 8
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




RG 102.37 The documents offering the shares for sale by tender
should state that each prospective tenderer will need to apply to the
ASC for an exemption from s615(4). Alternatively, the ASC will
accept an application from one prospective tenderer, or from the
vendor, for a Class Order giving relief for all tenderers. This will
ensure the commercial confidence of unsuccessful tenderers.

RG 102.38 Each tenderer must disclose in its tender the highest
price it has paid in the last four months for shares in the relevant class.


The successful tenderer
RG 102.39 More significantly, the eventual acquisition of a parcel
of shares by a successful tenderer will also breach s615(1) unless an
exemption is granted by the ASC. For this reason, any proposed
agreement to result from the tender process should be expressed to
have no force or effect until an exemption from s615 is granted to the
successful tenderer.

RG 102.40 The ASC will not grant an exemption from s615 before
the tender process is final, as the ASC will only grant an exemption to
a specified person or persons.

RG 102.41 However, in order to increase the degree of certainty
associated with the tender proceedings, the vendor may apply to the
ASC for an “in principle” decision to grant an exemption from s615 in
response to an application by the successful tenderer. The ASC will
usually make such a decision subject to the conditions set out in this
guide being met and any other conditions which are appropriate for
the particular circumstances.

RG 102.42 The ASC will only grant relief if it is satisfied that the
tender was conducted at arms-length.

RG 102.43 An exemption from s615 for a successful tenderer will
be conditional on the successful tenderer making takeover offers in
accordance with s616 or s617 for the remaining shares in the target
company within 30 days of the day on which the contract of sale, or
agreement to accept a takeover offer, under the tender becomes
binding.


Terms and conditions of takeover bid
RG 102.44 The takeover offer which the successful tenderer is
obliged to make must be:


               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                       Page 9
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




(a) for a cash consideration, or include a solely cash alternative (the
    ASC may allow other than solely cash consideration if the vendor
    is selling into the takeover offer);
(b) at a price no less than that paid or agreed by the tenderer under
    the tender; and
(c) subject only to prescribed occurrence defeating conditions (if
    any).
RG 102.45 If the successful tenderer is in control of the target
company at the time of the takeover bid because it has purchased the
tender parcel shares prior to the takeover bid rather than requiring the
vendor to sell into the bid, the ASC will not grant relief to allow the
offeror to include a prescribed occurrence defeating condition in the
terms of its offers.

RG 102.46 If the offeror has only entered into an agreement in
relation to accepting its takeover bid, many of the prescribed
occurrence conditions may be under its direct control when it makes
its takeover bid and s662(2) will operate to excise parts of the
condition from the bid. If the tenderer takes control of the target
during the offer, it would constitute unacceptable circumstances for it
to assert that its bid should lapse because of a defeating condition
under its control.


Section 622A
RG 102.47 Under s622A, the successful tenderer would not
contravene s615 by acquiring more than 20% of the voting shares in
an unlisted company by way of a s1043C or s1043D secondary sale
notice lodged with the ASC. This is provided that the offer was made
to each member of the company. However, the other provisions of the
Law apply and vendors and potential tenderers may need relief from
particular provisions of the Law depending on their individual
circumstances. They are strongly advised to seek their own
commercial legal advice in such cases.

RG 102.48 The ASC would consider referring the acquisition to the
Corporations and Securities Panel if a tenderer relied on this provision
and did not proceed to make a follow-up takeover bid. The ASC
would also consider referring the acquisition to the Corporations and
Securities Panel if the offer had not been a fair test of the market.




               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                      Page 10
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




Section 648 — offeror connected with target
company
RG 102.49 The target company may apply for an exemption from
compliance with s648.

RG 102.50 The independent expert report required under s648 is an
important protection for minority offerees where an offeror has a
strong connection or commonality of interest with the target company.

RG 102.51 However, the ASC recognises that an offeror may
obtain a strong connection, such as a prescribed shareholding (an
entitlement of not less than 30% of the voting shares) solely by virtue
of the tender process.

RG 102.52 The need for a detached viewpoint as provided by an
expert is not as essential in these circumstances. This is because the
potential for conflict of interest is not inherent in the relationship
between the offeror and the target company. In addition, the vendor is
likely to have had the advantage of a similarly close connection with
the company, and is likely to have been able to use that connection
and information to extract a higher price for the target company. The
higher price is then offered equally to the minority shareholders.

RG 102.53 As a result, the ASC will normally grant an application
for an exemption from the requirements of s648 if the “connections”
outlined in s648(1) have been created solely as a consequence of the
tender process.


Section 701 — compulsory acquisition
RG 102.54 The ASC will modify the definition of “shares subject
to acquisition” in s701(1)(a) so that a person who commences its
tender offer from an entitlement of less than 10% of the voting shares
in the target is not required to comply with the three-quarters of
offerees or shareholder tests in s701(2)(c). Regardless of the
percentage of voting shares in the target that the offeror was entitled to
at the commencement of the process, by the time it makes its takeover
bid it will be entitled to the tender parcel and therefore be required to
meet the three-quarters test. However, it may have commenced the
whole process as an outsider and the rationale of the guide is that the
selling person will have used its controlling stake to extract the
highest possible offer price.

RG 102.55 The fact that the offeror commenced with an entitlement
to the tender parcel should not, of itself, trigger the three-quarters of


               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                      Page 11
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




offerees or shareholders test in s701(2)(c). This is consistent with this
guide’s treatment of expert reports under s648. If the successful
tenderer commenced the tender process with less than 10% of the
voting shares of the target, then acquired the controlling parcel and
also received acceptances of its takeover offer to achieve an
entitlement of 90% of the target class of shares, that is a sufficient test
of the fairness and reasonableness of the offer. The additional test of
three-quarters of shareholders or offerees is not needed.


Role of target board
RG 102.56 Although not necessarily directly involved in the tender
process, the board of the target company may consider that it has an
obligation to assess the implication for the company as a whole of the
possible change of control which a successful tender process would
cause. The target board may co-operate with the tenderer in order to
maximise both the amount of information available to the potential
tenderers and the number and range of potential tenderers, in order to
increase the amount offered in the resulting takeover to minority
shareholders.

RG 102.57 It is possible that the company and its board may
become associates of the vendor or vendors and breach s615 in the
process of assisting in the tender process. The ASC will consider
applications from the target company’s board in such circumstances
for exemption from s615, to the extent that the board is merely
facilitating the tender process to maximise the return to all
shareholders of the tender process.

RG 102.58 Directors of the target company should be careful to
avoid inhibiting the making of the takeover offer to minority
shareholders. This may constitute unacceptable circumstances under
s732(2)(b).


Section 698 — benefits to offerees
RG 102.59 An offer by a potential tenderer to enter into an
agreement to acquire the vendor’s shares and to make the takeover bid
is prohibited by s698(1) or 698(2). This is because the tenderer offers
the vendor the benefit of the agreement. It gives the vendor the right to
sue for specific performance of the agreement (or damages). The
breach occurs at the time of making the tender offer, not at the time of
making the takeover bid. The benefit offered to the vendor is not
likely to induce the vendor to sell at a lower price in anticipation of

               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                      Page 12
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




some other benefit, purportedly unrelated to the takeover, which other
offerees will not receive. Therefore the ASC will modify s 698 to the
extent required to allow the potential tenderers to offer the vendor the
benefit of the agreement.

RG 102.60 Because the breach occurs at the time of the tender
offer, potential tenderers need to have received individual or class
relief before making their tenders, or express the tenders to be of no
effect until relief has been granted.

RG 102.61 However, following from the decision of the High Court
in Sagasco Ltd v Magellan Petroleum Ltd (1992) 10 ACLC 1,617, a
tender process in which the vendor is paid before the subsequent
takeover is not a benefit prohibited under s698. The High Court
decided that mere early payment of an equal consideration does not
constitute such a benefit.


Price-sensitive information
RG 102.62 Frequently, because of its major shareholding in the
target company, the vendor shareholder will have significant
information or insights into the operations and future of the target
company. Tenderers, or potential tenderers, to whom this information
is provided would breach the insider trading provisions of Pt 7.11 of
the Law if they made use of this information other than as tenderers
and in making the takeover offer.

RG 102.63 This is more likely if the board of the target company
chooses to take part in the tender process to facilitate the highest
tender price being offered to the minority shareholders.

RG 102.64 Any confidential, price-sensitive information disclosed
to the successful tenderer must be included in the Part A or Part C
statement. Non disclosure of this information would contravene s704,
cl 17 Part A s750 and s1002G.

RG 102.65 All parties concerned should ensure that they put in
place sufficient internal trading controls to ensure that they do not
breach the insider trading provisions. The ASC would not object to
potential tenderers being required to sign confidentiality agreements
with the vendor or the target company.




               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                      Page 13
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




Disclosure to the market
RG 102.66 The vendor must advise the securities exchange on
which the target is listed of its decision to dispose of its shares in the
target company by tender. It should do this at, or before, the time it
dispatches invitations to tender. Unless commercially confidential
information is included in the tender documents, the vendor should
provide a copy of the tender document to the securities exchange.

RG 102.67 It will be a condition of relief that the identity of the
successful tenderer be announced to the market (including to the
securities exchange if the target is listed) immediately following the
ASC granting relief.


Tender by agreement to sell into bid
RG 102.68 If the vendor chooses to structure the tender sale by way
of an agreement to sell into a takeover bid by the successful tenderer
in return for the tenderer agreeing to make the takeover bid at the
agreed price, the offer by the tenderer will still breach s615(4) and
s698, and entering into the agreement will breach s615(1). The ASC
will apply similar policy considerations in determining applications
for this form of tender sale.


Regional office to oversee tender
process

Tender document
RG 102.69 Before being issued, the document offering the shares
for sale by tender should be lodged with the relevant ASC Regional
Office. The Regional Office should have indicated that it has no
objections to the document.

RG 102.70 The tender documents should set out the relevant relief,
including the expected time sequence required by the vendor, potential
tenderers and the successful tenderer.


Tender process
RG 102.71 The vendor should provide the ASC with a description
of the tender process, including the identity or descriptions of persons

                © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                       Page 14
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




who have been solicited for expressions of interest. In order for the
ASC to be satisfied that the auction by tender process has been
efficient, the vendor should ensure that the shares are marketed
sufficiently widely. Frequently this will include advertising nationally
and overseas.

RG 102.72 Tenders should be invited on the basis of publicly
available information or non-public information provided equally to
all interested tenderers (subject to any confidentiality agreement).
Equal information includes equal notice to all tenderers of any
extension of time, and so on.

RG 102.73 The vendor may reasonably require some proof of bona
fides and financial capacity before providing non-public information
to potential tenderers or including them in further rounds of
negotiation.

RG 102.74 The terms of the tender must include a requirement that
the successful tenderer must make an application for an exemption
from s615(1) no later than five business days after being informed of
being the successful tenderer. The ASC may refuse to grant relief if
the successful tenderer applies later than five business days after being
advised of its success.


Conditions of granting relief
RG 102.75 The vendor should submit to the ASC, after tenders
have closed, and before announcing the successful tenderer, a letter
identifying the successful tenderer and confirming that no better offer
was received. Normally the highest offer will be the best offer;
however, an offer may be higher but clearly not be better. An example
is if the higher offer, despite the tender terms, contains defeating
conditions, or the tenderer has not proven its financial capacity to
meet the terms of the tender and the subsequent bid.

RG 102.76 The ASC will not normally grant relief for any other
than the best tender, although the vendors may accept no tender.

RG 102.77 The ASC expects that to assist it determine that the
tender process has been a fair test of the market, the vendor will
provide the ASC with the following information, as far as the vendor
knows, in relation to each tenderer:

(a) the names and a brief description of each tenderer;
(b) the names of their advisers;
(c) directors and associates; and

               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                      Page 15
                REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




(d) bid price, terms and ranking.
RG 102.78 It is important to repeat that the ASC will not grant s615
relief to any tenderer until the tender process is finalised, and the ASC
is convinced that the tender process has been fair and at arms-length
and that no benefits prohibited by s 698 have been offered or
accepted.


Timeliness of tender process
RG 102.79 Tender sales which take an extended time to complete
are likely to create prolonged disturbances in the market for the target
company’s shares. The ASC must seek to reduce disturbances of this
sort, under s1(2) of the ASC Law. The ASC will look carefully at the
proposed tender process to ensure that it will be concluded in a
straightforward and timely manner. Provisions in the tender process
which give the vendor extensive discretion to negotiate over several
rounds with tenderers will not assist an efficient and certain securities
market. The ASC may refuse to grant relief if it is not satisfied that the
tender will be settled quickly and straightforwardly.


Consultation
RG 102.80 Because all shareholders will quickly receive an equal
opportunity to share in the benefits accruing from the tender process, and
the tender process will provide adequate opportunity for any potential
tenderers to submit a tender, no person’s rights will be directly and
materially adversely affected. Therefore, the ASC is not obliged to
consult third parties prior to deciding an application under this guide.

RG 102.81 However, because of the assistance it may provide to
the tender process and to the ASC, it is recommended that the vendor
consents to the ASC, if it wishes, consulting the board of the target
company. The vendor should consult with the ASC about the timing
of any consultation with the target company and the effects that the
target’s continuous disclosure obligations would have on the
confidentiality of the information.


Summary
RG 102.82 A person wishing to dispose of their shares by way of
tender should consider the following items and take the appropriate
action:


               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                      Page 16
               REGULATORY GUIDE 102: Tender offers by vendor shareholders




(a) Section 1078 complied with, existing exception applies, or
    exemption granted.
(b) Certificate under s708(3) and exemption from s615 sought to
    allow joint vendors to make the tender invitations jointly.
(c) Application for exemption from s698 made.
(d) All proposed agreements expressed to have no force or effect
    until ASC has granted an exemption from s615.
(e) Vendor makes an application for “in principle” decision to grant
    an exemption from s615 to the successful tenderer (optional).
(f) Tender documents lodged with the ASC’s delegate and advice of
    no objection received.
(g) Tenderers receive s615(4) relief prior to lodging tenders.
(h) Copies of all tenders received provided to the Regional Office
    which has processed the applications.


Enforcement and surveillance
RG 102.83 The ASC considers that the major enforcement issues in
tender offers are equality of treatment between members of the target
company, and prevention of a false market in the target company’s shares.

RG 102.84 The ASC will look closely at any attempt by the
successful tenderer not to proceed with the subsequent takeover by
reliance on a prescribed occurrence. This may constitute unacceptable
circumstances. The ASC would refer such a matter to the
Corporations and Securities Panel.

RG 102.85 Tenderers must also be aware of the possibility of
breaching s746(4). Announcement of the successful tenderer will
constitute an announcement by, or on behalf of, the successful
tenderer of an intention to make a takeover bid for the target company.
The ASC will enforce this provision strictly.


Applications
RG 102.86 Applications may be made at any Regional Office of the
ASC, with the appropriate fees for the different aspects of relief required
for the particular tender offer. All applications and document lodgements
relating to a particular tender should be made to the same Regional Office.
The successful tenderer should lodge its takeover documents at the
Regional Office which has processed the applications for tender relief.

               © Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 1995
                                                                      Page 17
