REGULATORY GUIDE 128

Collective action by investors

June 2015




About this guide
This guide is for investors who wish to cooperate with each other in relation
to their investment in a listed company or managed investment scheme.

It provides guidance to promote investor engagement on corporate
governance issues. It also identifies circumstances where acting together
may lead to investors becoming associates or entering into a relevant
agreement for the purposes of the takeover and substantial holding
provisions of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act).
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This draft guide was issued in June 2015 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 128, issued January 1998, reissued
                                     July 1998 and rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007.


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                Page 2
                                                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Balancing the benefits of engagement against the risk of
                                    inappropriate acquisition of control ..........................................................4
                                    Purpose of this guide ...............................................................................5
                                    Additional legal considerations ................................................................6
                                    Scope of this guide ..................................................................................7
                             B      Permissible and prohibited conduct ...................................................8
                                    The takeover and substantial holding provisions.....................................8
                                    Collective action conduct .......................................................................11
                                    Consequences of problematic collective action.....................................14
                                    Relief ......................................................................................................16
                             C      Additional legal considerations .........................................................18
                                    Issues for investors to consider .............................................................18
                                    Issues for entities to consider ................................................................19
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................21
                             Related information .....................................................................................22




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                                              Page 3
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               Effective investor engagement can enhance corporate governance and the
                               long-term performance and corporate value of a listed entity.

                               In some instances the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) can
                               present obstacles to investors cooperating, as engagement of this kind may
                               require lodgement of substantial holding notices or result in a breach of the
                               takeover provisions of the Corporations Act.

                               Section B of this guide provides guidance on the likely legal effect of
                               different types of collective action by investors and also whether these may
                               constitute unacceptable circumstances. It also provides guidance on our
                               approach to enforcement of the takeover and substantial holding provisions
                               in the context of investor engagement.

                               Section C of this guide identifies some other legal issues that investors and
                               entities need to consider in relation to investor engagement.




Balancing the benefits of engagement against the risk of
inappropriate acquisition of control
              RG 128.1       A fundamental principle of corporate governance is that investors should be
                             able to hold the board—and, through the board, management—to account
                             for the entity’s performance. To do so, investors need to engage with the
                             entity. Effective investor engagement can enhance the long-term
                             performance and corporate value of an entity for all investors.

              RG 128.2       Investor engagement can take many different forms and investors may wish
                             to engage with entities in a variety of ways, either individually or
                             collectively. We recognise that investors should be allowed to cooperate and
                             coordinate their actions concerning an entity in which they have invested, in
                             the interests of promoting long-term value for all investors. At times, this
                             type of engagement can be more effective and efficient than individual
                             investor engagement.

              RG 128.3       However, there is a difference between investors expressing views and
                             promoting appropriate discipline in entity decision making and investors
                             effectively taking control of entity decision making. Regulatory support for
                             collective action by investors must recognise that the takeover and
                             substantial holding provisions place limits on cooperation between investors
                             to avoid control over an entity being acquired inappropriately.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                Page 4
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




                             Takeover and substantial holding provisions

              RG 128.4       We recognise the importance of the underlying purposes of the takeover and
                             substantial holding provisions, as set out in s602 of the Corporations Act.
                             The aims of these provisions include, in broad terms, ensuring:
                             (a)   transparency to the market about those persons who control an entity;
                                   and
                             (b)   that all investors are provided with equal opportunities to consider and
                                   benefit from control proposals.

              RG 128.5       Investors acting collectively to surreptitiously obtain a substantial stake in or
                             illegitimately obtain control over an entity can negatively affect the entity
                             and the position of other investors in the entity.

              RG 128.6       The challenge for investors wishing to act together to promote good
                             corporate governance in an entity is that the takeover and substantial holding
                             provisions are broadly drafted and the actual situations to which these
                             provisions apply are variable.

              RG 128.7       Investors concerned about common issues may become ‘associates’ or be
                             regarded as having entered into a ‘relevant agreement’ for the purposes of
                             the takeover or substantial holding provisions. This is because these
                             provisions are not only concerned with the power of individual investors in
                             relation to the voting and disposal of shares in companies or interests in
                             managed investment schemes, but also the aggregated voting power of
                             groups of investors who are either related or associated with each other in
                             relation to some aspect of the entity’s affairs.

              RG 128.8       Depending on the aggregated voting power of the group, investors acting
                             collectively in this way may be required to lodge substantial holding notices
                             relating to the group, may be prohibited from acquiring further interests in
                             the entity under the takeover prohibition in s606 or may even breach the
                             takeover provisions.

              RG 128.9       It may be difficult for investors to navigate through these provisions, which
                             can serve to deter activity that does not have an illegitimate control purpose.



Purpose of this guide
              RG 128.10      The purpose of this guide is to provide guidance on how the Corporations
                             Act provisions apply specifically to collective action by investors and to
                             provide more clarity on when we will consider that collective action may
                             constitute unacceptable circumstances despite not contravening the Act.

              RG 128.11      We have provided detailed guidance on the relevant takeover and substantial
                             holding notice concepts in Regulatory Guide 5 Relevant interests and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                Page 5
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




                             substantial holding notices (RG 5) and we do not repeat that guidance here.
                             Section B describes how the substantial holding notice provisions and the
                             takeover provisions apply to collective action: see RG 128.21–RG 128.40.

              RG 128.12      To help investors and entities understand our approach to collective action
                             by investors, in Section B we have provided illustrative examples of
                             collective action conduct we consider is unlikely (Table 1) or more likely
                             (Table 2) to result in investors being regarded as acquiring a relevant interest
                             or becoming associates for the purposes of the takeover and substantial
                             holding provisions.

              RG 128.13      Our two aims in providing guidance on collective action are to:
                             (a)   encourage collective action by investors that can promote corporate
                                   governance improvements for the long-term benefit of an entity and its
                                   investors. Many forms of this action may occur without giving rise to
                                   any contravention of the Corporations Act or other unacceptable
                                   circumstances; and
                             (b)   deter investors from undertaking collective action that is not consistent
                                   with the letter or spirit of the takeover and substantial holding
                                   provisions. At its worst, the conduct may amount to the passing of
                                   control in circumstances where those investors not engaged in the
                                   conduct are uninformed about this passing of control and are not given
                                   any opportunity to obtain benefits that might need to be paid if control
                                   were to pass legitimately.

              RG 128.14      While these examples aim to reduce uncertainty about the position of
                             investors when acting collectively, the circumstances of each case need to be
                             considered individually and there may be other relevant factors that trigger
                             the takeover and substantial holding provisions.

              RG 128.15      Section B includes a discussion on the consequences of collective action that
                             triggers or breaches the Corporations Act, and the factors we will consider
                             when deciding whether to take enforcement action: see RG 128.46–
                             RG 128.52. It also includes a discussion on the circumstances in which we
                             may give individual relief to facilitate collective action: see RG 128.53–
                             RG 128.55.



Additional legal considerations
              RG 128.16      While the question of whether the collective action by investors results in the
                             acquisition of a relevant interest or creates an association is an important
                             one, Section C outlines a number of other important legal considerations
                             that:
                             (a)   investors need to take into account when engaging with entities
                                   (RG 128.56–RG 128.60); and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                Page 6
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




                             (b)   entities need to take into account when engaging with investors or
                                   responding to investor approaches (RG 128.61–RG 128.67).

              RG 128.17      The discussion in Section C is a general overview only. We have not
                             described in this guide additional considerations that may:
                             (a)   apply to specific types of listed entities (e.g. in particular industries) or
                                   to specific types of investors (e.g. foreign investors); or
                             (b)   arise as a result of the application of legislation other than the
                                   Corporations Act and Australian Securities and Investments
                                   Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act)—for instance, the Competition and
                                   Consumer Act 2010—to collective action.



Scope of this guide
              RG 128.18      This guidance is focused on investor engagement with listed companies and
                             managed investment schemes, in relation to which the takeover and
                             substantial holding provisions will apply. The guidance may have some
                             more limited relevance to engagement in relation to unlisted companies with
                             more than 50 members, but the substantial holding provisions will not apply
                             to these companies.

              RG 128.19      References to ‘entity’ in this guidance are to both companies and managed
                             investment schemes while references to ‘investors’ are to members of
                             companies and managed investment schemes. References to ‘interests’ are to
                             interests in a managed investment scheme.

              RG 128.20      This guide does not deal with investors coming together for the purpose of
                             acquiring shares or interests of other investors. Investors who wish to act
                             together for the purposes of a joint bid or scheme should see Section L of
                             Regulatory Guide 9 Takeover bids (RG 9) for details of the approach we take
                             to such situations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                Page 7
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




B          Permissible and prohibited conduct

                               Key points

                               This section provides guidance on how the takeover and substantial
                               holding provisions apply to collective action. It also provides practical
                               guidance to understand our approach to when certain conduct may raise
                               concerns in relation to compliance with the takeover and substantial
                               holding provisions, or otherwise gives rise to unacceptable circumstances.
                               We have included illustrative examples of activities that are unlikely or
                               more likely to trigger the legal provisions.

                               This section discusses the consequences of triggering the legal provisions
                               or undertaking conduct amounting to unacceptable circumstances, and
                               sets out the factors we will consider when deciding whether to review
                               conduct and take enforcement action.

                               We also discuss the circumstances in which we might consider giving relief
                               from the law to allow investors to engage in collective action that would
                               otherwise be prohibited.




The takeover and substantial holding provisions
              RG 128.21      The takeover and substantial holding provisions are triggered when the
                             following thresholds are met:
                             (a)   the 5% substantial holding threshold—after which a person must
                                   provide substantial holding notices relating to movements above or
                                   below the threshold, and any change of 1% or more in their substantial
                                   holding (Pt 6C.1); and
                             (b)   the 20% takeover threshold—after which acquisitions and offers to
                                   acquire relevant interests in voting shares or interests are only permitted
                                   through certain transactions or in certain circumstances (Ch 6).

                             The thresholds are made up of a person’s ‘relevant interest’ in voting shares
                             or interests, combined with that of any of their associates.

              RG 128.22      The thresholds for both the takeover and substantial holding provisions
                             involve similar calculations incorporating two essential elements:
                             (a)   accounting for the votes attached to voting shares or interests in which a
                                   person has a relevant interest; and
                             (b)   the aggregation of the relevant interests in voting shares or interests of a
                                   person and their associates.

              RG 128.23      These elements reflect the respective regimes’ underlying policy concern with
                             the acquisition of corporate control and the disclosure of interests that may
                             have a capacity to dictate or influence the entity’s future direction or affairs.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                Page 8
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




              RG 128.24      The concept of ‘relevant interest’ revolves around control over voting and
                             disposal of shares or interests. Because the concept is concerned with a
                             person’s capacity to exercise a degree of influence over securities, it
                             encompasses connections wider than ownership. As such, a number of
                             people may have a relevant interest in the same securities in a variety of
                             different capacities.

                                   Note: See Sections B–C of RG 5 for a detailed discussion on when relevant interests arise.

              RG 128.25      Depending on the form and circumstances, collective action by investors can
                             result in the investors acquiring a relevant interest in the shares or interests
                             held by the other investors. For instance, investors might undertake to each
                             other that they will vote a particular way in relation to a particular resolution
                             or not dispose of their shares or interests until a particular issue about an
                             entity’s performance is resolved.

              RG 128.26      Even where a particular kind of investor engagement does not result in the
                             investors acquiring a relevant interest in each other’s securities, it may still
                             be relevant for the purposes of the takeover and substantial holding
                             provisions. This will most commonly be the case where the investors’
                             collective actions do not involve any arrangement regarding the voting or
                             disposal of shares or interests, but nonetheless results in one or more
                             investors becoming associates.

              RG 128.27      An investor can become an associate of another investor under s12(2) if they
                             propose to:
                             (a)   enter into, or have already entered into, a relevant agreement with the other
                                   investor for the purpose of controlling or influencing the composition of the
                                   entity’s board or the conduct of the entity’s affairs (s12(2)(b)); or
                             (b)   act, or are acting, in concert in relation to the entity’s affairs (s12(2)(c)).

              RG 128.28      An association may arise from a relevant agreement or concerted action
                             relating to matters set out in s53, which include the broad variety of an
                             entity’s affairs: see RG 5.136. Therefore, it is possible for the takeover or
                             substantial holding provisions to apply to collective action by investors
                             relating to a range of corporate governance matters, which is not necessarily
                             being undertaken for a control purpose.

              RG 128.29      It can sometimes be important when analysing the legal position to
                             understand that a person does not automatically have a relevant interest in all
                             the shares or interests in which an associate has a relevant interest.

              RG 128.30      Detailed guidance in relation to the concepts of ‘relevant interest’ and
                             ‘associates’ is provided in RG 5: see in particular the discussion of ‘relevant
                             agreements’ at RG 5.30–RG 5.33 and of ‘associates’ at RG 5.131–RG 5.151.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                          Page 9
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




              RG 128.31      We have set out an overview of the operation of the takeover and substantial
                             holding provisions and the issues that may arise in certain circumstances
                             where investors engage in collective action: see RG 128.32–RG 128.40.


                             Substantial holding provisions

              RG 128.32      A person has a substantial holding if they and their associates have relevant
                             interests in voting shares or interests carrying 5% or more of the total votes
                             attached to all voting shares or interests of a listed entity.

                                   Note: This definition is expanded to include relevant interests disregarded under s609(6)
                                   (market traded options) and s609(7) (conditional agreements) in accordance with the
                                   definition of ‘substantial holding’ in s9. See also Table 4 in RG 5.

              RG 128.33      A person must lodge a substantial holding notice under Pt 6C.1 if they:
                             (a)   begin to have, or cease to have, a substantial holding in the listed entity;
                             (b)   have a substantial holding in the listed entity and there is a movement of
                                   at least 1% in their holding; or
                             (c)   make a takeover bid for securities of the listed entity (s671B).

              RG 128.34      In assessing what level of substantial holding an investor has at any point, it
                             is important to consider whether any collective action may have caused
                             another person to be their associate, with the result that the other person’s
                             relevant interests must also be counted.

              RG 128.35      The substantial holding provisions require disclosure of the identity of the
                             associate and, if the association arises as a result of a relevant agreement,
                             details of the relevant agreement: s671B(3)–(4).

              RG 128.36      The substantial holding notice obligations do not prevent investors in a listed
                             entity acting collectively. Rather, the obligations ensure that in some cases
                             the investors will be obliged to disclose their cooperation to the market.


                             Takeover prohibition

              RG 128.37      The takeover prohibition in s606 will be contravened (s606(1)–(2)) if an
                             investor acquires a relevant interest in issued voting shares or interests
                             through a transaction in relation to securities so that it or another person’s
                             voting power in an entity increases:
                             (a)   from 20% or below to more than 20%; or
                             (b)   from a starting point above 20% and below 90%.

                             A person’s voting power is the aggregate of the votes attached to the shares
                             or interests in which the person and associates of the person have a relevant
                             interest.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                       Page 10
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




              RG 128.38      In determining whether this provision may be breached, an investor needs to
                             be aware of whether the collective action the investor proposes to undertake
                             will result in any investors:
                             (a)   acquiring a relevant interest in the shares or interest of another investor
                                   or any other person; and/or
                             (b)   becoming associates of any other investors or any other person.

              RG 128.39      The takeover prohibition does not prohibit collective action occurring when:
                             (a)   the investors are not associates and have not acquired a relevant interest
                                   as a result of their engagement and interaction;
                             (b)   the collective action does not involve the acquisition of a relevant
                                   interest because it is conduct that is subject to a specific exclusion under
                                   the Corporations Act (e.g. being appointed as proxy within the terms of
                                   s609(5) or entering into conditional agreement within the terms of
                                   s609(7));

                                   Note: Substantial holding notice disclosure must be made as if the relevant interests
                                   acquired through the conditional agreement are not disregarded (s671B(7)). There may
                                   of course be other circumstances applicable that mean a relevant interest arises despite
                                   the specific exclusion.

                             (c)   the aggregate voting power of the investors involved in the collective
                                   action is less than 20%; or
                             (d)   despite the aggregate voting power of the investors being more than
                                   20%, no transaction in relation to securities has been entered into, and
                                   no legal or equitable interest in securities has been acquired, that
                                   increases a person’s relevant interest (even if one or more of the
                                   investors have otherwise become associates).

                                   Note: The concept of ‘entering into a transaction’ is broadly defined and can include
                                   entering into a relevant agreement in relation to the securities (see s9 and 64). The
                                   prohibition in s606(2) also requires the acquisition of a relevant interest in voting shares
                                   (or interests), but not necessarily through a transaction.

              RG 128.40      It is important to then consider whether the collective action will affect the
                             ability of investors to engage in transactions involving the acquisition of
                             relevant interests in the future. For instance, if an investor’s situation is as
                             described in RG 128.39(d), it may not be possible for them to acquire more
                             shares or interests in the entity as a result of the takeover prohibition
                             applying in the future.



Collective action conduct
              RG 128.41      There are a number of collective activities by investors that provide a means
                             of effectively engaging with an entity but that do not result in an investor
                             acquiring a relevant interest in someone else’s shares or interests, nor result



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                          Page 11
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




                             in an associate relationship. We recognise the value of these activities in
                             promoting good corporate governance in Australian entities.

              RG 128.42      While in some instances it can be clear whether conduct falls within or
                             outside the scope of the legal provisions, due to the nature of concepts like
                             ‘relevant agreement’ and ‘associate’, there can be uncertainty about their
                             application to a range of conduct.

              RG 128.43      We have provided some illustrative examples of conduct where collective action
                             is unlikely (Table 1) or more likely (Table 2) to constitute entry into a relevant
                             agreement resulting in the acquisition of a relevant interest or triggering an
                             associate relationship. These examples are illustrative only. The circumstances
                             of each case need to be considered individually. There may be other relevant
                             factors that trigger the takeover or substantial holding provisions.

              RG 128.44      In addition, when regulating the takeover provisions we also need to
                             consider the possibility that unacceptable circumstances may exist: see
                             s657A and the Takeovers Panel’s Guidance Note 1 Unacceptable
                             circumstances. Table 1 and Table 2 also note whether the conduct may give
                             rise to unacceptable circumstances.

              RG 128.45      To the extent that it is ambiguous whether particular conduct is caught by the
                             takeover and substantial holding provisions or conduct is outside these
                             provisions, our attitude to whether unacceptable circumstances exist and
                             enforcement action is warranted will depend on whether it appears that the
                             conduct has a control purpose and effect, rather than simply promoting good
                             corporate governance: see RG 128.46–RG 128.52.

Table 1: Conduct unlikely to constitute acting as associates or entering into a relevant
agreement giving rise to a relevant interest

 Type of conduct                              Explanation and analysis of issues

 Investors:                                   If the conduct is confined to the exchange of views or information
  holding discussions or meetings            between the investors, then this is unlikely to give rise to an
   about voting at a specific or proposed     association, involve entering into a relevant agreement or
   meeting of an entity;                      unacceptable circumstances, as each investor is not bound to act in
                                              a certain way and retains its own discretion in terms of approach on
  discussing issues about the entity,
                                              an issue.
   including problems and potential
   solutions;                                 If the conduct extends to the formulation of joint proposals to be
  discussing possible matters to be          pursued together or there is an understanding that the investors will
   raised with the entity’s board;            act or vote in a particular way, then concerns may arise.

  discussing and exchanging views on
   a resolution to be voted on at a
   meeting; or
  disclosing individual voting intentions
   on a resolution.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                 Page 12
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




 Type of conduct                                  Explanation and analysis of issues

 Investors recommending that another              This is unlikely to make the investors associates or constitute
 investor votes in a particular way.              entering into a relevant agreement giving rise to a relevant interest if
                                                  no undertaking or agreement to follow the recommendation or act in
                                                  a particular way is obtained.
                                                        Note: This type of conduct may have the benefit of the associate
                                                        exclusions set out in s16 (if one entity is providing advice in a
                                                        professional capacity to another entity).

                                                  The conduct is unlikely to give rise to unacceptable circumstances.

 Investors making representations to the          If the conduct comprises merely raising the same general issues of
 company’s board about the company’s              concern raised by other shareholders—either in one-on-one or joint
 policies or practices or particular              meetings with the company—in order to understand the company’s
 actions that the company might                   position and discuss alternative viewpoints, then this is unlikely to
 consider taking.                                 result in the investors being associates.

                                                  These general issues may range from corporate governance issues
                                                  to long-term strategic or commercial risks facing the company. For
                                                  instance, dialogue in relation to:
                                                   some aspect of executive remuneration, such as the structure of
                                                    the company’s incentive schemes; or
                                                   forward-looking or long-term strategic matters about how the
                                                    entity is positioning itself for the future, taking into account the
                                                    specific large-scale risks and trends that are affecting the future of
                                                    the industry in which the entity operates.

                                                  This conduct is also unlikely to give rise to unacceptable
                                                  circumstances, particularly if focused on governance issues.

                                                  However, if this forms part of pursuing agreed joint proposals about
                                                  the company (or it is suggested) that joint proposals will be pursued
                                                  if the company does not give a satisfactory response), then this may
                                                  suggest that the investors are associates. If accompanied by overt
                                                  threats of some form of collective or coordinated exercise of rights
                                                  attached to shares, it can raise concerns that the investors have
                                                  acquired relevant interests in each other’s shares via a relevant
                                                  agreement.

                                                  Making the same representations to the company’s board about a
                                                  control transaction proposed by one of the investors, or about
                                                  particular transactions that the investors may benefit from over and
                                                  above any benefit to shareholders generally, may in particular give
                                                  rise to concerns that unacceptable circumstances exist.

Note: These examples are unlikely to give rise to an association or involve entering into a relevant agreement giving rise to a
relevant interest only if the conduct is confined to the actions in the examples and does not go any further.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                              Page 13
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




Table 2:      Conduct more likely to constitute acting as associates or entering into a relevant
              agreement giving rise to a relevant interest

 Type of conduct                              Explanation and analysis of issues

 Investors jointly signing with other         Jointly signing a s249D or s249N notice (or a s252B or s252L notice
 investors:                                   in the case of managed investment schemes) in these
  a s249D notice (or s252B notice in         circumstances is likely to be considered entering into a relevant
   the case of managed investment             agreement and for these investors to be considered associates. If
   schemes) to requisition a general          this is accompanied by an understanding about the exercise of
   meeting of an entity for the purposes      voting rights, it will also result in the acquisition of a relevant interest.
   of putting forward a resolution relating   We expect that this would be the case in most instances.
   to the composition of the board or the     We expect that it would be rare for a person to elect to publicly sign
   entity’s affairs; or                       a notice requisitioning a resolution without having formed any
  a s249N notice (or s252L notice in         understanding with their co-signatories as to voting. In these cases,
   the case of managed investment             signing a s249D, s249N, s252B or s252L notice will likely give rise
   schemes) to request a resolution to        to an association, but may not result in an acquisition of a relevant
   relating to the composition of the         interest.
   board or the entity’s affairs be
                                              Concerns that unacceptable circumstances could exist may arise
   considered at a general meeting of
                                              where the subject matter of the resolution:
   the entity.
                                               is the proposed removal of directors to be replaced with new
                                                directors who are aligned with the requisitioning investors (i.e. the
                                                purpose of the resolution is to facilitate the investors pursuing their
                                                plans for the company); or
                                               seeks approval of a transaction (such as a selective buy-back) on
                                                unduly favourable or on non-commercial terms, or a transaction
                                                that has an effect on the ‘control’ of the company.

 Investors formulating joint proposals        This conduct is likely to indicate that there is an understanding
 relating to board appointments or a          between the investors on a particular matter relating to the affairs of
 strategic issue.                             the company, which amounts to a relevant agreement or acting in
                                              concert and these investors being considered associates.

 Investors:                                   This conduct is likely to constitute entering into a relevant
  accepting an inducement to vote or         agreement and for these investors to be considered associates. In
   act in a specific way;                     addition, it may give a person control over the votes attached to
                                              shares or interests, resulting in the acquisition of a relevant interest
  agreeing on a plan concerning voting;
                                              by that person.
   or
  limiting their freedom to vote (e.g. by
   granting another investor their
   irrevocable proxy).




Consequences of problematic collective action
               RG 128.46     In some circumstances, collective action conducted by investors will result
                             in the acquisition of a relevant interest or an associate relationship. The
                             consequences of this will depend on whether there has been a transaction (or
                             acquisition of legal or equitable interest) and what the resulting level of
                             voting power is: see RG 128.38–RG 128.39. Where the resulting voting
                             power of a person or group is 5% or more, but no more than 20%, and the



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                        Page 14
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




                             collective action results in the acquisition of relevant interest or the
                             formation of an association, the Corporations Act will require only
                             disclosure of information. The takeover prohibition potentially applies only
                             if the voting power of a person or group increases above 20%.

              RG 128.47      We will consider enforcement action against investors who act collectively
                             in breach of the takeover and substantial holding provisions. If investors act
                             contrary to the underlying principles of Ch 6, we are likely to consider that
                             unacceptable circumstances have occurred and may refer the matter to the
                             Takeovers Panel.

              RG 128.48      We are likely to look more closely at potential collective action that has the
                             characteristics set out in Table 3.

Table 3:     Conduct that may attract ASIC scrutiny

 Control transaction           This conduct involves an actual or proposed control transaction, being either a
                               takeover bid or a transaction of the kind listed in s611.

                               It is more likely in these circumstances that the collective action is being
                               undertaken to acquire or maintain control of the entity.
                                    Note: For further guidance regarding joint bids, see Section L of RG 9.

 Board control                 This conduct involves the replacement of directors of a company and other
                               circumstances involving directing the exercise of the board’s power.

                               Particularly in circumstances where the proposed directors have a connection with
                               the investors who may be engaged in collective action, board control activity can
                               be used as a pathway to control over the entity and more traditional control
                               transactions. It can also be used to exert illegitimate undisclosed control by using
                               threats to the position of existing board members to persuade an entity’s board to
                               make particular decisions.

                               We will be particularly concerned by collective action that seeks to change the
                               composition of the board for the purpose of facilitating the investors proposing the
                               change pursuing their plans for the company.

 Benefits to some              This conduct concerns proposals that have benefits for particular investors rather
 investors only                than investors as a whole.

                               Some of the potential for cooperative investor engagement to increase the long-
                               term value for all investors will not be realised if only particular investor interests
                               are served. Generally, entities are cautious about benefiting particular investors
                               only and investors seeking to obtain these benefits may be more likely to engage
                               in behaviour to acquire control of, rather than simply make representations about,
                               entity decision making. Proposals to give investors veto rights (greater than those
                               carried by the level of their holding) over the entity engaging in particular types of
                               conduct (e.g. equity fundraising proposals) may be one example of this kind of
                               benefit.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                    Page 15
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




 Pattern of collective         The investors involved have a history of collective action in relation to this entity or
 action                        other entities that suggest that they act in concert for control purposes.

                               As finding associations often depends on inferences from circumstances, it is
                               important to take into account the broader history of investors who may be acting
                               collectively. If there is a long history of investors pursuing joint proposals, it is more
                               likely that the particular issue where the views of these investors are aligned is not
                               a common approach to one matter but part of a broader arrangement about
                               controlling the entity. This kind of history may also mean that it is easier to imply to
                               the entity that the voting influence of each will be combined.


              RG 128.49      In contrast, we are less likely to closely examine collective action that
                             satisfies all of the following criteria:
                             (a)   the subject matter of the collective action relates solely to:
                                   (i)    the improvement of the entity’s corporate governance; or
                                   (ii)   issues that can properly be determined at a general meeting;
                             (b)   the collective action is temporary and purely related to the resolution of
                                   that issue; and
                             (c)   the collective action is not concerned with the acquisition of a
                                   substantial interest or the exercise of control, and there is no ongoing
                                   undisclosed association between the investors involved.

              RG 128.50      Examples of matters that relate solely to the improvement of the entity’s
                             corporate governance may include encouraging:
                             (a)   better disclosure to the market, including ensuring information
                                   communicated through investor briefings is as widely available as
                                   possible;
                             (b)   more comprehensive board evaluation processes;
                             (c)   more sophisticated risk management systems;
                             (d)   improved sustainability or corporate social responsibility reporting; and
                             (e)   changes to executive remuneration structures.

              RG 128.51      We may take action where investors fail to lodge substantial holding notices
                             when they are required to do so under the Corporations Act or where the
                             disclosure in the substantial holding notice is inadequate: see RG 5 for
                             further guidance in relation to substantial holding notices.

              RG 128.52      See Section C for other legal considerations under the Corporations Act that
                             can also arise in relation to collective actions.



Relief
              RG 128.53      We are prepared to give relief in circumstances where the collective action
                             proposed is clearly caught by the takeover provisions, yet the nature of it is



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                      Page 16
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




                             not concerned with the acquisition of a substantial interest or control over
                             the entity. To the extent we are prepared to grant relief, we will be more
                             likely to facilitate short-term, specific arrangements that do not include the
                             provision of consideration. These arrangements more closely resemble the
                             exception to the relevant interest provisions for proxies.

              RG 128.54      We will generally be reluctant to provide relief simply because there is some
                             residual uncertainty about the legal position of collective action. The
                             exhaustive analysis of the facts required in such cases, and the need to cast
                             relief by reference to these facts, is unlikely to result in timely or useful
                             relief.

              RG 128.55      In addition, any relief that we are prepared to give will generally require
                             disclosure to the market. Given the emphasis in the Corporations Act on
                             disclosure of substantial holdings and control transactions, we consider that
                             in most cases the benefits of disclosure to the market outweigh the burden on
                             the parties involved in making the disclosure.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                               Page 17
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




C          Additional legal considerations

                               Key points

                               This section identifies a number of other important legal considerations for
                               investors and entities involved in investor engagement. These include:
                               • the prohibition on insider trading;
                               • shadow directors;
                               • directors’ duties;
                               • misleading and deceptive conduct; and
                               • handling confidential information.




Issues for investors to consider

                             Insider trading

              RG 128.56      An investor that has entered into a voting agreement or discussions with
                             other investors or with the entity may be in possession of inside information.
                             For example, the mere existence of a voting agreement or the occurrence of
                             these discussions may be price-sensitive information.

              RG 128.57      Persons possessing information that is price sensitive and not generally
                             available to the market must not trade for as long as those circumstances
                             apply. Otherwise they could contravene the insider trading prohibition in
                             s1043A if they apply for, acquire, or dispose of shares or interests (or enter
                             into an agreement to do so), or procure another person to apply for, acquire,
                             or dispose of shares or interests (or enter into an agreement to do so), after
                             entering into a relevant agreement without informing the market that an
                             agreement exists: see s1043A and the definition of ‘inside information’ in
                             s1042A. The exceptions in s1043H–1043J (exception for knowledge of
                             person’s own intentions or activities) are unlikely to apply in these
                             circumstances.


                             Shadow directors

              RG 128.58      Investors should be mindful of whether their actions result in them effectively
                             managing the entity. If they do, investors may be acting as shadow directors.

              RG 128.59      The definition of ‘director’ in s9 of the Corporations Act covers both
                             appointed directors and shadow directors—that is, it includes persons who
                             have not been appointed directors but:
                             (a)   who act in the position of a director; or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                               Page 18
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




                             (b)   whose wishes or instructions the directors of the company or body are
                                   accustomed to act in accordance with.
                             As it is possible for the concept of a shadow director to extend beyond
                             natural persons, investors should be conscious of whether their actions could
                             constitute a shadow directorship. Liability for directors’ duties imposed by
                             the Corporations Act extends to shadow directors.


                             Misleading and deceptive conduct

              RG 128.60      Some instances of investor engagement, including collective statements,
                             occur through statements made by investors publicly, including in the media.
                             When making public statements, investors should be careful that the
                             statements are not misleading or deceptive: see s1041H of the Corporations
                             Act and s12DA of the ASIC Act.



Issues for entities to consider

                             Duty to act in best interests of the company

              RG 128.61      While we recognise the benefits of directors engaging with investors,
                             directors have a duty to act in the best interests of the company: s181(1).
                             That is, directors have a duty to act in the best interests of the company as a
                             whole, as opposed to the interest of any individual investor or collection of
                             investors.

              RG 128.62      The responsible entity of a managed investment scheme, and its officers,
                             also have a duty to act in the best interests of members: s601FC(1)(c) and
                             601FD(1)(c), respectively.


                             Duty to act for a proper purpose

              RG 128.63      Directors have a duty to act for a proper purpose: s181(1)(b). That is,
                             directors must use their powers for their intended purpose, not a collateral
                             purpose: see Whitehouse v Carlton Hotel Pty Ltd (1987) 162 CLR 285. A
                             ‘collateral purpose’ may include where a director uses their powers or
                             corporate funds to advance personal interests in responding to an approach
                             by an investor: see Advance Bank v FAI [1987] 9 NSWLR 464.

              RG 128.64      In election and proxy solicitation cases, which may have commenced
                             because of collective action by investors, directors may be exceeding or
                             abusing their powers where they:
                             (a)   expend an unreasonable sum of the entity’s money;
                             (b)   expend corporate funds on material relevant only to questions of
                                   personality and not corporate policy; or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                               Page 19
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




                             (c)   otherwise act in a manner that is excessive or unfair in the
                                   circumstances, given the corporate purpose to be attained (see Advance
                                   Bank v FAI [1987] 9 NSWLR 464, at 485).


                             Confidential information

              RG 128.65      Engagement with investors should not be viewed as a way in which those
                             investors can gain price-sensitive information additional to that already
                             disclosed to the market as a whole. This type of engagement should instead
                             focus on investors providing the listed entity with feedback regarding
                             previously disclosed information or discussion of information that is clearly
                             not price sensitive.

              RG 128.66      While we recognise it is important that listed entities actively engage with
                             their investors, these entities should be careful that they are not selectively
                             disclosing confidential, price-sensitive information when doing so. This
                             could constitute a breach of the entity’s continuous disclosure obligations
                             under the ASX Listing Rules and the Corporations Act, and creates the risk
                             of insider trading.

                                   Note: In Report 393 Handling of confidential information: Briefings and unannounced
                                   transactions (REP 393), we make recommendations for companies on the handling of
                                   confidential information, including the issues associated with selectively disclosing
                                   information.


                             Misleading and deceptive conduct

              RG 128.67      As noted at RG 128.60, some instances of investor engagement occur
                             through statements made by investors publicly, including in the media.
                             Companies should be careful when making public statements in response to
                             investor communications to the market that the statements are not
                             misleading or deceptive: see s1041H of the Corporations Act and s12DA of
                             the ASIC Act.

                                   Note: Regulatory Guide 25 Takeovers: False and misleading statements (RG 25)
                                   addresses the issue of ‘truth in takeovers’ and provides guidance to market participants
                                   (bidders, targets and substantial holders) in relation to making public statements during
                                   takeover bids.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                        Page 20
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




Key terms

                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investment Commission

                               ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                         2001

                               associates                Has the meaning given in s10–17 of the Corporations Act

                               Ch 6 (for example)        A Chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 6)

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               Pt 6C.1 (for example)     A Part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                         6C.1)

                               relevant interest         Has the meaning given in s608–609 of the Corporations
                                                         Act

                               REP 393 (for              An ASIC report (in this example numbered 393)
                               example)

                               RG 9 (for example)        An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 9)

                               s602 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                         numbered 602)

                               substantial holding       Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               voting power              Has the meaning given in s610 of the Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                                  Page 21
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 128: Collective action by investors




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             associates, collective action, corporate governance, investor engagement,
                             investors, relevant agreement, relevant interest, substantial holding,
                             takeover, unacceptable circumstances, voting agreement


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 5 Relevant interests and substantial holding notices

                             RG 9 Takeover bids

                             RG 25 Takeovers: False and misleading statements


                             Legislation

                             ASIC Act, s12DA

                             Corporations Act, Ch 6, Pt 6C.1, s9, 12(2), 16, 53, 64, 181(1), 249D, 249N,
                             252B, 252L, 601FC(1)(c), 601FD(1)(c), 602, 606, 608, 609(5), 609(6),
                             609(7), 611, 657A, 671B, 1041H, 1042A, 1043A, 1043H–1043J


                             Cases

                             Advance Bank v FAI [1987] 9 NSWLR 464

                             Whitehouse v Carlton Hotel Pty Ltd (1987) 162 CLR 285


                             Reports

                             REP 393 Handling of confidential information: Briefings and unannounced
                             transactions




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2015                                               Page 22
