REGULATORY GUIDE 101

Managed investment scheme
buy-backs

December 2016




About this guide
This guide is for responsible entities of registered managed investment
schemes, including schemes that form part of a stapled group, and their
advisers involved in buy-backs of interests in such schemes.

It explains:
    the relief we have given in ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-
     market Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159 from certain provisions of the
     Corporations Act 2001 and what a responsible entity of an ASX-listed
     scheme should do in conducting an on-market buy-back; and
    our policy on applications for individual relief for scheme buy-backs.

Note: From 27 July 2020, applications for relief should be submitted through
the ASIC Regulatory Portal. For more information, see how you apply for
relief.
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (for example, describing the steps of a
                                      process such as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of
                                      how regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in December 2016 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. The note on the front page was inserted
                             on 27 July 2020.

                             Previous version:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 101 On-market buy-backs by ASX-listed
                                     schemes, issued December 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                        Page 2
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




Contents
                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Purpose of this guide and our relief .........................................................4
                                    Types of scheme buy-backs ....................................................................5
                                    Overview of our relief ...............................................................................6
                                    Overview of conditions of relief ................................................................8
                             B      ASIC relief for scheme buy-backs .....................................................10
                                    Relief for on-market buy-backs of ASX-listed schemes ........................10
                                    Relief for other types of scheme buy-backs (individual relief) ...............11
                             C      Conditions of relief for scheme buy-backs .......................................16
                                    Scheme buy-back must be in accordance with the constitution ............16
                                    Scheme buy-back must not materially prejudice creditors ....................16
                                    Listed scheme buy-backs must be in the ‘ordinary course of trading’ ...17
                                    Purchase price must be paid from scheme property .............................17
                                    Listed scheme buy-backs must comply with listing rules ......................17
                                    Interests must not be disposed of and must be cancelled ....................18
                                    Member approval must be sought in certain circumstances .................18
                                    Notification requirements .......................................................................24
                             D      Applying for individual relief ..............................................................26
                                    Types of individual relief applications we will consider ..........................26
                                    Considerations linked to our conditions of relief ....................................26
                                    Other relevant considerations ................................................................27
                                    How to apply for individual relief ............................................................31
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................32
                             Related information .....................................................................................34




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                                      Page 3
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              To enable a responsible entity of an ASX-listed registered managed
                              investment scheme to buy back interests in the scheme on-market, we
                              provide conditional relief in ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-
                              market Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159 from certain requirements in the
                              Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) to facilitate the scheme buy-
                              back.

                              We consider applications for individual relief, subject to conditions, for a
                              range of other types of scheme buy-backs, such as off-market scheme buy-
                              backs, selective scheme buy-backs or scheme buy-backs involving stapled
                              securities.




Purpose of this guide and our relief
              RG 101.1       This guide will assist a responsible entity of a registered managed
                             investment scheme (scheme), including one that forms part of a stapled
                             group, and its advisers, to understand ASIC relief to facilitate a buy-back of
                             interests in the scheme. This guide explains:
                             (a)   the relief in ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-
                                   backs) Instrument 2016/1159, which is available to a responsible entity
                                   of an ASX-listed scheme to carry out an on-market buy-back of
                                   interests in the scheme; and
                             (b)   our policy on applications for individual relief to facilitate other types
                                   of buy-backs of interests in a scheme.

              RG 101.2       The Corporations Act defines a ‘buy-back’ as an acquisition by a company
                             of shares in itself. We use the term ‘scheme buy-back’ in this guide to refer
                             to the acquisition by a responsible entity of interests in the scheme that are
                             paid for using scheme property.

              RG 101.3       Our policy on scheme buy-backs is broadly consistent with our policy on
                             share buy-backs: see Regulatory Guide 110 Share buy-backs (RG 110) at
                             RG 110.1 and s256B.

              RG 101.4       In granting the relief covered by this guide, our intention is to:
                             (a)   enable a responsible entity to utilise a cost-effective, transparent and
                                   fair means of returning capital to members;
                             (b)   avoid placing a scheme at a regulatory disadvantage to a company in
                                   relation to capital management techniques where there is no regulatory
                                   reason for different treatment; and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                         Page 4
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             (c)   ensure that the special regulatory protections that Parliament intended
                                   for schemes are not undermined but operate in a commercially sensible
                                   manner.


                             What this guide does not cover

              RG 101.5       This guide does not cover share buy-backs. Where a proposed scheme buy-
                             back also involves a buy-back of shares (e.g. a buy-back of stapled
                             securities), this guide should be read in conjunction with RG 110.

              RG 101.6       A scheme buy-back will at times be a part of a broader transaction involving
                             other activities. For example, a transaction might also involve a change in
                             responsible entity of the scheme or some other capital raising activity. These
                             other activities may separately require additional ASIC relief. Although a
                             responsible entity might apply for other relief relevant to a broader
                             transaction proposal, this guide is limited to the scheme buy-back portion of
                             the overall transaction.

              RG 101.7       Employee share scheme buy-backs and minimum holding buy-backs are also
                             not specifically covered by this guide.



Types of scheme buy-backs

                             On-market scheme buy-backs

              RG 101.8       We consider that a buy-back by the responsible entity of a scheme listed on a
                             prescribed financial market in the ordinary course of trading on that market
                             is an on-market buy-back. An on-market scheme buy-back is generally a
                             continuous buy-back, where the responsible entity regularly buys back
                             interests over a period of time.


                             Equal access scheme buy-backs

              RG 101.9       Generally, an equal access scheme buy-back is an offer to every member to
                             buy back a fixed percentage of the interests held by each member of the
                             scheme. It is not a continuous buy-back given the buy-back agreements are
                             not entered into until a specified time for acceptance of offers has closed.
                             Every member must have a reasonable opportunity to accept the offer.


                             Selective scheme buy-backs

              RG 101.10      In a selective scheme buy-back, the number of interests purchased from one
                             member need not relate to the number (if any) purchased from other
                             members. This means members will be treated selectively, and the potential
                             for (and risk of) abuse increases.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                        Page 5
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




              RG 101.11      For a company, a selective buy-back is a buy-back that does not come within
                             one of the other types of buy-back provided for in the Corporations Act—
                             that is, it is not an equal access buy-back, a minimum holding buy-back, an
                             on-market buy-back or an employee share scheme buy-back. We apply
                             similar concepts for a scheme buy-back.

              RG 101.12      Typically, selective scheme buy-backs are subject to greater regulation
                             because they offer certain members the right to withdraw their capital
                             without making the same offer to all members. Table 1 sets out some
                             examples of selective scheme buy-backs.

Table 1:    Examples of selective scheme buy-backs

  Type of buy-back        Description

  Tender offer            In a tender offer scheme buy-back, the responsible entity invites each member to
                          tender their interests for sale, rather than offering to buy back interests. We consider
                          that a tender offer scheme buy-back cannot be an equal access scheme buy-back
                          because the responsible entity does not ‘offer’ to buy interests, but rather invites
                          members to offer to sell interests. This means it is a selective scheme buy-back.

  ‘Dutch auction’         In a Dutch auction tender offer scheme buy-back, the responsible entity invites each
  tender offer            member to tender their interests at a price nominated by the member. Usually,
                          members choose from a range of prices set by the responsible entity, where each price
                          is a certain discount to the market price at the time of the buy-back. The responsible
                          entity then calculates the lowest price (i.e. the biggest discount to the market price) at
                          which it can buy back the desired number of interests, and buys interests at that price
                          (the final price) from each member who nominated a price at or below the final price.

  Irrevocable             In an equal access scheme buy-back, agreements are not entered into until the offer
  acceptances are         period has closed. If a responsible entity allows members to give irrevocable
  allowed                 acceptances during the offer period, the buy-back agreement is entered into when the
                          responsible entity receives the acceptance. Accordingly, we consider the buy-back is
                          technically a selective scheme buy-back.




Overview of our relief
              RG 101.13      We grant relief to facilitate scheme buy-backs because although the
                             Corporations Act does not specifically prohibit a scheme buy-back, certain
                             requirements in the Act have the effect of preventing or making it
                             commercially difficult for a responsible entity to carry out a scheme buy-
                             back.

              RG 101.14      We have provided conditional relief for on-market buy-backs of ASX-listed
                             schemes in ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-backs)
                             Instrument 2016/1159. We will consider granting conditional individual
                             relief in appropriate circumstances for a range of other types of scheme buy-
                             backs, including off-market scheme buy-backs, selective scheme buy-backs
                             and a scheme buy-back involving stapled securities.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                Page 6
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                                   Note: Where a scheme has more than one class of interests, the responsible entity has a
                                   duty under s601FC(1)(d) to treat members of each class fairly.


                             Relief for on-market buy-backs of ASX-listed schemes

              RG 101.15      ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-backs) Instrument
                             2016/1159 gives relief from the following requirements in the Corporations
                             Act to enable responsible entities of ASX-listed schemes to carry out on-
                             market buy-backs of interests in those schemes:
                             (a)   the requirement that a scheme’s constitution must specify any right to
                                   withdraw and set out adequate procedures for making and dealing with
                                   withdrawal requests under s601GA(4) (see RG 101.22–RG 101.23);
                             (b)   the withdrawal procedures for non-liquid schemes in Pt 5C.6 (see
                                   RG 101.24–RG 101.27); and
                             (c)   the takeovers prohibited acquisition provisions in s606 (see RG 101.28–
                                   RG 101.29).


                             Individual relief for other types of scheme buy-backs

              RG 101.16      We consider applications for individual relief from a range of requirements
                             that may be granted to a responsible entity as appropriate in the
                             circumstances of the particular scheme buy-back proposal.

              RG 101.17      For a scheme buy-back that is not an on-market buy-back of an ASX-listed
                             scheme, we may grant relief similar to that provided for on-market buy-
                             backs of ASX-listed schemes in ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes
                             On-market Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159. We may also extend relief
                             provided to on-market buy-backs of ASX-listed schemes to schemes listed
                             on other financial markets: see RG 101.46.

              RG 101.18      We may also grant relief:
                             (a)   from the requirement to treat members equally under s601FC(1)(d) (see
                                   RG 101.31–RG 101.37);
                             (b)   from the prohibition on a responsible entity from acquiring interests in
                                   the scheme for less consideration than another person under
                                   s601FG(1)(a) (see RG 101.38–RG 101.40);
                             (c)   from the prohibition on unsolicited offers to purchase products off-
                                   market under Div 5A of Pt 7.9 (see RG 101.41–RG 101.43);
                             (d)   from the requirement to give the offer to all members of the scheme or
                                   to all members of a particular class (see RG 101.44);
                             (e)   to facilitate a shorter offer period (RG 101.45); and
                             (f)   for scheme buy-backs involving stapled and unstapled securities (see
                                   RG 101.47–RG 101.48).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                    Page 7
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




              RG 101.19      Section D provides details of the factors we will consider when deciding
                             applications for individual relief for a scheme buy-back.



Overview of conditions of relief
              RG 101.20      Our relief in ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-
                             backs) Instrument 2016/1159 and individual relief is subject to conditions.
                             Table 2 provides a summary of these conditions, which are described in
                             more detail in Section C.

Table 2:     Summary of key conditions of relief

 Condition                   Conditions in ASIC Corporations          General conditions for               Reference
                             (ASX-listed Schemes On-market            individual relief
                             Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159

 The scheme buy-back         The constitution must contain a power to allow the responsible entity to      RG 101.49–
 must be in accordance       buy back the interests and the scheme buy-back must be carried out in         RG 101.50
 with the constitution       accordance with the constitution.

 The scheme buy-back         The scheme buy-back must not materially prejudice the responsible             RG 101.51–
 must not materially         entity’s ability to pay the scheme’s creditors.                               RG 101.52
 prejudice creditors

 Listed scheme buy-          The scheme buy-back must be             On-market: The scheme buy-back        RG 101.53–
 backs must be in the        carried out in the ordinary course of   must be carried out in the ordinary   RG 101.55
 ‘ordinary course of         trading on ASX.                         course of trading on the
 trading’                                                            prescribed financial market.
                                                                     Off-market: The condition is not
                                                                     imposed.

 The price must be paid      The purchase price must be paid from the scheme property.                     RG 101.56
 from scheme property

 Listed scheme buy-          The responsible entity must comply       On-market and off-market: The        RG 101.57–
 backs must comply with      with the ASX Listing Rules for an on-    condition applies generally to       RG 101.62
 listing rules               market scheme buy-back as if the         scheme buy-backs (including off-
                             scheme were a company listed on          market buy-backs) of a scheme
                             ASX, including Rules 3.8A                listed on a prescribed financial
                             (disclosure), 7.29 (recorded             market as if the buy-back were
                             transactions) and 7.33 (buy-back         being carried out on the
                             price). The responsible entity should    prescribed financial market. The
                             also satisfy itself as to whether it     responsible entity should also
                             would need to seek a waiver from         satisfy itself as to whether it
                             any ASX Listing Rules.                   would need to seek a waiver
                                                                      from any rule of the relevant
                                                                      prescribed financial market from
                                                                      the Australian market licensee.
                                                                      Unlisted schemes: The condition
                                                                      is not imposed.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                             Page 8
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




 Condition                   Conditions in ASIC Corporations            General conditions for               Reference
                             (ASX-listed Schemes On-market              individual relief
                             Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159

 Interests must not be       The responsible entity must:                                                    RG 101.63
 disposed of and must         not dispose of the interests it buys back; and
 be cancelled
                              ensure that, immediately after registration of the transfer to the
                               responsible entity of the interests bought back, the interests are
                               cancelled.

 Member approval must        If the ‘10/12 limit’ is exceeded:          If a selective scheme buy-back:      RG 101.67–
 be sought for the            a valid resolution of members is          a valid special resolution of      RG 101.84
 scheme buy-back in            required;                                  members is generally required;
 certain circumstances
                              members must be given all                 members must be given all
                               information known to the                   information known to the
                               responsible entity that is material        responsible entity that is
                               to the decision on how to vote on          material to the decision on how
                               the resolution; and                        to vote on the resolution; and
                              member approval can only be               member approval can only be
                               relied on for 12 months after it is        relied on for 12 months after it
                               given.                                     is given.
                                  Note: The 10/12 limit is 10% of the   If the 10/12 limit is exceeded:
                                  smallest number of interests that
                                  are on issue at any time during the    a valid resolution of members
                                  previous 12 months.                     is generally required;
                                                                         members must be given all
                                                                          information known to the
                                                                          responsible entity that is
                                                                          material to the decision on how
                                                                          to vote on the resolution; and
                                                                         member approval can only be
                                                                          relied on for 12 months after it
                                                                          is given.

 Notification                If the 10/12 limit is not exceeded:        If a listed scheme buy-back and      RG 101.85–
 requirements                 the responsible entity must notify       the 10/12 limit is not exceeded:     RG 101.89
                               the market at least 14 days before        the responsible entity must
                               the scheme buy-back; and                   notify the prescribed financial
                              the buy-back must commence                 market at least 14 days before
                               within two months of the date the          the scheme buy-back; and
                               buy-back was notified to the              the buy-back must commence
                               market.                                    within two months of the date
                                                                          the buy-back was notified to
                                                                          the market.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                               Page 9
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




B          ASIC relief for scheme buy-backs

                              Key points

                              For on-market buy-backs of ASX-listed schemes, we have provided relief in
                              ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-backs) Instrument
                              2016/1159 from certain provisions of the Corporations Act: see RG 101.21–
                              RG 101.29.

                              For other types of scheme buy-backs, we will consider applications for
                              individual relief: see RG 101.30–RG 101.48 and Section D.

                              All relief is subject to a range of conditions, which are described in detail in
                              Section C.


Relief for on-market buy-backs of ASX-listed schemes
              RG 101.21      ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-backs) Instrument
                             2016/1159 grants relief to responsible entities of ASX-listed schemes to
                             carry out on-market scheme buy-backs.

                             Relief from the requirements for withdrawal rights in
                             s601GA(4)

              RG 101.22      Section 601GA(4) requires that if members have a right to withdraw, the
                             scheme’s constitution must specify the right and set out adequate procedures
                             for withdrawal in a way that is fair to all members. However, the right to
                             withdraw in an on-market scheme buy-back arises from the market contract
                             rather than being specified in the constitution.

                                  Note: See Regulatory Guide 134 Managed investments: Constitutions (RG 134) at
                                  RG 134.146–RG 134.152.

              RG 101.23      We have given relief from s601GA(4) because in our view compliance with
                             this provision would be impracticable for an on-market scheme buy-back.

                                  Note: See RG 134.134–RG 134.159 for our policy on withdrawal rights in s601GA(4).


                             Relief from withdrawal procedures in Pt 5C.6

              RG 101.24      A payment by a responsible entity out of scheme property to a member,
                             where there is an act of volition by the member, in return for the member’s
                             rights in the scheme will generally be a withdrawal for the purposes of
                             Pt 5C.6. If the right to withdraw may be exercised while the scheme is non-
                             liquid, the constitution must provide for the right to be exercised in
                             accordance with the withdrawal procedures in Pt 5C.6.

                                  Note: See MacarthurCook Fund Management Ltd v TFML Ltd (2014) 32 ACLC
                                  14-023; [2014] HCA 17.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                             Page 10
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




              RG 101.25      Many schemes listed on ASX may be classified as non-liquid schemes for
                             the purposes of Pt 5C.6 because of the nature of the assets held by the
                             scheme.

              RG 101.26      In the absence of relief, s601KD may have the effect of preventing a non-
                             liquid listed scheme from engaging in an on-market buy-back. On-market
                             buy-backs by nature are continuous buy-backs rather than proportional.
                             Trading system rules require trades to be settled within a certain number of
                             days of the transaction. However, under s601KD, the responsible entity must
                             not satisfy withdrawal requests until the close of the withdrawal offer period
                             (which must be a minimum of 21 days) and the proportional satisfaction
                             requirement could only be calculated at the end of the withdrawal offer
                             period.

              RG 101.27      We consider the policy objectives of Pt 5C.6 of fair and equal access to
                             liquidity to be less relevant for non-liquid listed schemes because all
                             members are likely to have the ability to liquidate their investment by selling
                             on-market at any time.


                             Takeovers relief from s606

              RG 101.28      Section 606 prohibits certain acquisitions of relevant interests in voting
                             interests. We consider this prohibition could make it difficult for schemes to
                             engage in a scheme buy-back because it might mean that the proportionate
                             share of those members who do not participate increases. The holding of
                             those members could exceed the permitted threshold when there is not a
                             takeover offer.

                                  Note: Such a problem would also exist for share buy-backs were it not for the exception
                                  in s611, item 19, which facilitates acquisitions that result from share buy-backs.

              RG 101.29      For consistency with our policy on share buy-backs, we have given relief
                             from the prohibition in s606 on certain acquisitions of relevant interests in
                             listed schemes. Consequently, an acquisition of relevant interests in a listed
                             scheme that results from a scheme buy-back complying with the terms of our
                             relief is exempt from the prohibition in s606.


Relief for other types of scheme buy-backs (individual relief)
              RG 101.30      In addition to the relief provided in ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed
                             Schemes On-market Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159, we may provide
                             individual relief in appropriate circumstances where an application is made.


                             Relief from the equal treatment requirements

              RG 101.31      Section 601FC(1)(d) requires that members who hold interests of the same
                             class be treated equally. This requirement may be difficult for a responsible



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                 Page 11
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             entity to comply with in certain types of scheme buy-back situations, such as
                             in a tender scale-back, where there are small parcels of interests or where
                             there are foreign members.

                             Tender scale-backs

              RG 101.32      A responsible entity may set a maximum number, value or percentage of
                             interests it will buy back and make it a term of the offer that if (at the close
                             of offers) the responsible entity has received acceptances for more interests
                             than the specified limit, the number of each acceptor’s interests will be
                             reduced by the same proportion needed to ensure the responsible entity buys
                             back no more than the specified limit (i.e. a ‘scale-back’). A proportional
                             scale-back ensures that members are treated equally. However, we
                             understand that sometimes a proportional scale-back may result in members
                             ending up with small and unmarketable parcels after the scale-back.

              RG 101.33      We consider that preferential treatment under the proposed scheme buy-back
                             may be beneficial to small balance members but not unfair to other
                             members. We would generally limit the preferential treatment to small
                             balance members to a monetary cap appropriate in the circumstances of the
                             scheme buy-back.

              RG 101.34      Relief may also be appropriate for rounding any fractions of interests arising
                             from calculating the number of interests to be bought back.

                             Small parcels

              RG 101.35      We may grant relief to enable a responsible entity to give priority to small
                             parcels of interests or to selectively scale back a scheme buy-back to avoid
                             members being left with small parcels following the scheme buy-back.

                                   Note: The scheme’s market capitalisation and the size of the parcel of interests to be
                                   bought back should be determined using the volume weighted average price (VWAP),
                                   where the average is calculated over the last five days reasonably practicable before any
                                   notice of meeting being issued to members proposing a resolution to carry out the
                                   scheme buy-back or any announcement being made of the scheme buy-back.

              RG 101.36      We would generally limit the relief so that the maximum value of a small
                             parcel is:
                             (a)   for schemes with a market capitalisation of less than $1 billion:
                                   (i)    $2,000 for interests to be bought back from each participating
                                          member, including the entire holding of participating members
                                          whose holding is less than $2,000 (threshold parcel); and
                                   (ii)   $500 where a participating member’s remaining interests are worth
                                          less than $500 after the threshold parcel is bought back (residual
                                          parcel); and
                             (b)   for schemes with a market capitalisation of more than $1 billion:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                    Page 12
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                                   (i)     $5,000 for threshold parcels; and
                                   (ii)    $2,000 for residual parcels.

                             Excluding foreign members

              RG 101.37      Relief may be required to enable a responsible entity to buy back interests in
                             situations where:
                             (a)   the responsible entity would be prohibited from making a payment
                                   under relevant legislation, regulations or regulatory requirements in
                                   Australia or the relevant foreign jurisdiction;
                             (b)   the member resides in a jurisdiction where it would be prohibited from
                                   making a payment under relevant legislation, regulations or regulatory
                                   requirements to make an offer to the member to buy their interests; or
                             (c)   the member does not reside in Australia and it would be unreasonable to
                                   make the offer to the member having regard to each of the following:
                                   (i)     the number of members in the jurisdiction in which the member
                                           resides;
                                   (ii)    the value of the interests held by members in that jurisdiction; and
                                   (iii)   the cost of complying with relevant legislation, regulations or
                                           regulatory requirements applicable to making the offer in that
                                           jurisdiction.

                                   Note: Additional relief may be required from Pt 5C.6 if the offer will not be made to all
                                   members.


                             Relief from the self-acquisition provisions

              RG 101.38      Section 601FG(1)(a) requires that a responsible entity of a managed
                             investment scheme may acquire and hold an interest in the scheme, but must
                             only do so for not less than the consideration that would be payable if the
                             interest were acquired by another person and subject to terms and conditions
                             that would not disadvantage other members.

              RG 101.39      In some scheme buy-backs the buy-back price may be set based by reference
                             to the VWAP for a certain number of days leading up to the scheme buy-
                             back. For example, the buy-back price might be set at a 5% premium to the
                             VWAP in the five days leading up to the scheme buy-back: see RG 101.61.

              RG 101.40      We consider there is a risk that changes in the market price in the days
                             leading up to the scheme buy-back (e.g. if there is a substantial surge in the
                             market price) at the time the units are transferred to the responsible entity
                             may lead to a breach of s601FG(1)(a).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                    Page 13
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             Relief from the prohibitions on unsolicited offers

              RG 101.41      Division 5A of Pt 7.9 prohibits unsolicited offers to purchase financial
                             products off-market. Division 5A establishes a disclosure regime to prevent
                             persons profiting from an investor’s lack of knowledge of the market value
                             of their financial products by offering to purchase their financial products at
                             a grossly undervalued price. The offeror must disclose the current market
                             price, or a fair estimate if not quoted on a market, in an offer document.

              RG 101.42      The division was not intended to capture offers made under an off-market
                             buy-back on the basis that such offers are subject to an adequate disclosure
                             regime. Section 1019D(1)(d)(ii) provides a carve out to the anti-hawking
                             provisions for equal access or selective access buy-backs for companies
                             occurring under s257A.

              RG 101.43      We consider that technically, by inviting members under a scheme buy-back
                             to tender their interests, there is an unsolicited invitation of offers to sell
                             financial products prohibited by the section. We consider that the rationale
                             behind the carve out for company buy-backs may also be applicable to some
                             scheme buy-backs.


                             Relief from the requirement to make offer to all members

              RG 101.44      Section 601KB(2) requires that the offer must be made to all scheme
                             members. In our view, relief may be required where Pt 5C.6 applies if the
                             offer will not be made to all members (e.g. if foreign members are
                             excluded).


                             Relief relating to the offer period

              RG 101.45      Section 601KB(3)(a) requires that the offer period must remain open for
                             21 days. In our view, relief may be required to facilitate differing timetable
                             requirements for the particular scheme buy-back.


                             Relief for schemes listed on financial markets other than
                             ASX

              RG 101.46      We will consider granting relief to facilitate a scheme buy-back for a scheme
                             that is listed on a prescribed financial market other than ASX or an approved
                             foreign market. This relief may be granted where the applicant demonstrates
                             that the prescribed financial market is governed by investor protections
                             comparable to ASX. We will consider applications for relief on a similar
                             basis to the relief granted in ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-
                             market Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159.

                                  Note: See Regulatory Guide 72 Foreign securities disclosure relief (RG 72) at
                                  RG 72.54 for a list of foreign markets we consider to be comparable to ASX in terms of
                                  being fair, efficient, well-informed and internationally competitive.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                Page 14
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             Relief for scheme buy-backs involving stapled and
                             unstapled securities

              RG 101.47      Where a proposed scheme buy-back is for a stapled security that involves an
                             interest in a scheme and a share in a company, relief would be subject to the
                             requirements set out in RG 110 as well as in this guide.

              RG 101.48      In a small number of cases, we have provided limited relief to facilitate
                             scheme buy-backs involving unstapled securities. These have generally
                             been:
                             (a)   to reduce complexity and corresponding complexity in the accounts and
                                   in distributing payments to members; or
                             (b)   where the commercial purpose of the unstapled securities no longer
                                   existed.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                       Page 15
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




C          Conditions of relief for scheme buy-backs

                              Key points

                              This section provides details of the conditions applicable under ASIC
                              Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-backs) Instrument
                              2016/1159.

                              For individual relief, we will adapt conditions relevant for each head of relief
                              we grant as appropriate for the circumstances of the particular scheme
                              buy-back. We may also impose additional conditions not described in this
                              section where we consider it appropriate for the scheme buy-back.

                              Table 2 in Section A provides an overview of:
                              • the conditions of relief in ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-
                                market Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159 for responsible entities of
                                ASX-listed schemes conducting an on-market scheme buy-back; and
                              • our approach to the conditions of individual relief for scheme buy-backs.




Scheme buy-back must be in accordance with the constitution
              RG 101.49      A scheme buy-back may only be carried out if the constitution gives the
                             responsible entity power to buy back interests in the scheme. We have
                             imposed this requirement to ensure that members have agreed that the
                             responsible entity may buy back interests in the scheme when permitted by
                             law.

              RG 101.50      The responsible entity must not buy back an interest in the scheme in
                             reliance on our relief except in accordance with the procedure outlined in the
                             constitution and in our conditions of relief.



Scheme buy-back must not materially prejudice creditors
              RG 101.51      The responsible entity may only carry out a scheme buy-back if it does not
                             materially prejudice the responsible entity’s ability to pay scheme creditors
                             in relation to liabilities incurred or acquired by it as responsible entity of the
                             scheme. The responsible entity will be liable for debts it incurred as
                             responsible entity, but is usually entitled under the constitution to be
                             indemnified from scheme property where it acts in the proper performance
                             of its duties.

              RG 101.52      We consider a scheme buy-back could adversely affect creditors of the
                             responsible entity, and this might affect the ability of the responsible entity
                             to operate the scheme and affect continuing members.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                        Page 16
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




Listed scheme buy-backs must be in the ‘ordinary course of
trading’
              RG 101.53      For an on-market scheme buy-back, the buy-back must be carried out in the
                             ‘ordinary course of trading’ on the prescribed financial market.

              RG 101.54      In Australia, this phrase means that the trading is in strict order of price and
                             time priority, with indifference as to the identity of counterparties, and no
                             pre-agreements or selection of counterparties: see Attorney-General (Vic) v
                             Walsh’s Holdings Ltd [1973] VR 137.

              RG 101.55      We consider that a scheme buy-back in the ‘ordinary course of trading’ does
                             not extend to a situation where:
                             (a)   the parties have negotiated or prearranged ‘crossings’ (where the broker
                                   acts for both the buyer and the seller)—see Aberfoyle Ltd v Western
                                   Metals Ltd (1998) 16 ACLC 1,335; or
                             (b)   a transaction relying on the trade with ‘price improvement exception’ is
                                   effected other than on an order book.

                                   Note: See, for example, Rule 4.2.3 (‘Exception—Trades with price improvement’) of
                                   ASIC Market Integrity Rules (Competition in Exchange Markets) 2011 and Regulatory
                                   Guide 223 Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for competition in exchange
                                   markets (RG 223) at RG 223.195.




Purchase price must be paid from scheme property
              RG 101.56      To be within the scope of what is considered to be a scheme buy-back the
                             purchase price must be paid from scheme property. For example, if the
                             responsible entity bought units of the scheme using its own property (or
                             property other than scheme property), then the transaction would not be
                             equivalent to a company buying back shares in itself.



Listed scheme buy-backs must comply with listing rules
              RG 101.57      The responsible entity of a listed scheme must comply with the listing rules
                             for a scheme buy-back as if the scheme were a company listed on a
                             prescribed financial market. This avoids placing a listed scheme at a
                             regulatory advantage or disadvantage to a listed company in relation to
                             capital management techniques.

                                   Note: A responsible entity should also satisfy itself as to whether it would need to seek
                                   a waiver of any rule of the relevant prescribed financial market from the Australian
                                   market licensee.

              RG 101.58      For ASX-listed schemes, this includes Rules 3.8A, 7.29 and 7.33.

                                   Note: There may be other listing rules that apply.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                     Page 17
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




              RG 101.59      Under Rule 3.8A, the responsible entity of a listed scheme must make
                             appropriate ongoing disclosure to ASX to:
                             (a)   comply with the continuous disclosure requirements of the Corporations
                                   Act and the ASX Listing Rules; and
                             (b)   assure the market it is not buying back interests while possessing inside
                                   information in breach of the insider trading provisions (s1043A).

              RG 101.60      Under Rule 7.29, the responsible entity of a listed scheme may only buy
                             interests under a scheme buy-back if transactions in the interests in the listed
                             scheme were recorded on a prescribed financial market on at least five days
                             in the three months before it buys back the interests.

              RG 101.61      Under Rule 7.33, the scheme buy-back price must not exceed 5% of the
                             VWAP for interests (or stapled securities, if applicable), where the average
                             is calculated over the last five days on which sales in the interests were
                             recorded before the day on which the purchase is made.

              RG 101.62      We consider that buying back interests for an amount that significantly
                             exceeds their value might dilute the value of holdings of those members who
                             do not participate in the scheme buy-back. This requirement prevents entities
                             from using the scheme buy-back as a means of artificially increasing or
                             manipulating the market price.

                                   Note: Section 601FC(1A) notionally applying under Class Order [CO 13/657]
                                   Discretions affecting the amount of consideration to acquire interests and withdrawal
                                   amounts requires the responsible entity to ensure that the manner in which a discretion
                                   affecting determination of the amount of consideration to acquire interests or the terms
                                   of any payment or removal of liability arising from withdrawal from the scheme is
                                   exercised as far as practicable consistently with ordinary commercial practice and is
                                   reasonably current at the time of issue or withdrawal.



Interests must not be disposed of and must be cancelled
              RG 101.63      Interests bought back must not be disposed of and must be cancelled
                             immediately upon registration of the transfer to the responsible entity. We
                             impose this requirement to ensure that when scheme property is used to buy
                             back interests in the scheme, the scheme receives the benefit of having fewer
                             interests on issue that have rights in relation to the scheme.


Member approval must be sought in certain circumstances
              RG 101.64      Member approval for a scheme buy-back must be sought in the following
                             circumstances:
                             (a)   if the buy-back is a selective scheme buy-back (see RG 101.67–
                                   RG 101.69); or
                             (b)   if the ‘10/12 limit’ is exceeded (see RG 101.70–RG 101.73).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                    Page 18
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




              RG 101.65      The responsible entity must ensure that:
                             (a)   the approval is valid (see RG 101.74); and
                             (b)   members are given all information known to it that is material to the
                                   decision on how to vote on the resolution (see RG 101.75–RG 101.79).

              RG 101.66      Member approval can only be relied on for 12 months after it is given: see
                             RG 101.82.


                             Circumstances that require member approval

                             Special resolution required for selective scheme buy-backs

              RG 101.67      For a selective buy-back of a company, a special resolution passed at a
                             general meeting of the company of the terms of the buy-back agreement is
                             generally required: see s257B.

              RG 101.68      We consider that there may be cases where a proposed scheme buy-back is,
                             but for technical exceptions, selective, but it is more appropriate to treat it as
                             an equal access scheme buy-back (e.g. a tender offer that is in all material
                             respects an equal access scheme buy-back: see Table 1). In appropriate
                             circumstances, we will consider requiring a resolution of members of the
                             terms of the buy-back arrangement, rather than a special resolution.

                             Irrevocable acceptances

              RG 101.69      As discussed in Table 1, because irrevocable acceptances would technically
                             make the scheme buy-back selective, a special resolution would generally be
                             required. Because some agreements will be entered into while offers are still
                             open, we will generally require member approval.

                             Members’ resolution required for scheme buy-backs that exceed the
                             ‘10/12 limit’

              RG 101.70      If a responsible entity proposes to buy back an interest in the scheme that
                             would exceed the 10/12 limit, it must have obtained the approval of
                             members passed at a meeting of members of the terms of the buy-back
                             arrangement. This is consistent with our policy on share buy-backs: see
                             s257B.

              RG 101.71      We consider that a scheme buy-back that exceeds the 10/12 limit is more
                             likely to give rise to significant control and dilution issues. In our view,
                             members should have a right to vote on buy-backs that raise these issues. For
                             example:
                             (a)   where a responsible entity and its associates do not participate in the
                                   scheme buy-back, there may be control or entrenchment issues; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                        Page 19
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             (b)   when the buy-back price is higher than needed to effect the scheme
                                   buy-back, members who do not participate in the scheme buy-back may
                                   have the value of their interests diluted.

                             Calculating the 10/12 limit

              RG 101.72      The 10/12 limit for a responsible entity proposing a scheme buy-back is 10%
                             of the smallest number of interests that are on issue at any time during the
                             previous 12 months.

              RG 101.73      A proposed scheme buy-back would exceed the 10/12 limit if the number of
                             votes attaching to all the voting interests in the scheme that have been
                             bought back in the last 12 months, and the voting interests that will be
                             bought back if the proposed buy-back is made, would exceed the 10/12 limit.

                              Example

                              On 1 January, a listed scheme has 1,000 interests, each carrying one vote.
                              The 10/12 limit would be exceeded if more than 100 interests were bought
                              back (i.e. more than 10% of 1,000 interests).

                              On 1 July, the responsible entity buys back 50 interests, which does not
                              exceed the 10/12 limit because it has not exceeded 5% of the total 1,000
                              interests and has not bought any other interests in the scheme in the
                              previous 12 months. The scheme now has a total of 950 interests carrying
                              one vote each.

                              On 1 December, the scheme has 950 voting interests and the 10/12 limit is
                              10% of 950. As the responsible entity has already bought back 50 interests
                              during the previous 12 months, it would exceed the 10/12 limit if it bought
                              back more than 45 interests.


                             Ensuring the approval is valid

              RG 101.74      For member approval to be effective, the resolution must approve a
                             transaction the consequences of which were known at least to those who
                             voted for it. This requires that the scheme buy-back proposal must be mature
                             enough to be put before members. For example, where the substance of a
                             key term of the proposed scheme buy-back has not yet been established, it
                             would not be possible to make fair disclosures or to obtain the consent of
                             members on an informed basis: see ANZ Nominees Pty Ltd v Wormald
                             International Ltd (1988) 13 ACLR 698 at 704–5 and NSCS v Consolidated
                             Gold Mining Areas NL (No. 2) [1985] 1 NSWLR 622 at 625.

                                   Note 1: Section 253E imposes voting restrictions on the responsible entity and its
                                   associates if they have an interest in the resolution other than as a member.

                                   Note 2: See Ch 2G.4 for requirements for meetings of scheme members.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                   Page 20
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                              Disclosing all material information

              RG 101.75       The notice of meeting or the explanatory material accompanying it must
                              include all information known to the responsible entity that is material to the
                              decision on how to vote on the scheme buy-back resolution. However, the
                              responsible entity need not disclose information if it would be unreasonable
                              to do so because the responsible entity had previously disclosed the
                              information to members of the scheme.

                                  Note: The disclosure requirement is equivalent to the disclosure required for a selective
                                  share buy-back: see s257D(2).

              RG 101.76       Information material to the decision on how to vote on the scheme buy-back
                              requires an assessment of whether the information ‘would reasonably have
                              affected the mind’ of a hypothetical member in determining whether they
                              would support or oppose the scheme buy-back. This involves a wider inquiry
                              than the likelihood the information would have led a member to oppose a
                              resolution.

                                  Note: See Lantern Hotel Group and Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                                  [2015] AATA 428 (17 June 2015) at para 70.

              RG 101.77       We consider that the information summarised in Table 3 is likely to be
                              material to a member’s decision on how to vote on the scheme buy-back.

Table 3:    Information to be provided to scheme members

 Information required            Description

 How a scheme buy-back           There should be an explanation of the type of scheme buy-back and how it works,
 works                           including:
                                  an explanation of the scope of the scheme buy-back and of the key points in the
                                   terms and conditions;
                                  if the scheme buy-back is on-market, details of how the responsible entity
                                   proposes to purchase interests in the ordinary course of trading on the
                                   prescribed financial market;
                                  prominent disclosure of the reasons for any members proposed to be excluded
                                   from the scheme buy-back, and reasons for any other unequal treatment of
                                   members, such as a scale-back; and
                                  details of how the procedures for scheme buy-back offers are fair to all members.

 The number of interests on      The number of interests on issue and the number and percentage of interests to be
 issue and the number and        bought back should be specified.
 percentage to be bought
                                 If it is not possible to specify the exact number and percentage of interests to be
 back
                                 bought back, the maximum proportion of the interests to be bought back within the
                                 scope of the approval should be explained.

                                 For a selective scheme buy-back, if the buy-back is to be scaled back details
                                 should be provided of the method used to determine the number of interests to be
                                 bought back by each member offering to sell.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                   Page 21
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




 Information required                Description

 The objective for the               There should be a description of the objective of the scheme buy-back and reasons
 scheme buy-back and                 why the proposal will achieve this objective, including advantages and
 alternatives considered             disadvantages of the scheme buy-back.

                                     This section should also include an evaluation of alternative options considered to
                                     achieve the objective and a description of why other options have not been chosen.

 Associated interests                There should be a description of the interests of the responsible entity and any
                                     associate of the responsible entity who may participate in the scheme buy-back.
                                     Among other things, the directors must make full and frank disclosure of their
                                     interests in the reduction and in any scheme of which the reduction forms part.

 Financial and other effects         There should be an explanation of:
                                      the financial effect that the scheme buy-back will have on members, including on
                                       any distributions; and
                                      the effect the reduction will have on the scheme and on the control of the
                                       scheme.

 Source of funds for the             Details should be provided of the source of funds proposed to be used to pay for
 scheme buy-back                     the scheme buy-back.

                                     If an asset is proposed to be used to satisfy the liability to pay for interests bought
                                     back, the amount of money expected to be available when the asset is converted
                                     into cash should be specified.

 Key dates                           The date the scheme buy-back offer will commence and close should be specified.
                                     If the scheme buy-back will be open for an indefinite period of time until a certain
                                     number and percentage of interests, or maximum proportion of the scheme’s funds,
                                     are bought back, a statement of that fact should be made.

 Scheme buy-back price and           Details should be provided of how the scheme buy-back price was determined. For
 current market price                on-market buy-backs, details of any applicable pricing rules such as caps (e.g. the
                                     requirement that the buy-back price does not exceed 5% of the VWAP for interests:
                                     see RG 101.61) should be provided.

                                     For a tender offer, details of the factors taken into account in determining the
                                     tender range should be provided.

                                     Information regarding the current market price of the interests, and for a listed
                                     scheme buy-back any additional information that the listing rules of the prescribed
                                     financial market require to be disclosed, should be included.

Note: This information is similar to the information we expect a company to provide to shareholders when seeking shareholder
approval and making offers under a share buy-back: see RG 110.18.


                               Additional disclosures when buying back a significant percentage of
                               interests

               RG 101.78       If a responsible entity proposes to buy back a significant percentage of
                               interests, it should consider including:
                               (a)    a report by any of its directors who are independent about whether
                                      members should vote in favour of the scheme buy-back, particularly
                                      having regard to how much the responsible entity is paying for the
                                      interests; and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                     Page 22
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             (b)   an independent expert report with a valuation of the interests.

              RG 101.79      For scheme buy-backs of a significant percentage of the interests in a
                             scheme or involving parties holding a significant interest, we consider it is
                             usually helpful for members to have the benefit of independent advice on
                             whether to vote for a scheme buy-back that sets out the expert’s opinion on
                             whether the proposed terms give a ‘fair value’ for the interests and the
                             reasons the expert holds this opinion.

                                   Note: See Regulatory Guide 111 Content of expert reports (RG 111) and Regulatory
                                   Guide 112 Independence of experts (RG 112).


                             When previously disclosed information is overtaken by events

              RG 101.80      We consider that if the information disclosed to members approving the
                             scheme buy-back no longer adequately describes the circumstances
                             surrounding the scheme buy-back, the responsible entity can no longer rely
                             on that resolution in order to carry out a valid scheme buy-back. Any
                             information disclosed to members must not be misleading or deceptive.

                             Confidential information

              RG 101.81      All information known to the responsible entity that is material to the
                             decision to how to vote must be disclosed. There is no exclusion that would
                             enable the responsible entity or expert to omit confidential information. If a
                             responsible entity is concerned about disclosing detailed confidential
                             information about the scheme, we consider the responsible entity or expert
                             should summarise this information.


                             Member approval can only be relied on for up to 12 months

              RG 101.82      We impose a 12-month limit on any resolution approving the scheme buy-
                             back given by members. After 12 months, we consider that an approval of a
                             scheme buy-back may be ‘stale’ (i.e. the approval will likely no longer
                             provide the intended protection for members and creditors). A 12-month
                             period is also consistent with the operation of the 10/12 limit in s257B for
                             companies.

              RG 101.83      Where member approval is required, members are approving the terms of the
                             scheme buy-back arrangement. This means the terms of the arrangement
                             must be sufficiently certain for member approval to be effective. We
                             consider that a responsible entity can only rely on approval for up to
                             12 months.

              RG 101.84      For continuous scheme buy-backs, after 12 months, further approval will be
                             required if the responsible entity intends to continue buying back interests.

                                   Note: For listed schemes, a further notice must be made to the prescribed financial
                                   market after 12 months of the previous notice: see RG 101.87.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                   Page 23
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




Notification requirements

                             Prescribed financial market must be notified for listed
                             scheme buy-backs that do not exceed the 10/12 limit

              RG 101.85      For a listed scheme buy-back that does not require member approval (i.e. the
                             10/12 limit is not exceeded), the responsible entity must disclose in a notice
                             to the prescribed financial market:
                             (a)   the intention of the responsible entity to buy back interests;
                             (b)   the number of interests in the scheme held by the responsible entity and
                                   any associate; and
                             (c)   the source of funds to pay for any interests to be bought back.

                                   Note: See Appendix 3C of ASX Listing Rules (‘Announcement of buy-back’).

              RG 101.86      The responsible entity must notify the prescribed financial market at least
                             14 days before the scheme buy-back. This process will help to ensure that
                             members are given sufficient time to be made aware of the intended scheme
                             buy-back. Notification is intended to promote a reasonable opportunity for
                             members to participate in the scheme buy-back having regard to the fact that
                             the responsible entity is not required to send a withdrawal notice to scheme
                             members under Pt 5C.6.

                                   Note: A 14-day waiting period is consistent with the equivalent requirements for on-
                                   market share buy-backs: s257F(1).


                             Continuous scheme buy-backs

              RG 101.87      For a continuous scheme buy-back, a new notice setting out the information
                             in RG 101.85 must be made to the prescribed financial market if the scheme
                             buy-back is to continue after 12 months from the date of the previous notice.

                                   Note: See the corresponding 12-month limit on member approval at RG 101.82–
                                   RG 101.84.


                             When the responsible entity must start buying back interests

              RG 101.88      The responsible entity must start buying back interests:
                             (a)   at any date specified in the notice to the prescribed financial market; or
                             (b)   otherwise, within two months of the date of the notice to the prescribed
                                   financial market.

                                   Note: We have imposed a two-month time limit because we consider that after two
                                   months members may reasonably expect that a scheme buy-back is not proceeding if it
                                   has not already commenced. A two-month timeframe is also consistent with s631(1) for
                                   announcements about proposed takeovers. We do not believe it will be difficult to have
                                   to lodge a further notice with the prescribed financial market if required.

              RG 101.89      We will calculate the two-month period from:



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                  Page 24
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             (a)   the date specified, if the disclosure to the prescribed financial market
                                   specifies a date for the proposed scheme buy-back; or
                             (b)   if no such date is specified, the date the scheme buy-back is announced.


                             No notifications to ASIC are required

              RG 101.90      A responsible entity carrying out an on-market scheme buy-back is not
                             required to directly lodge any notices with ASIC. All relevant notices
                             relating to the commencement, ongoing status and completion of the on-
                             market scheme buy-back must be made through the prescribed financial
                             market in accordance with the listing rules.

                                   Note: See, for example, Rule 3.8A, Appendix 3C (‘Announcement of buy-back’),
                                   Appendix 3D (‘Change relating to buy-back’), Appendix 3E (‘Daily notification’) and
                                   Appendix 3F (‘Final notice’) of the ASX Listing Rules.


                             Notification requirements for other types of scheme buy-
                             backs

              RG 101.91      For scheme buy-backs where there will not be notifications to a prescribed
                             financial market of the scheme buy-back (e.g. an unlisted scheme), we may
                             impose alternative notification requirements to promote members having a
                             reasonable opportunity to participate in the scheme buy-back.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                Page 25
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




D          Applying for individual relief

                              Key points

                              We will consider applications for individual relief for scheme buy-backs in
                              appropriate circumstances subject to the responsible entity being able to
                              meet certain conditions: see Section C.

                              We will exercise our discretionary power to grant individual relief after
                              taking into account relevant considerations and the proper use of our
                              discretionary power.

                              This section provides details of the factors we will generally consider
                              relevant to our consideration of applications for individual relief for scheme
                              buy-backs. We may require additional information or consider further
                              factors not set out in this section as required in the context of a particular
                              relief application.




Types of individual relief applications we will consider
              RG 101.92      When considering applications for individual relief, we will consider the
                             types of relief that would be required to facilitate the proposed scheme buy-
                             back. The types of relief we will generally consider granting are described in
                             Section B. Our considerations will include a general assessment of whether
                             the proposed scheme buy-back would be consistent with our policy settings
                             for scheme buy-backs: see RG 101.4.

              RG 101.93      If we decide that relief would be appropriate for a particular scheme buy-
                             back, we will consider how the conditions generally described in Section C
                             should be applied to the circumstances of the particular proposal.



Considerations linked to our conditions of relief
              RG 101.94      When we assess an application for individual relief, we will consider the
                             following factors linked to the conditions set out in Section C:
                             (a)   whether the constitution includes a power for the responsible entity to
                                   buy back interests (see RG 101.49–RG 101.50);
                             (b)   whether the scheme buy-back materially prejudices scheme creditors
                                   (see RG 101.51–RG 101.52);
                             (c)   for listed schemes, whether the scheme buy-back will be in the ordinary
                                   course of trading (see RG 101.53–RG 101.55);
                             (d)   whether the purchase price will be paid from scheme property (see
                                   RG 101.56);



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                       Page 26
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             (e)   for listed schemes, whether the scheme buy-back will comply with the
                                   listing rules of the prescribed financial market (see RG 101.57–
                                   RG 101.62);
                             (f)   whether the interests will be disposed of and will be cancelled (see
                                   RG 101.63);
                             (g)   whether member approval will be required—we may review the draft
                                   disclosure that the responsible entity proposes to give to members
                                   eligible to participate in the scheme buy-back and consider whether the
                                   draft disclosure contains all material information to assist a member to
                                   make a decision to participate in the scheme buy-back (see RG 101.67–
                                   RG 101.84); and
                             (h)   for listed scheme buy-backs that do not require member approval, the
                                   notifications proposed to be made to the prescribed financial market and
                                   the timing of when the scheme buy-back is proposed to be carried out
                                   (see RG 101.85–RG 101.89).



Other relevant considerations
              RG 101.95      The considerations in this section are linked to a corresponding disclosure
                             requirement (where the proposed scheme buy-back requires member
                             approval). For the factors in this section, in addition to the considerations set
                             out in Table 3 and in RG 101.78–RG 101.79, we will also consider the
                             following factors as relevant to the circumstances of the proposed scheme
                             buy-back:
                             (a)   the type of scheme buy-back and the type of relief required to facilitate
                                   the scheme buy-back, and whether it will be carried out on-market or
                                   off-market (see RG 101.96–RG 101.97);
                             (b)   whether the scheme buy-back is fair to all members (see RG 101.98–
                                   RG 101.105);
                             (c)   documentation supporting the proposed scheme buy-back (see
                                   RG 101.106);
                             (d)   whether there is any report by independent directors about whether they
                                   recommend members voting in favour of the scheme buy-back or an
                                   independent expert has given an opinion that the scheme buy-back is
                                   fair and reasonable (see RG 101.107–RG 101.108);
                             (e)   the proposed scheme buy-back price and trading volumes (see
                                   RG 101.109–RG 101.110);
                             (f)   alternative options considered and reasons why each alternative option
                                   was not considered to be appropriate (see RG 101.111); and
                             (g)   appropriate conditions and limitations applicable to the relief sought
                                   (see RG 101.112–RG 101.114).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                       Page 27
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             Type and mode of scheme buy-back

              RG 101.96      We will consider the type of scheme buy-back and whether it will involve
                             stapled or unstapled securities. We will also form a view on the type of relief
                             that will be required to facilitate the scheme buy-back.

              RG 101.97      We will also consider whether the scheme buy-back is proposed to be
                             carried out on-market or off-market or whether it is proposed to be
                             conducted concurrently on-market and off-market. If the scheme buy-back is
                             to be carried out on a prescribed financial market that is not ASX, we will
                             consider whether the prescribed financial market has equivalent investor
                             protections to ASX.


                             Fairness to members

              RG 101.98      We will consider whether the scheme buy-back is, and the scheme buy-back
                             procedures are, fair and reasonable to members as a whole (to align with the
                             general policy for share capital reductions in s256B(1)(a)) and whether the
                             scheme buy-back proposes to treat any members differently: see
                             s601FC(1)(d).

                             Members have a reasonable opportunity to offer for sale their interests

              RG 101.99      In our view, notification to members is generally required to promote a
                             reasonable opportunity for members to participate in the scheme buy-back.

              RG 101.100     Where approval is required to carry out the scheme buy-back, 21 days notice
                             of the meeting to approve the scheme buy-back will generally be required to
                             be given to members. Where member approval is not required, 14 days
                             notice is generally required to be made. This notification process may be
                             similar to the notification that would be required for a listed scheme buy-
                             back: see RG 101.86.

                             Equal treatment of members

              RG 101.101     We will consider whether the proposed scheme buy-back is intended to treat
                             all members equally, whether some members are proposed to be prioritised
                             over others, and whether any members would be ineligible to participate in
                             the scheme buy-back. We will assess whether any proposed unequal
                             treatment of members is within our policy and whether equal treatment relief
                             is appropriate: see RG 101.31–RG 101.37.

              RG 101.102     We will carefully consider any unequal treatment of members, including the
                             following factors:
                             (a)   the overall number of interests and the total value of the scheme
                                   interests;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                       Page 28
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             (b)   the relative number, and the value, of the holdings of groups of
                                   members that will be treated in different ways; and
                             (c)   reasons for the differences in how members will be treated under the
                                   proposed scheme buy-back and how information about different
                                   treatment of members is proposed to be disclosed.

              RG 101.103     Typically, we will seek to apply reasonable limits on any relief we grant
                             from the requirement to treat members equally as appropriate to the
                             circumstances of the scheme buy-back.

                             How the scheme buy-back is to be funded

              RG 101.104     We will consider in detail how the proposed scheme buy-back is to be
                             funded having regard to:
                             (a)   whether the scheme buy-back is to be funded out of existing cash
                                   holdings of scheme property;
                             (b)   whether the scheme buy-back might prompt any realisation of assets
                                   that could be disadvantageous to members; and
                             (c)   the liquidity of the assets of the fund.

                             Impact of the scheme buy-back

              RG 101.105     We will consider the impact of the scheme buy-back on net asset value,
                             including the risk that the asset backing of non-participating members may
                             be diluted, change in control and how impacts are proposed to be disclosed
                             to members.


                             Documentation supporting the proposed scheme buy-back

              RG 101.106     We may request copies of draft documentation relating to the proposed
                             scheme buy-back, including:
                             (a)   any notice of meeting of members, including any supporting statements
                                   relating to a resolution to carry out the scheme buy-back or approve the
                                   scheme buy-back terms or any other related approval (such as an
                                   approval for a related party transaction—see Regulatory Guide 76
                                   Related party transactions (RG 76));
                             (b)   any draft changes proposed to be made to a scheme constitution; and
                             (c)   any draft disclosure document related to the proposed scheme buy-back,
                                   including any draft Product Disclosure Statement (PDS).


                             Independent reports

              RG 101.107     Depending on the circumstances of the proposed scheme buy-back, and
                             whether an independent expert report is required, we may request a copy of




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                       Page 29
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             any draft independent report proposed to be provided to members relating to
                             the scheme buy-back: see RG 101.78–RG 101.79. We will consider any
                             recommendation from the expert and reasons for the recommendation in
                             relation to the scheme buy-back and whether the expert has given an opinion
                             as to whether the scheme buy-back is fair and reasonable.

              RG 101.108     We will similarly consider any report or recommendation by an independent
                             director on how members should vote in a resolution relating to the proposed
                             scheme buy-back.


                             Scheme buy-back price

              RG 101.109     In considering the scheme buy-back price, we will consider the following
                             factors:
                             (a)   potential impacts on the trading volume of the class of interests to be
                                   bought back;
                             (b)   how the scheme buy-back price is proposed to be determined;
                             (c)   the extent of any proposed premium or discount to the average market
                                   price;
                             (d)   whether the scheme buy-back price complies with Rule 7.33 of the
                                   ASX Listing Rules (see RG 101.61)—that is, the price does not exceed
                                   5% of the VWAP for interests, where the average is calculated over the
                                   last five days on which sales in the interests were recorded before the
                                   day on which the purchase is made; and
                             (e)   whether the scheme buy-back price is more than the net asset value of
                                   the interest.

              RG 101.110     Generally, the scheme buy-back price will not be at a discount to the average
                             market price; however, if a discounted buy-back price is proposed we will
                             consider the reasons for the discount. For example, a discounted price may
                             be justified for a scheme with a history of being illiquid. Relief from the self-
                             acquisition provisions in s601FG(1)(a) may be required where there is a
                             proposed discount to the average market price: see RG 101.38–
                             RG 101.40.


                             Alternative options

              RG 101.111     We will consider what other options are open to the responsible entity, the
                             responsible entity’s assessment of these options and why the proposed
                             scheme buy-back is considered the preferred option. Where an independent
                             expert report is proposed to be provided to members, we may also consider
                             the expert’s findings on any alternative options considered.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                       Page 30
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             Scheme buy-back conditions

              RG 101.112     We will consider whether any special conditions or variations on the general
                             conditions applicable to scheme buy-back relief set out in Section C would
                             be appropriate in the circumstances.

              RG 101.113     Standard conditions are typically adapted to the circumstances of the
                             particular scheme buy-back in the following ways:
                             (a)   determining the type of resolution if member approval is required and
                                   whether the resolution should be a special resolution (see RG 101.67–
                                   RG 101.71);
                             (b)   establishing appropriate limits on any relief from the requirement to
                                   treat members of the same class equally (see s601FC(1)(d))—for
                                   example, setting appropriate limits on any tender scale-backs (see
                                   RG 101.32–RG 101.33), or limits on the maximum value of a small
                                   parcel where priority is proposed to be given for small parcels (see
                                   RG 101.35–RG 101.36); and
                             (c)   ensuring there are appropriate parameters around the scheme buy-back
                                   price and the timing of the scheme buy-back, including any record date.

              RG 101.114     We may as appropriate for a particular scheme buy-back apply different
                             conditions that are not included in this guide.



How to apply for individual relief
              RG 101.115     To submit a relief application, you should:
                             (a)   lodge an electronic copy to applications@asic.gov.au or a hard copy of
                                   the document to an ASIC office in your state or territory;
                             (b)   include the prescribed fee(s); and
                             (c)   ensure that your application addresses the criteria in Regulatory
                                   Guide 51 Applications for relief (RG 51) and this guide.

              RG 101.116     If you are considering applying for relief, you should lodge your relief
                             application well in advance of when you are considering commencing the
                             scheme buy-back. We may also require additional time to consider any
                             disclosure to be given to members.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                       Page 31
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




Key terms

                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              10/12 limit               10% of the smallest number of interests that are on issue
                                                        at any time during the previous 12 months

                              ASX                       ASX Limited or the exchange market operated by ASX
                                                        Limited

                              buy-back price            The amount to be paid to a member whose interest in the
                                                        scheme is being purchased by the responsible entity of
                                                        the scheme

                              [CO 13/657] (for          An ASIC class order (in this example numbered 13/657)
                              example)                       Note: Legislative instruments made from 2015 are referred
                                                             to as ASIC instruments.

                              constitution              A constitution of a scheme

                              Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                        purposes of that Act

                              employee share            Has the meaning given in s9
                              scheme buy-back

                              equal access scheme       Has the meaning given in s9 and as described in
                                                        RG 101.9

                              listed                    Has the meaning given in s9

                              minimum holding buy-      Has the meaning given in s9
                              back

                              non-liquid scheme         Has the meaning given in s601KA(3)

                              on-market                 Has the meaning given in s9

                              prescribed financial      Has the meaning given in s9
                              market

                              Product Disclosure        A document that must be given to a retail client in relation
                              Statement (PDS)           to the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance
                                                        with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                             Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                              responsible entity        Has the meaning given in s9

                              RG 110 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered
                                                        110)

                              Rule 3.8A (for            A rule of the ASX Listing Rules (in this example
                              example)                  numbered 3.8A), unless otherwise specified

                              s601GA(4) (for            A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                              example)                  numbered 601GA(4)), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                               Page 32
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              scheme                    A registered managed investment scheme as defined in
                                                        s9

                              scheme buy-back           A scheme buy-back as described in RG 101.2

                              scheme property           Has the meaning given in s9

                              scheme’s creditor         A creditor of a responsible entity in relation to which the
                                                        responsible entity has a right of indemnity for the liability
                                                        out of scheme property

                              selective buy-back        A selective buy-back as defined in s9 and described in
                                                        RG 101.10–RG 101.12

                              VWAP                      Volume weighted average price




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                                Page 33
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             10/12 limit, buy-back price, disclosure, discretion, managed investment
                             scheme, market price, member approval, members, off-market scheme buy-
                             back, on-market scheme buy-back, responsible entity, scheme buy-back,
                             scheme constitution, withdrawal procedures, withdrawal requests


                             Legislative instruments

                             [CO 13/657] Discretions affecting the amount of consideration to acquire
                             interests and withdrawal amounts

                             ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-backs) Instrument
                             2016/1159


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 72 Foreign securities disclosure relief

                             RG 76 Related party transactions

                             RG 110 Share buy-backs

                             RG 111 Content of expert reports

                             RG 112 Independence of experts

                             RG 134 Managed investments: Constitutions

                             RG 223 Guidance on ASIC market integrity rules for competition in
                             exchange markets


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Ch 2G.4, Pt 5C.6, Div 5A of Pt 7.9, s253E, 256B,
                             256B(1)(a), 257A, 257B, 257D(2), 257F(1), 601FC(1)(d), 601FC(1A),
                             601FG(1)(a), 601GA(4), 601KB(2), 601KB(3)(a), 601KD, 606, item 19 of
                             611, 631(1), 1019D(1)(d)(ii), 1043A


                             Market integrity rules

                             ASIC Market Integrity Rules (Competition in Exchange Markets) 2011




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                       Page 34
                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 101: Managed investment scheme buy-backs




                             Cases

                             Aberfoyle Ltd v Western Metals Ltd (1998) 16 ACLC 1,335

                             ANZ Nominees Pty Ltd v Wormald International Ltd (1988) 13 ACLR 698

                             Attorney-General (Vic) v Walsh’s Holdings Ltd [1973] VR 137

                             Lantern Hotel Group and Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                             [2015] AATA 428 (17 June 2015)

                             MacarthurCook Fund Management Ltd v TFML Ltd (2014) 32 ACLC
                             14-023; [2014] HCA 17

                             NSCS v Consolidated Gold Mining Areas NL (No. 2) [1985] 1 NSWLR 622


                             Consultation paper

                             CP 269 Remaking ASIC class order on managed investment scheme buy-
                             backs and updating related guidance




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission December 2016                                       Page 35
