REGULATORY GUIDE 134

Funds management:
Constitutions

October 2023



About this guide
This guide is for responsible entities of registered managed investment
schemes (registered schemes), corporate directors of corporate collective
investment vehicles (CCIVs), Australian passport fund operators and their
advisers.

It sets out our guidance on the requirements in the Corporations Act for the
constitutions of registered schemes, CCIVs and Australian passport funds.
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in October 2023 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. In December 2025, minor updates were
                             made to reflect the remaking of ASIC relief in September 2025: see Note 2
                             to RG 134.27(b) and Note to RG 134.266.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 134, issued August 1998, updated
                                     November 1998, June 1999 and September 2000, reissued June 2013,
                                     February 2014, October 2015, July 2018 and October 2022


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                            Page 2
                                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    How our guidance applies ................................................................. 4
                                    Requirements for a constitution ......................................................... 6
                                    Complying with our guidance............................................................. 8
                             B      Consideration and issue price—Retail investment funds ........... 9
                                    Consideration to acquire interests in a registered scheme ............... 9
                                    Issue price of shares in a retail CCIV .............................................. 28
                             C      Rights of members—Retail investment funds ............................ 30
                                    Protecting class rights in a retail investment fund ........................... 30
                                    Establishing sub-funds of CCIVs ..................................................... 30
                                    Cross-investment between sub-funds ............................................. 31
                             D      Powers and rights of operators—Retail investment funds ....... 32
                                    Powers to deal with property and raise money................................ 32
                                    Rights to fees and indemnities ........................................................ 33
                             E      Complaints, disputes and remedies—Retail investment funds 37
                                    Requirements for retail investment funds ........................................ 37
                                    Requirements for Australian passport funds ................................... 40
                             F      Changing the constitution—Retail investment funds and
                                    wholesale CCIVs ............................................................................ 42
                                    Requirements for retail investment funds ........................................ 42
                                    Relief available for retail investment funds ...................................... 43
                                    Requirements for wholesale CCIVs ................................................. 44
                             G      Withdrawal—Retail investment funds ......................................... 45
                                    Withdrawal from a registered scheme ............................................. 45
                                    Redemption of shares in a retail CCIV ............................................ 54
                             H      Winding up—Registered schemes only ...................................... 57
                                    Procedures for winding up ............................................................... 57
                                    Independent audit ............................................................................ 60
                                    Postponement of winding up ........................................................... 60
                             I      Enforceability of the constitution—Retail investment funds and
                                    wholesale CCIVs ............................................................................ 61
                                    Constitution of registered schemes ................................................. 61
                                    Constitution of retail and wholesale CCIVs ..................................... 62
                             J      Incorporation by reference—Retail investment funds and
                                    wholesale CCIVs ............................................................................ 63
                                    Making provision for and specifying matters ................................... 63
                                    Relief to incorporate listing rules of a financial market .................... 63
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 65
                             Related information ............................................................................... 69




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                                       Page 3
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               The constitution of a managed investment scheme that is registered with
                               ASIC (registered scheme) and the constitution of a corporate collective
                               investment vehicle (CCIV) must meet certain requirements under the
                               Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act). In addition, the constitution of a
                               registered scheme or a sub-fund of a retail CCIV that is registered as an
                               Australian passport fund must meet the content requirements in the
                               Australian Passport Rules.

                               This guide explains these requirements.


How our guidance applies
              RG 134.1       This guide is for:
                             (a)   responsible entities of registered schemes;
                             (b)   corporate directors of CCIVs;
                             (c)   Australian passport fund operators; and
                             (d)   their advisers.

                                   Note: Table 1 explains which parts of this guide apply to each type of fund.

              RG 134.2       The guide sets out our expectations for the content of constitutions that are
                             part of applications lodged with ASIC to register:
                             (a)   managed investment schemes;
                             (b)   CCIVs; and
                             (c)   a registered scheme or a sub-fund of a retail CCIV as an Australian
                                   passport fund.

              RG 134.3       In this guide, as illustrated in Figure 1:
                             (a)   ‘investment fund’ refers to managed investment schemes and CCIVs;
                             (b)   ‘retail investment fund’ refers to registered schemes and retail CCIVs;
                             (c)   ‘investment fund operator’ refers to operators of managed investment
                                   schemes and corporate directors of CCIVs;
                             (d)   ‘retail investment fund operator’ refers to responsible entities and
                                   corporate directors of retail CCIVs;
                             (e)   ‘Australian passport fund’ refers to a registered scheme or sub-fund of a
                                   retail CCIV that is also registered as a passport fund under the Asia
                                   Region Funds Passport; and
                             (f)   ‘wholesale CCIV’ refers to a CCIV operated by corporate directors that
                                   has wholesale members only.
                                   Note: For full definitions, including the definition of ‘retail CCIV’, see ‘Key terms’.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                        Page 4
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




Figure 1: Who this guide applies to

                       Retail investment fund operators


           Responsible entities                      Corporate directors                    Corporate directors




                              Retail investment funds


          Registered managed                      Retail corporate collective               Wholesale corporate
          investment schemes                        investment vehicles                collective investment vehicles
          (registered schemes)                           (retail CCIVs)                      (wholesale CCIVs)




          May be eligible to be                   A sub-fund of a retail CCIV
       registered as an Australian                   may be eligible to be
      passport fund under the Asia                registered as an Australian
         Region Funds Passport                           passport fund


Note: For a description of Figure 1, see RG 134.3 (accessible version).


                RG 134.4        Table 1 sets out the topics covered in this guide, and which types of funds
                                the guidance applies to.

Table 1: Summary of our guidance by topic

 Guidance in this guide                                              Retail investment funds      Wholesale CCIVs

 Consideration and issue price (Section B)                           Yes                          No

 Rights of members (Section C)                                       Yes                          No

 Powers and rights of operators (Section D)                          Yes                          No

 Complaints, disputes and remedies (Section E)                       Yes                          No

 Changing the constitution (Section F)                               Yes                          Yes

 Withdrawal (Section G)                                              Yes                          No

 Winding up (Section H)                                              Registered schemes only      No

 Enforceability of the constitution (Section I)                      Yes                          Yes

 Incorporation by reference (Section J)                              Yes                          Yes




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                   Page 5
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




Requirements for a constitution

                             Registered schemes

              RG 134.5       The constitution of a registered scheme must be a legally enforceable document
                             between the responsible entity and members that sets out some or all of the rights,
                             duties and liabilities of the responsible entity in its operation of the scheme.

              RG 134.6       Under s601GA of the Corporations Act, the constitution of a registered
                             scheme must make adequate provision for, or specify, certain prescribed
                             matters. These include:
                             (a)   the consideration to acquire and dispose of an interest in the scheme
                                   (see Section B);
                             (b)   the powers and rights of the responsible entity (see Section D), including:
                                   (i)    for making investments, borrowing or dealing with scheme
                                          property; and
                                   (ii)   to be paid fees or be indemnified out of scheme property;
                             (c)   the method for dealing with complaints about the scheme (see Section E);
                             (d)   any rights of members to withdraw from the scheme (see Section G); and
                             (e)   winding up the scheme (see Section H).

                                   Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), Parts (Pts) or Chapters (Chs) are to the
                                   Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.

              RG 134.7       The constitution of a registered scheme must be contained in a document
                             that is legally enforceable between the members and the responsible entity of
                             the scheme (s601GB): see Section I.

              RG 134.8       In our view, making provisions of the constitution required under s601GA
                             subject to other documents that may affect the provisions means that the
                             constitution does not ‘make adequate provision for’ or ‘specify’ the matters
                             required by s601GA: see Section J.

              RG 134.9       The constitution of a registered scheme may be changed only in certain
                             circumstances (see s601GC): see Section F.

                             Retail and wholesale CCIVs

              RG 134.10      A CCIV must have a constitution: see s1223B(1). The replaceable rules in
                             the Corporations Act do not apply to a CCIV: see s1223A.

              RG 134.11      The constitution of a retail CCIV must:
                             (a)   make provision for:
                                   (i)    the establishment of sub-funds, and classes of shares referable to
                                          sub-funds (s1223G(a)) (see Section C);
                                   (ii)   any cross-investment of assets between different sub-funds of the
                                          CCIV (s1223G(e)) (see Section C);


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                         Page 6
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                                   (iii)   the method for dealing with complaints in relation to the CCIV
                                           (s1223G(b)) (see Section E); and
                                   (iv)    shares in the CCIV to be redeemed, if some or all of the shares are
                                           redeemable shares or redeemable preference shares (s1223H) (see
                                           Section G);
                             (b)   state that the CCIV has power to borrow or raise money (s1223G(c));
                             (c)   if there are any limits on the power to borrow or raise money—set out
                                   the limits (s1223G(d)) (see Section D); and
                             (d)   specify any rights of the corporate director to be paid fees or be
                                   indemnified out of CCIV assets (s1224N) (see Section D).

              RG 134.12      The constitution of a retail CCIV may be changed only in certain
                             circumstances (see s1223D): see Section F.

              RG 134.13      The constitution of a wholesale CCIV must specify the requirements for
                             modifying, or repealing and replacing, the constitution (s1223F): see
                             Section F. There are no other prescribed minimum content requirements for
                             the constitution, but it is open to the corporate director to also include
                             content required for a retail CCIV.

              RG 134.14      In our view, making provisions of the constitution required under s1223F,
                             1223G, 1223H and 1224N subject to other documents that may affect the
                             provisions means that the constitution does not ‘make provision for’, ‘state’,
                             ‘set out’ or ‘specify’ the matters required by those sections: see Section J.


                             Australian passport funds

              RG 134.15      Under section 4 of the Australian Passport Rules, a passport fund operator
                             must ensure an Australian passport fund has a constitution that always
                             provides for:
                             (a)   a member to seek remedy, including through compensation, against the
                                   Australian passport fund and its operator; and
                             (b)   the agreed forum where:
                                   (i)     a member may commence proceedings against the Australian
                                           passport fund or its operator; and
                                   (ii)    the Australian passport fund or its operator may commence
                                           proceedings against a member.

                                   Note 1: The Australian Passport Rules are the Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018
                                   made under s1211 and 1211A by the Australian Minister responsible for the Asia
                                   Region Funds Passport. Under s1211(2), the Australian Passport Rules must be
                                   substantially the same as the Passport Rules set out in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of
                                   Cooperation on the Establishment and Implementation of the Asia Region Funds
                                   Passport (Memorandum of Cooperation).

                                   Note 2: For more information on requirements for Australian passport funds, see
                                   RG 134.172–RG 134.178.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 7
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




Complying with our guidance
              RG 134.16      There are consequences if a retail investment fund’s constitution does not
                             meet the requirements in the Corporations Act.

              RG 134.17      In particular, non-compliance will be a potential breach of:
                             (a)   the duty of the retail investment fund operator to ensure that the
                                   constitution meets the requirements in the Corporations Act for
                                   registered schemes or for retail CCIVs; or

                                   Note: See s601FC(1)(f) for registered schemes, and s1224D(2)(e) for retail CCIVs.

                             (b)   the duty of officers of the operator to do what a reasonable person in the
                                   officer’s position would do to ensure that the operator complies with the
                                   requirements for registered schemes or for retail CCIVs.
                                   Note: See s601FD(1)(f)(i) for registered schemes, and s1225(1)(f) for retail CCIVs.

              RG 134.18      Failure to ensure the constitution of a CCIV complies with the requirements
                             under Subdiv C of Div 1 of Pt 8B.3, including the minimum content
                             requirements, is a strict liability offence: see s1223B(3).

              RG 134.19      ASIC may also deregister a registered scheme if its constitution does not
                             meet the requirements in s601GA or s601GB.

              RG 134.20      Under s1223C, we may direct a retail CCIV to modify its constitution to
                             comply with the content requirements in Subdiv C of Div 1 of Pt 8B.3.

              RG 134.21      In deciding whether to amend the constitution, a retail investment fund
                             operator must consider all relevant implications so as to comply with its
                             duties under the Corporations Act.
                                   Note: For information on the process for registering a retail investment fund, including
                                   our assessment of the relevant constituent documents as part of that registration, see
                                   Regulatory Guide 131 Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund
                                   (RG 131) and Information Sheet 272 How to register a corporate collective investment
                                   vehicle and sub-fund (INFO 272).

              RG 134.22      We may deregister a registered scheme under s601PB(1)(b) or take action
                             against the responsible entity and/or its officers if we consider that the
                             constitution does not meet the requirements in s601GA or 601GB.

                                   Note: The following applies for schemes registered before 1 October 2013:
                                   (a) If the constitution meets the requirements set out in Regulatory Guide 137
                                       Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013 (RG 137),
                                       we will not deregister the registered scheme or take any action against a responsible
                                       entity or its officers on the basis that a constitution does not comply with s601GA
                                       and 601GB. Our no-action position will not affect the rights of other persons,
                                       including members, to take action for non-compliance. The responsible entity
                                       should assess whether the constitution complies with the Corporations Act and, if
                                       not, what action it should take to remedy any non-compliance.
                                   (b) If the scheme applies to become registered as an Australian passport fund, its
                                       constitution must be amended to comply with the Australian Passport Rules and
                                       s601GA and 601GB.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 8
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




B          Consideration and issue price—Retail
           investment funds

                               Key points

                               The guidance in this section is relevant to retail investment funds.
                               The constitution of a registered scheme must make adequate provision for
                               the consideration that is to be paid to acquire an interest in the scheme.
                               What constitutes ‘adequate provision’ will depend on the circumstances of
                               the registered scheme: see RG 134.23–RG 134.26.

                               To minimise uncertainty, we have given relief to allow a responsible entity
                               to set the amount of the consideration to acquire an interest in a registered
                               scheme: see RG 134.27–RG 134.118.

                               We encourage a responsible entity that does not rely on our relief, or that
                               proposes to include provisions giving a discretion about timing that affects
                               payment of the consideration, to provide us with a draft of the relevant
                               provisions before lodging an application to register the scheme: see
                               RG 134.31–RG 134.40.

                               We also encourage a corporate director of a retail CCIV to have regard to
                               the guidance in this section that applies to responsible entities when it is
                               setting the issue price of a share in a CCIV.




Consideration to acquire interests in a registered scheme

                             What is ‘adequate provision’?
              RG 134.23      The constitution of a registered scheme must make adequate provision for
                             the consideration that is to be paid to acquire an interest in the scheme: see
                             s601GA(1)(a).

              RG 134.24      This requirement aims to ensure that members have rights in the constitution
                             about the consideration to acquire an interest, because this consideration may
                             affect the value of other members’ interests, including by unfairly diluting
                             them. In our view, the responsible entity may be subject to a conflict between:
                             (a)   its interest in further issues of interests, which may increase its remuneration
                                   and may be promoted by offering interests at a discount; and
                             (b)   the interests of members, which may be to avoid diluting the value of
                                   their interests.

              RG 134.25      Because s601GA is principles based, what constitutes ‘adequate provision’
                             will depend on the circumstances of the registered scheme.

              RG 134.26      We acknowledge that responsible entities and their advisers might face
                             uncertainty about whether a constitution makes adequate provision for the
                             consideration to acquire an interest in a registered scheme.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                             Page 9
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             What relief is available?

              RG 134.27      To minimise uncertainty on what pricing discretions are permitted, we have
                             granted relief for registered schemes under ASIC Corporations (Discretions
                             for Setting the Issue Price and Withdrawal Price for Interests in Managed
                             Investment Schemes) Instrument 2023/693 (ASIC Instrument 2023/693).
                             Responsible entities can choose to:
                             (a)   rely on the relief in ASIC Instrument 2023/693 by including provisions
                                   in the constitution that meet the requirements of this relief; or
                             (b)   make adequate provision in the constitution for the amount of the
                                   consideration to be paid in a way that does not meet all of the requirements
                                   in the relief but does comply with the requirement in s601GA(1)(a).

                                   Note 1: ASIC Instrument 2023/693 commenced on 12 September 2023 and remade the
                                   relief under Class Order [CO 13/655] Provisions about the amount of consideration to
                                   acquire interests and withdrawal amounts not covered by ASIC Corporations (Managed
                                   Investment Product Consideration) Instrument 2015/847 and Class Order [CO 13/657]
                                   Discretions affecting the amount of consideration to acquire interests and withdrawal
                                   amounts. ASIC Instrument 2023/693 applies to responsible entities of registered
                                   managed investment schemes that were registered after 30 September 2013 or prior
                                   schemes where the responsible entity has published on its website that it will rely on
                                   this instrument or [CO 13/655].

                                   Note 2: If a scheme was registered before 1 October 2013 and the responsible entity has
                                   not published a notice on its website that it will rely on [CO 13/655] or ASIC
                                   Instrument 2023/693, the responsible entity may instead choose to include provisions
                                   that meet the requirements in ASIC Corporations (Managed Investment Product
                                   Consideration) Instrument 2025/629, which remade the relief in ASIC Corporations
                                   (Managed investment product consideration) Instrument 2015/847—for more
                                   information, see RG 137.

              RG 134.28      We have also granted responsible entities relief from the requirements for
                             equal treatment and acquiring interests on forfeiture under ASIC
                             Corporations (Equality of Treatment Impacting on the Acquisition of Scheme
                             Interests and CCIV Shares) Instrument 2023/697 (ASIC Instrument
                             2023/697).

                                   Note: ASIC Instrument 2023/697 commenced on 12 September 2023 and remade the
                                   relief under Class Order [CO 13/656] Equality of treatment impacting on the acquisition
                                   of interests. Our relief in ASIC Instrument 2023/697 also applies to retail and wholesale
                                   CCIVs as applicable.


                             Relying on our relief

              RG 134.29      If a responsible entity chooses to rely on all or any part of our relief in ASIC
                             Instrument 2023/693, it can:
                             (a)   draft provisions in the constitution that reflect the content of ASIC
                                   Instrument 2023/693; or
                             (b)   incorporate the content of ASIC Instrument 2023/693 by referring to it
                                   in a provision of the constitution.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                    Page 10
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.30      A responsible entity may incorporate ASIC Instrument 2023/693 by
                             specifically referring to the provisions of that instrument as being taken to be
                             incorporated in the constitution, or by referring generically to the provisions
                             of any exemption or declaration as being taken to be incorporated in the
                             constitution.

                             Requesting a review of provisions for scheme constitutions

              RG 134.31      Given the 14-day registration period for schemes, we encourage any
                             responsible entity that does not rely on our relief in ASIC Instrument
                             2023/693, or that proposes to include provisions giving a discretion about
                             timing that affects payment of the consideration to acquire an interest, to
                             give us a draft of the relevant provisions before lodging an application to
                             register the scheme. This will help us in reviewing the proposed provisions
                             and liaising with the responsible entity about them.

              RG 134.32      A written request for a review and a copy of the relevant draft provisions
                             should be sent to applications@asic.gov.au.

                                   Note 1: If the draft provisions do not comply with s601GA(1)(a) (taking into account
                                   this guidance), the responsible entity should lodge an application for individual relief
                                   rather than asking for a review. For more information on how to apply for relief, see
                                   Regulatory Guide 51 Applications for relief (RG 51) and Regulatory Guide 136 Funds
                                   management: Discretionary powers (RG 136).

                                   Note 2: Ordinarily, we will not act on requests to review draft provisions of the
                                   constitution of a registered scheme, other than provisions for the consideration to
                                   acquire an interest or calculation of the withdrawal amount.

              RG 134.33      The request for review should include an explanation of:
                             (a)   how the draft provisions comply with s601GA(1)(a) (taking into
                                   account this guidance);
                             (b)   the impact of the provisions on the certainty of determining the
                                   consideration; and
                             (c)   why the provisions do not create an inappropriate risk of a dilutive
                                   effect and are otherwise consistent with the purpose of s601GA(1)(a).

              RG 134.34      We will take all of this information into account in reviewing the draft
                             provisions, and any provisions of a constitution lodged with an application
                             for registration. We may also take into account other factors that appear
                             relevant.

              RG 134.35      There is no fee for this service.

              RG 134.36      A responsible entity or its advisers should allow enough time for us to
                             review the draft provisions and provide any comments. We will generally
                             require at least 10 business days to review the provisions and provide our
                             comments. However, if a provision is unusually complex or novel, we may
                             require more time for consideration.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 11
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.37      When lodging a subsequent application to register the scheme, the
                             responsible entity or its advisers should state that certain provisions have
                             been reviewed before lodgement. We may refuse registration if the
                             responsible entity or its advisers have not requested a review of the relevant
                             provisions and we do not have sufficient time to consider whether the
                             provisions comply with s601GA(1)(a).

              RG 134.38      An application to register a scheme that follows a review by ASIC will not
                             receive any priority or an expedited processing time on that account alone.

              RG 134.39      A review of the provisions in a constitution before lodgement does not
                             preclude us from raising additional matters when assessing whether the
                             constitution meets the requirements under s601EB.

              RG 134.40      We may publish reports on our view of particular kinds of provisions we
                             have reviewed. Where we have published our view about a particular kind of
                             provision, a responsible entity or its advisers do not need to apply for a
                             review if the provision is the same. When lodging an application to register a
                             scheme in these circumstances, the responsible entity or its advisers should
                             state that a certain provision is the same as a provision in a published report.
                             If there are some differences, we encourage responsible entities and their
                             advisers to lodge a written request for a review.


                             Calculating the consideration

              RG 134.41      Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, a responsible entity can exercise certain
                             discretions if the price is based on:
                             (a)   a reasonably current market price for interests in a class of interests in a
                                   scheme that is able to be traded on a financial market where the scheme
                                   is listed on the financial market; or
                             (b)   the net asset value for interests in a class of interests in a scheme that is
                                   either:
                                   (i)    not traded on a financial market; or
                                   (ii)   an exchange traded fund or managed fund and the interests are able
                                          to be traded on a financial marketed operated by ASX or Cboe.

                                   Note: For the definition of ‘exchange traded fund’ and ‘managed fund’, see ‘Key terms’.

              RG 134.42      The responsible entity can decide on a matter that affects what is determined
                             as the market price or net asset value per interest, or make an adjustment to
                             the amount determined. This relief relates only to discretions affecting the
                             amount of the consideration.

              RG 134.43      For example, when calculating the consideration, the responsible entity can:
                             (a)   add or deduct from the market price or net asset value per interest; and
                             (b)   cover costs associated with acquiring or disposing of relevant assets.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                  Page 12
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.44      However, our relief under ASIC Instrument 2023/693 does not allow:
                             (a)     adjustments that are made to determine a particular amount as the
                                     consideration to acquire an interest (even if it is expressed in a form that
                                     refers to the net asset value per interest, or the market price) as distinct
                                     from an adjustment based on something that affects the amount that is
                                     determined. This is because these types of adjustments can distort the
                                     consideration;
                             (b)     discretions affecting the timing for the provision of the consideration
                                     for the issue of interests; and
                             (c)     discretions about the form of consideration. However, consideration in
                                     the form of a non-monetary asset may be treated as being provided in
                                     relation to the monetary price at which the responsible entity could
                                     properly buy the asset.

              RG 134.45      Our relief under ASIC Instrument 2023/693 takes into account the purpose
                             of s601GA.

                             Unlisted unitised schemes

              RG 134.46      After the initial issue of interests in an unlisted unitised registered scheme, a
                             responsible entity will usually set the consideration to acquire an interest
                             using the value of assets of the scheme.

              RG 134.47      Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, a responsible entity of an unlisted
                             registered scheme may include a provision for calculating the consideration
                             using a formula or method that is based on the value of:
                             (a)     scheme property, less any liabilities that may be met from scheme
                                     property, divided by the number of interests on issue; or
                             (b)     the assets of a class of interests in the scheme, less any liabilities
                                     attributable to that class under the constitution that may be met from
                                     scheme property, divided by the number of interests on issue in that
                                     class (this is referred to as a ‘class pricing’ provision).

                                     Note: A responsible entity of an unlisted registered scheme can choose to rely on our
                                     relief under s601GAE in ASIC Instrument 2023/693 even if it is issuing an interest in a
                                     situation covered by s601GAD under this legislative instrument.

              RG 134.48      An example of a ‘class pricing’ provision is an interest in a particular class
                             being issued at a price calculated, as at the close of business on the date of
                             application, according to the formula in Figure 2.

                             Figure 2: Example class pricing provision

                                                              Net asset value + transaction costs
                                   Application price =
                                                                 Number of interests on issue




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 13
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.49      In this formula, ‘net asset value’, ‘transaction costs’ and ‘number of interests
                             on issue’ are proportionate to those variables the responsible entity
                             determines are properly referable to that class.

              RG 134.50      We consider that the best available information to determine the value of
                             interests or a class of interests in an unlisted registered scheme is generally
                             the value of the market price of the assets after any transaction costs that
                             may be expected. This is because the value of the interests will depend on
                             the acquisition or realisation of the assets.

              RG 134.51      While the consideration to acquire an interest in a registered scheme that is
                             not traded on a financial market (or is in a class of interests referred to in
                             RG 134.41(b)(ii)) must be based on the value of assets less liabilities for our
                             relief to apply, discretions may be exercised in calculating this. In addition,
                             adjustments may be made to the amount determined in the responsible
                             entity’s discretion.

                                   Note: For example, a provision that gives the responsible entity discretion to determine
                                   which of the two formulas specified in the constitution (each of which is based on the
                                   value of assets less liabilities) is to be used to set the consideration will be ‘based on’
                                   the value of assets less liabilities.

              RG 134.52      Some responsible entities will have partly paid interests on issue, and may
                             wish to include these in the formula or method to determine the
                             consideration to acquire an interest. In our view, this type of provision may
                             not meet the requirements in ASIC Instrument 2023/693 where the formula
                             or method:
                             (a)   does not count the partly paid interests as interests in the registered
                                   scheme when determining the number of interests on issue; and

                                   Note: For the purposes of counting the number of interests on issue, a partly paid
                                   interest should be counted as a fully paid interest (i.e. a partly paid interest should be
                                   counted as a ‘whole’ rather than a fractional interest in the denominator of the formula
                                   or method for calculating the consideration).

                             (b)   does not treat the value to the scheme of the right to make calls for the
                                   unpaid amount as an asset of the scheme. We consider that the current
                                   value to the scheme of the responsible entity’s right to make future calls
                                   for any unpaid amounts needs to be considered.
                                   Note 1: The value of the right to make a call for unpaid amounts may be appropriately
                                   accounted for by:
                                   (a) making a separate adjustment in the numerator of the formula or method to account
                                       for the value; or
                                   (b) treating the value as an asset in the definition of ‘net asset value’, where such a term
                                       is used in the numerator of the formula or method.

                                   Note 2: In valuing the right to make calls for any unpaid amounts, the responsible entity
                                   should consider the risk that members may fail to pay an outstanding amount called for
                                   by the responsible entity, or to restrictions on the ability to make a call for a defined
                                   period (in which case, time value of money should be considered). The factors relevant
                                   to valuation may differ depending on the specific circumstances and nature of the
                                   scheme and the terms on which partly paid interests are issued.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                       Page 14
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.53      Examples of pricing provisions that appropriately account for partly paid
                             interests are shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4.

                             Figure 3: Example pricing provision accounting for partly paid
                                       interests—Separate adjustment to the numerator

                                                         Net asset value + V + transaction costs
                                 Application price =
                                                              Number of interests on issue



              RG 134.54      In this formula, ‘V’ is the value of the right to call for the unpaid amount.
                             This excludes unpaid amounts already being treated as an asset of the scheme.
                             In determining this value, the responsible entity should consider certain
                             factors: see RG 134.52(b). In determining the number of interests on issue, a
                             partly paid interest should be counted as a ‘whole’ interest: see RG 134.52(a).

                             Figure 4: Example pricing provision accounting for partly paid
                                       interests—Adjustment to definition of ‘net asset value’

                                                           Net asset value + transaction costs
                                 Application price =
                                                              Number of interests on issue


              RG 134.55      For this formula, the definition of ‘net asset value’ in the constitution
                             includes a positive adjustment to account for the value of the right to call for
                             the unpaid amount. This excludes unpaid amounts already being treated as
                             an asset of the scheme. For example, it may treat the value of that right as an
                             asset. In determining this value, the responsible entity should consider certain
                             factors: see RG 134.52(b). In determining the number of interests on issue, a
                             partly paid interest should be counted as a ‘whole’ interest: see RG 134.52(a).

              RG 134.56      We understand that there can be material costs involved in the acquisition
                             and/or disposal of assets, which may not necessarily be reflected in the
                             valuation of these assets. These are often described as ‘transaction costs’.
                             These costs are in addition to any fees that are reflected in an adjustment to
                             the net asset value per interest in calculating the amount of the consideration.
                             The types of costs that may be incurred in acquiring or disposing of these
                             assets will depend on the types of assets.

              RG 134.57      We consider that the inclusion of actual transaction costs, or an estimate,
                             ensures that members who are not acquiring or disposing of interests at a
                             particular time are not disadvantaged by the registered scheme bearing costs
                             associated with the need to acquire and dispose of assets to satisfy such
                             applications in the consideration.

              RG 134.58      We understand the responsible entity may not always be able to include the
                             actual costs associated with the acquisition and/or disposal of assets. In these
                             circumstances, it is acceptable for the constitution to permit the responsible



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 15
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             entity to use an estimate of the acquisition or disposal costs to determine the
                             transaction cost amount. If a responsible entity uses an estimate, the estimate
                             should seek to provide equity and fairness among members. If the scheme is
                             generally growing with money coming in from new issues, any withdrawals
                             will not normally involve additional transactional costs and this should be
                             reflected in the adjustments. If the outlook is for withdrawals to exceed new
                             issues, the reverse may apply.

                                   Note 1: If the responsible entity uses estimates, it should take into account its duties
                                   under s601FC.

                                   Note 2: A responsible entity has duties to act honestly and in the best interests of members.
                                   In our view, a responsible entity may not be complying with these duties if it attributes
                                   costs to the acquisition or disposal of assets that do not reflect the expected costs of
                                   acquisition or disposal of the assets, after taking into account any netting of these costs
                                   with persons undertaking offsetting transactions with the fund that may be expected.

                             Unlisted exchange traded funds and managed funds traded on
                             financial markets

              RG 134.59      The responsible entity of an exchange traded fund or a managed fund that
                             has a class of interests traded on a financial market operated by ASX or
                             Cboe will set the consideration to acquire an interest in the registered
                             scheme using the net asset value per interest.

              RG 134.60      We have given conditional relief under ASIC Instrument 2023/693 for
                             responsible entities of exchange traded funds or managed funds to include a
                             provision to allow the amount of the consideration to acquire interests in a class
                             of interests that are, or will be, traded on a financial market operated by ASX or
                             Cboe to be based on the value of scheme property, less any liabilities that may
                             be met from scheme property, divided by the number of interests on issue.
                                   Note: A responsible entity can choose to rely on our relief under s601GAE in ASIC
                                   Instrument 2023/693, even if it is issuing an interest in a situation covered by s601GAD
                                   under this legislative instrument.

              RG 134.61      These types of registered schemes are required to have uncapped facilities
                             for issue and withdrawal operating on each trading day. This is intended to
                             ensure that arbitrage opportunities limit divergence between market price
                             and a price based on the value of the scheme assets less liabilities. If the
                             market price is lower, market participants could purchase interests at the
                             lower market price and withdraw through the continuous redemption facility
                             at the higher price to make a profit.

              RG 134.62      The profit-making opportunities can attract market participants to continue
                             with this process until the two prices equalise (within a certain spread) and any
                             further profit-making opportunities are eliminated. In our view, the quality of
                             the management of an unlisted registered scheme traded on a financial market
                             operated by ASX or Cboe does not substantially affect the value of its interests.
                             In these circumstances, we consider that the consideration to acquire an interest
                             in this type of registered scheme is more accurately priced based on the value
                             of scheme assets, less liabilities, rather than market price.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                        Page 16
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Listed schemes

              RG 134.63      After the initial issue of interests in a listed registered scheme, the
                             responsible entity may choose to set the consideration to acquire an interest,
                             taking into account the market price of the interests in the class that is traded.

              RG 134.64      We have given conditional relief under ASIC Instrument 2023/693 for
                             responsible entities to include a provision that means the amount of the
                             consideration to acquire an interest is based on the reasonably current market
                             price of the interests in the relevant class that is traded. However, this can be
                             subject to discretions related to determining the reasonably current market
                             price or making an adjustment to it. The adjustment must be for an amount
                             to be added to or deducted from the market price, rather than an amount that
                             results in a particular outcome as to the amount of the consideration that is
                             effectively not a market price.
                                   Note: A responsible entity can choose to rely on our relief under s601GAE in ASIC
                                   Instrument 2023/693, even if it is issuing an interest in a situation covered by s601GAD
                                   under this legislative instrument.

              RG 134.65      We consider that the market price generally better reflects the underlying
                             value of the interests in the scheme. Market pricing is an independent pricing
                             mechanism that regulates the depth of any discount that could result in unfair
                             economic dilution and establishes an appropriate reference point for
                             measuring it.

              RG 134.66      Our relief enables a responsible entity to determine the exact point of time
                             when the market price is determined. This includes whether it is based on
                             completed trades or bids or offers on a date, or average prices over a period
                             (e.g. using a volume weighted average). However, the market price that is
                             used must be reasonably current.
                                   Note: For more information on ‘reasonably current’ market value, see RG 134.114.

              RG 134.67      In our view, if the consideration to acquire an interest is based on the net
                             asset value and that price is lower than the market price, it has the potential
                             to unfairly dilute existing members’ interests. However, if that price is equal
                             to or higher than the market price, using it will not dilute members’ interests.

                                   Note: For example, a net asset value price might be appropriate when the market on
                                   which the scheme is traded is not liquid or deep enough to allow an accurate reflection of
                                   the true value of the interest, and interests are issued and withdrawn on a frequent basis.

              RG 134.68      A listed scheme may have a class of interests on issue that is not traded. In
                             these circumstances, it is our opinion that the consideration to acquire an
                             interest in that class should be priced using a formula or method based on the
                             value of assets, less any liabilities that may be met from the assets referable
                             to that class, divided by the number of interests in that class on issue.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                     Page 17
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Nil or fixed price schemes

              RG 134.69      ASIC Instrument 2023/693 does not give any relief for registered schemes
                             where the amount of consideration to acquire an interest is nil or a fixed
                             price. This is because we do not consider there is likely to be much
                             uncertainty for responsible entities and their advisers about whether a
                             constitution makes adequate provision for the consideration to acquire an
                             interest at a nil or fixed price.

              RG 134.70      We note that in some cases, a registered scheme may initially issue interests
                             at a fixed price but subsequently issue any other interests based on ‘assets
                             less liabilities per interest’, or market value. Our relief in ASIC Instrument
                             2023/693 still applies to the provisions relating to the subsequent issue of
                             interests based on ‘assets less liabilities’ or ‘assets of a class less liabilities of
                             a class’. However, if after an initial issue the interest of a member depends
                             on the value of assets, the value of which varies over time, the amount of the
                             consideration to acquire should reflect the changes in net asset value per
                             interest, or, for a listed scheme, the market price of the interests.

                             Options

              RG 134.71      A responsible entity may wish to issue options to acquire an interest in a
                             registered scheme. Where the responsible entity wishes to issue options, it
                             should consider whether the constitution will need to include a provision
                             about how the exercise price of the option is to be calculated. We do not
                             consider that the constitution needs to include a provision about the premium
                             payable on the option as the issue of the option does not itself separately
                             dilute the value of other members’ interests.

                             Placements

              RG 134.72      Responsible entities may issue interests in listed registered schemes by way
                             of placement. The consideration for the interests is generally at a discount to
                             the market price at which interests are acquired. A placement allows a
                             responsible entity to raise capital reasonably quickly and cost effectively
                             from targeted investors. However, as a placement excludes other existing
                             members, it may dilute the economic and voting rights of non-participating
                             members and has the potential to be unfair.

              RG 134.73      We have given conditional relief under ASIC Instrument 2023/693 allowing
                             responsible entities to determine the consideration to acquire an interest
                             where the interest is issued under a placement. The relief applies if:
                             (a)   the interests are traded on ASX or an approved foreign market;
                             (b)   trading of the interests in that class has not been suspended; and
                             (c)   where the interests are traded on an approved foreign market, either:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                            Page 18
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                                   (i)    the interests, together with any related issue in the previous year,
                                          do not immediately before the issue comprise more than 15% of
                                          the interests in that class; or
                                   (ii)   the following requirements are met:
                                          (A)   members who hold interests in the same class approve the
                                                issue of the interests by a placement resolution;
                                          (B)   unless the responsible entity considers that the issue of interests
                                                by the placement will not adversely affect the interests of
                                                members in another class, members of that class also approve
                                                the issue of the interests by placement resolution; and
                                          (C)   the notice convening a meeting to vote on the issue of
                                                interests by placement contains particulars of how the money
                                                raised by the issue will be used by the responsible entity.

              RG 134.74      A placement resolution means, in relation to an approval of an issue of
                             interests, a special resolution where votes are only cast for interests (eligible
                             interests) that are held by a member:
                             (a)   who will not acquire any of the interests that are to be issued or an
                                   interest in those interests; or
                             (b)   who does not hold the interests on trust for or on behalf of another
                                   person, unless that person will not acquire any of the interests that are to
                                   be issued or an interest in those interests.

              RG 134.75      By requiring that the interests are listed on ASX or an approved foreign
                             market, our relief in ASIC Instrument 2023/693 provides an independent
                             pricing mechanism that helps responsible entities assess the price of the issue
                             under the placement and helps protect members from unfair dilution. These
                             markets regulate the depth of any discount and establish an appropriate
                             reference point for measuring it. To ensure that the interests are adequately
                             priced and the market is fully informed, interests in the relevant class must
                             not be suspended from quotation.

              RG 134.76      Member approval of a placement is required if, together with any related
                             issue under a placement in the previous year, it would exceed 15% of the
                             interests in the relevant class. For ASX-listed registered schemes, this
                             requirement applies under Listing Rule 7.1. For foreign-listed registered
                             schemes, this requirement applies as a condition of relief under the modified
                             provisions in ASIC Instrument 2023/693. This requirement ensures that the
                             risk of unfair economic dilution is sufficiently addressed because it will
                             either have limited materiality or be approved by members.

                                   Note: Our relief in ASIC Instrument 2023/693 focuses on provisions in relation to the
                                   calculation of the amount of consideration under a placement. However, there are also
                                   additional requirements in the Corporations Act that have the potential to impact on the
                                   acquisition of interests in a registered scheme by way of placement, including:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                    Page 19
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                                   (a) the prohibition on the acquisition of more than 20% of a relevant interest in interests
                                       of a listed registered scheme (see s606);
                                   (b) the requirement to manage conflicts of interest (see s912A(1)(aa));
                                   (c) the requirement for approval of certain related party transactions (see Pt 5C.7);
                                   (d) the duties of a responsible entity (see s601FC); and
                                   (e) the prohibition on self-acquisition of interests by a responsible entity (see s601FG).


                             Rights issues

              RG 134.77      Responsible entities may issue interests in registered schemes by way of a
                             rights issue. As with an issue under a placement, the consideration for
                             interests is generally at a discount to the standard price at which interests in
                             the registered scheme are acquired.

              RG 134.78      We have given relief under ASIC Instrument 2023/693 for responsible
                             entities to determine the consideration to acquire an interest in a registered
                             scheme where the interest is issued under a rights issue. The responsible
                             entity can choose to make the offer to all members, or members of a specific
                             class. This relief also applies to issues on the exercise of an option, if the
                             option was offered to all members or all members of a particular class at the
                             time of the offer of the options. Our relief is subject to any statutory
                             exclusion of a member permitted by s601FC(1)(d), whether by ASIC
                             exemption or otherwise.

                                   Note: If an offer is restricted to members of a class, the responsible entity must comply
                                   with the relevant obligation under s601FC(1)(d) to treat members of different classes
                                   fairly.

              RG 134.79      Our relief in ASIC Instrument 2023/693 covers rights issues that meet the
                             requirements in s9A. In our experience, this definition captures the features
                             of the most common structure of a rights issue in the Australian market.

              RG 134.80      The relief focuses on provisions for calculating the amount of consideration
                             under a rights issue. We consider that it gives responsible entities
                             appropriate flexibility to structure a rights issue within the parameters of the
                             Corporations Act to best meet the needs of the registered scheme.

                                   Note: We may carefully scrutinise the structure of any rights issue (including
                                   underwriting by an associate) that appears to be a disguised placement outside of the
                                   process of assessing an application to register a scheme. We may also consider whether
                                   it is appropriate to apply for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances to the
                                   Takeovers Panel. For more information, see Regulatory Guide 6 Takeovers: Exceptions
                                   to the general prohibition (RG 6).


                             Additional relief affecting rights issues

              RG 134.81      We have given additional relief from s601FC(1)(d) for registered schemes
                             under ASIC Instrument 2023/697 to allow a responsible entity to:
                             (a)   exclude foreign members from participating in a rights issue; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 20
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             (b)   offer some or all members who are wholesale clients the opportunity to
                                   acquire interests under the rights issue before the opportunity is offered
                                   to other members, and require members who are wholesale clients that
                                   receive the offer to notify their acceptance of the offer at a time before
                                   other members must accept the offer.
                                   Note: A responsible entity has a duty to treat all members of the same class equally and
                                   members of different classes fairly: see s601FC(1)(d).

              RG 134.82      Our relief to exclude foreign members applies in the following situations:
                             (a)   If the registered scheme is listed and the offer is one to which ASX
                                   Listing Rule 7.7 applies, the responsible entity must comply with that
                                   rule for our relief to apply.
                             (b)   If the registered scheme is not listed on ASX and the offer is
                                   renounceable, the responsible entity must appoint a nominee to sell the
                                   rights to acquire the interests not taken up and distribute the net
                                   proceeds for our relief to apply.
                             (c)   If neither of the situations in RG 134.82(a)–RG 134.82(b) applies, our
                                   relief will apply where the responsible entity determines that it would be
                                   unreasonable to make the offer to a foreign member, taking into account:
                                   (i)     the number of members in the relevant jurisdiction;
                                   (ii)    the number and value of interests held by members that may be
                                           issued in a particular jurisdiction; and
                                   (iii)   the cost of complying with legal requirements and any requirements of
                                           a regulatory authority in making the offer in the relevant jurisdiction.

              RG 134.83      We have granted relief from s601FC(1)(d) to exclude foreign members. This is
                             because there are often only small numbers of foreign members in a particular
                             jurisdiction and/or legal or regulatory problems with offers to foreign members
                             meeting that jurisdiction’s requirements. A responsible entity is also permitted
                             to do this in relation to members with an address outside Australia and New
                             Zealand in relying on the disclosure exemptions for rights issues as defined
                             under s9A. For a listed registered scheme, our relief requires that foreign
                             members be given a fair opportunity to share in the benefit of any discount on a
                             rights issue where possible. This applies directly or indirectly through the
                             requirement to comply with the ASX Listing Rules.
              RG 134.84      Our relief to allow an offer to be made to members who are wholesale
                             clients before other members applies where the terms of the offer are such
                             that interests will not be issued to any members before the date that the other
                             members can elect to accept the offer to have the interest issued to them.
              RG 134.85      We grant this relief to allow offers of interests to occur at different times
                             under a rights issue. This type of rights issue is commonly referred to as an
                             ‘accelerated’ or ‘jumbo’ rights issue. A responsible entity structuring a rights
                             issue as an accelerated rights issue may be treating members of the same
                             class differently because the different offer periods for institutional and retail
                             members mean the offers may not be made on the same terms to each class.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                    Page 21
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Distribution reinvestment plans

              RG 134.86      A responsible entity may offer members an opportunity to acquire additional
                             interests by using some or all of any capital or income distributions to pay
                             for those additional interests. To increase the attractiveness for members, the
                             consideration to acquire these additional interests can be at some discount,
                             and members pay no brokerage on their acquisition.

              RG 134.87      Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, a responsible entity may determine the
                             amount of the consideration to acquire an interest in a registered scheme
                             where some or all of a distribution of capital or income payable to a member
                             is applied to pay for the issue of the interests to that member.

              RG 134.88      For the reasons given at RG 134.83, we have given additional relief from
                             s601FC(1)(d) for registered schemes (under ASIC Instrument 2023/697) to
                             allow a responsible entity to exclude certain foreign members from
                             participating in a distribution reinvestment plan.

                             Interest purchase plans

              RG 134.89      An interest purchase plan generally provides members with a convenient
                             means of obtaining additional interests in a registered scheme. These
                             additional interests are often acquired at a discount to the market price and
                             without brokerage fees or stamp duty.

              RG 134.90      Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, a responsible entity can set the
                             consideration to acquire an interest under a purchase plan if it meets the
                             requirements of ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans)
                             Instrument 2019/547 (ASIC Instrument 2019/547), which applies to interest
                             purchase plans where:
                             (a)   the interests in the relevant class are traded and trading has not been
                                   suspended (beyond a minimum period) on ASX;
                             (b)   we have not made certain determinations to prevent an issuer from
                                   relying on our relief; and
                             (c)   there are no existing exemptions from particular provisions of the
                                   Corporations Act.

              RG 134.91      There are also certain conditions for the relief in ASIC Instrument 2019/547
                             that a responsible entity must meet. If a responsible entity meets these
                             conditions, they will also be eligible to rely on relief from s601FC(1)(d)
                             (under ASIC Instrument 2023/697) to undertake the interest purchase plan.

                                   Note: For more information, see ASIC Instrument 2019/547, Regulatory Guide 125
                                   Share and interest purchase plans (RG 125) and ASIC Instrument 2023/697.


                             Negotiated fees

              RG 134.92      A responsible entity may regularly negotiate lower fees with certain
                             wholesale clients. These fees may be included in the calculation of the


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                              Page 22
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             consideration at which interests are issued. We recognise there are
                             commercial benefits for responsible entities in attracting wholesale clients by
                             negotiating commercial rates of fees with them.

              RG 134.93      Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, a responsible entity may set the
                             consideration to acquire an interest that involves a negotiated fee
                             arrangement, as long as it meets the requirements in ASIC Corporations
                             (Registered Schemes and CCIVs: Differential Fees) Instrument 2017/40
                             (ASIC Instrument 2017/40).

              RG 134.94      ASIC Instrument 2017/40 provides a conditional exemption for responsible
                             entities where the responsible entity differentiates between members in
                             relation to fees based on factors including:
                             (a)   the aggregation of a member’s interests across the range of financial
                                   products issued by the responsible entity (or a related body), that are
                                   regulated under the Corporations Act;
                             (b)   the aggregation of holdings of a member and certain family members
                                   across a range of financial products offered or issued by the responsible
                                   entity (or a related body corporate) according to the value or period of
                                   time during which the aggregated interests have been held; or
                             (c)   members who are employees of the responsible entity (or its related
                                   body corporate), provided that the value of the employees’ interests or
                                   shares relative to the other members does not exceed 5%.

              RG 134.95      To rely on this instrument, a responsible entity must ensure that:
                             (a)   a statement is disclosed to members and included in any Product
                                   Disclosure Statement (PDS):
                                   (i)    of the basis on which the differential fee will be calculated and
                                          which sets out the fees members will have to bear; or
                                   (ii)   where fees are negotiated with wholesale clients, that the fee
                                          arrangement is to be offered to certain wholesale clients;
                             (b)   the differential fee arrangement does not adversely affect the fees paid
                                   or to be paid by any member who is not entitled to participate; and
                             (c)   other than where fees are negotiated with wholesale clients, the differential
                                   fee arrangement is applied without discrimination to all members who
                                   satisfy the criteria to receive the benefit of the arrangement.

                                   Note: For more information on differential fees, see ASIC Instrument 2017/40.


                             Forfeited interests

              RG 134.96      An acquisition of an interest in a registered scheme that occurs as a result of
                             sale on a forfeiture may be caught by s601GA(1)(a), and we have granted
                             relief under ASIC Instrument 2023/693 to allow responsible entities to set
                             the consideration to acquire a forfeited interest in a class of interests that are
                             quoted on the financial market operated by ASX.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                    Page 23
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                                   Note: For information on forfeiture arrangements in relation to time-sharing schemes,
                                   see ASIC Corporations (Time-sharing Schemes) Instrument 2017/272 (ASIC Instrument
                                   2017/272) and Regulatory Guide 160 Time-sharing schemes (RG 160).

              RG 134.97      Our relief in ASIC Instrument 2023/693 applies where the interests have
                             been forfeited by a member for failing to pay an outstanding amount due to,
                             and called for by, the responsible entity and:
                             (a)   on payment of the outstanding amount the interest would be in a class
                                   of interests traded on ASX; and
                             (b)   the sale occurs in accordance with s254Q (other than s254Q(1), (9),
                                   (10) and (13)) as if the interest was a share in a company and the
                                   responsible entity was a director of the company.

                             Additional relief for forfeited interests

              RG 134.98      We have given additional relief from s601FG under ASIC Instrument 2023/697
                             for responsible entities to acquire forfeited interests on trust for members on
                             forfeiture of those interests if the sale of those interests is required.

                             Withdrawal price

              RG 134.99      Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, a responsible entity or its nominee may
                             exercise a discretion to:
                             (a)   decide on a matter that affects a value included in the formula for
                                   calculating the withdrawal amount;
                             (b)   decide on a matter that is an aspect of the method; or
                             (c)   make an adjustment to the formula for calculating the withdrawal
                                   amount for costs in acquiring or disposing of scheme property.

              RG 134.100     The formula used for calculating the withdrawal amount must be based on
                             the value of scheme assets less liabilities, and can take into account the
                             material costs involved in the disposal of scheme assets.

                                   Note: A responsible entity of a listed scheme does not generally give a right to members
                                   to withdraw on-market. We note that ASX Listing Rule 1.1, Condition 5, prevents off-
                                   market withdrawals.

              RG 134.101     ASIC Instrument 2023/693 limits the exercise of a discretion by the
                             responsible entity to discretions affecting how the withdrawal amount will
                             be determined. It does not permit a responsible entity to make adjustments so
                             that the withdrawal amount is set to a particular amount.

              RG 134.102     In some circumstances, it may not be appropriate for the responsible entity to
                             use a withdrawal amount based on the value of scheme assets less liabilities,
                             as this may not be the best information as to value (e.g. for relinquishment of
                             an interest in a time-sharing scheme). In those circumstances, the withdrawal
                             amount should be able to be determined from the constitution unless other
                             relief applies (e.g. relief under ASIC Instrument 2017/272).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                    Page 24
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             IDPS-like schemes and MDA services

              RG 134.103     Registered schemes that operate like investor directed portfolio services
                             (IDPS-like schemes) are arrangements for holding and dealing with
                             investments selected by clients. They are also known as a type of ‘platform’.
                             Managed discretionary accounts (MDAs) are arrangements that involve a
                             person managing a portfolio of assets for a retail client without pooling for
                             investment purposes. Some platforms and MDA services are operated as
                             registered schemes based on our approach that the product is a managed
                             investment scheme.

              RG 134.104     ASIC Instrument 2023/693 does not give any relief for IDPS-like schemes or
                             MDAs that are registered schemes. This is because we do not consider there
                             is likely to be much uncertainty for responsible entities and their advisers
                             about whether a constitution makes adequate provision for the consideration
                             to acquire an interest in these circumstances or for a right of withdrawal.
                             Investors acquiring an interest in an IDPS-like scheme or MDA that is a
                             registered scheme are making a contribution of money to the arrangement
                             that results in an equal amount being used on their behalf in the scheme.

              RG 134.105     This contribution varies depending on the minimum amount for investment and
                             the desire of the investor. Generally, a responsible entity can address the
                             requirement for the constitution to make adequate provision for the consideration
                             to acquire an interest by including a provision that the amount contributed,
                             including where a specified fee is deducted, is applied to the member’s account.
                             We will not generally raise any issues with this type of provision.

                             Stapled securities

              RG 134.106     Some responsible entities include one or more registered schemes as
                             components of stapled securities.

              RG 134.107     Generally, the responsible entity will want to retain a discretion about the
                             allocation of the issue price of the stapled security between its component
                             parts for tax reasons.

              RG 134.108     Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, a responsible entity may allocate the
                             consideration to acquire an interest in a registered scheme if that interest is a
                             component part of a stapled security and the constitution contains:
                             (a)   adequate provision for the consideration to acquire the stapled
                                   securities; or
                             (b)   provisions about the consideration to acquire the stapled securities that
                                   are permitted by our relief for the consideration to acquire interests.

              RG 134.109     The terms of a stapled security require that each of its component parts must be
                             transferred together. Stapled securities of listed entities that are traded are
                             generally acquired at market price. The component parts of the stapled security
                             are not individually quoted and, as such, each component does not have an
                             individual market price. The consideration to acquire stapled securities that are


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 25
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             not traded is generally based on the net asset value. The issue price of a listed or
                             unlisted stapled security will reflect the value of each of its components.

              RG 134.110     Our relief in ASIC Instrument 2023/693 applies to stapled securities:
                             (a)   that comprise two or more financial products, including at least one
                                   interest in a registered scheme, that must be transferred together; and
                             (b)   where there are no financial products in the same class as those
                                   financial products that are stapled that may be transferred separately.

                             Schemes with limited or no pooling

              RG 134.111     Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, a responsible entity may set the amount of
                             the consideration to acquire an interest in a scheme if the only contributions that
                             may be used in common with or pooled with any other assets of the scheme are:
                             (a)   money placed in an authorised deposit-taking institution (ADI) account
                                   as scheme property pending disbursement of the money to pay fees or
                                   expenses, acquire investments, or carry on business;
                             (b)   not proprietary rights and no income in which a member has any
                                   interest is to be paid or worked out by dividing up a pool; or
                             (c)   used in common or pooled between joint tenants or tenants in common
                                   where:
                                   (i)    none of the tenants is the responsible entity or an associate of the
                                          responsible entity; and
                                   (ii)   each tenant is known to each other tenant before the offer to issue
                                          an interest is made.

                             Duties for exercising a discretion

                             Valuation

              RG 134.112     Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, if a responsible entity exercises a
                             discretion in relation to determining the value of scheme property, the
                             method for calculating the value must:
                             (a)   be consistent with the range of ordinary commercial practice for valuing
                                   that type of asset; and
                             (b)   produce a value that is reasonably current at the time of issue or withdrawal.

              RG 134.113     If the responsible entity exercises a discretion in relation to determining the
                             market price of interests that are traded on a financial market, the method for
                             calculating the price must:
                             (a)   be consistent with the ordinary commercial practice for determining the
                                   market price of interests of the same kind; and
                             (b)   produce a market price that is reasonably current at the time of issue or
                                   withdrawal.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 26
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.114     What is a ‘reasonably current’ valuation or market price will depend on the
                             nature of the asset. However, we consider ‘reasonably current’ would
                             generally be:
                             (a)   for a class of interests (of a listed registered scheme) that is traded, the
                                   price or an average price close to the time it is issued or the time an
                                   impending issue is announced. In our view, a market price from several
                                   months before issue or announcement of the issue would not usually be
                                   ‘reasonably current’; and
                             (b)   for other classes of interests in a registered scheme:
                                   (i)     on a daily basis, if the financial products held are traded on a
                                           market with regular daily transactions;
                                   (ii)    as determined within the last year or a longer period while the
                                           responsible entity determines that a current valuation would not be
                                           materially different where the assets held are non-liquid or thinly
                                           traded; and
                                   (iii)   when a reliable market price is available for an asset, based on the
                                           market price for the asset.

                                   Note: The responsible entity must, at a minimum, conduct valuations at reasonable
                                   intervals appropriate to the relevant assets, unless an exemption applies: see s601FC(1)(j).


                             Act reasonably

              RG 134.115     Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, if a discretion affecting the pricing of
                             interests in a registered scheme is exercised, the responsible entity must only
                             exercise the discretion if it is reasonable to do so. We consider this is
                             consistent with the responsible entity’s duty to exercise the degree of care
                             and diligence that a reasonable person would exercise if they were in the
                             position of the responsible entity.

                             Record keeping

              RG 134.116     Under ASIC Instrument 2023/693, a responsible entity must exercise the
                             discretion affecting the pricing either in accordance with a current written
                             policy or prepare a written explanation of how the discretion was exercised
                             and why such exercise was reasonable.

              RG 134.117     A member or a person who is entitled to receive a PDS is also entitled to be
                             given by the responsible entity, free of charge, a copy of any documents
                             relating to discretions about pricing of interests. The responsible entity must
                             advise members of this right and include a statement to that effect in the
                             PDS. We would also expect this information to be included in shorter PDSs.
                             and should be incorporated by reference.

              RG 134.118     We consider that requiring a responsible entity to document its policies and
                             procedures on how it calculates the consideration to acquire an interest or
                             withdrawal payment promotes efficiency, consistency and transparency. We


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                     Page 27
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             also consider it is consistent with the responsible entity’s duty to exercise the
                             degree of care and diligence that a reasonable person would exercise if they
                             were in the position of the responsible entity.

                                   Note: For more information on good practice for unit pricing for registered schemes, see
                                   Regulatory Guide 94 Unit pricing: Guide to good practice (RG 94).




Issue price of shares in a retail CCIV
              RG 134.119     The constitution of a retail CCIV does not need to set out the consideration
                             that must be paid to become a member because, unlike a registered scheme,
                             a CCIV is a company. The price of shares in a company may vary over time.
                             In addition, a company may issue shares on such terms and with such rights
                             and restrictions as it determines.

                                   Note: See paragraph 3.75 of the Explanatory Memorandum to the Corporate Collective
                                   Investment Vehicle Framework and Other Measures Bill 2021.

              RG 134.120     We still encourage corporate directors of a retail CCIV to consider the
                             guidance for responsible entities in RG 134.23–RG 134.118 when setting the
                             issue price of a share in the CCIV.


                             Setting out the issue price

              RG 134.121     In accordance with good practice, we encourage corporate directors of retail
                             CCIVs to generally adopt the following approach to setting the issue price:
                             (a)   for shares in a sub-fund that is not listed—to calculate the issue price
                                   based on the value of CCIV assets, less any liabilities that may be met
                                   from CCIV assets, divided by the number of interests of issue; and
                             (b)   for shares in a sub-fund that is listed—to calculate the issue price based
                                   on the reasonably current market price of the shares in the relevant class
                                   that is traded.

              RG 134.122     We also expect the issue price of shares to be determined using valuations
                             that are:
                             (a)   reasonably current; and
                             (b)   consistent with the range of ordinary commercial practice for valuing
                                   those type of assets.

                                   Note 1: A valuation will not be reasonably current if the corporate director has reason to
                                   believe that a more up-to-date valuation would result in a materially different value. A
                                   reasonably current valuation will reflect current market prices for the assets, where
                                   available and reliable, and will reflect current market conditions that would affect
                                   dealing in the assets.

                                   Note 2: We also consider this is consistent with a corporate director’s duty under
                                   s1224D(2)(j) to ensure that the assets of a sub-fund are valued at regular intervals
                                   appropriate to the nature of the assets.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 28
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.123     There are also other requirements in the Corporations Act that a corporate
                             director will need to have regard to when setting the issue price of a share in
                             a CCIV, including:
                             (a)   the requirement to manage conflicts of interest (see s912A(1)(aa));
                             (b)   the duties of a corporate director (see s1224D); and
                             (c)   limitations on a corporate director’s right to acquire shares (see s1224P).


                             What relief is available?

              RG 134.124     The following relief from the equal treatment obligation under s1224D(2)(b)
                             is available to a corporate director of a retail CCIV under ASIC Instrument
                             2023/697:
                             (a)   for rights issues—relief to exclude foreign members from participating
                                   in a rights issue in certain circumstances (this is similar to the relief
                                   afforded to responsible entities as outlined in RG 134.81–RG 134.83);
                             (b)   for rights issues—relief to offer some or all members who are wholesale
                                   clients the opportunity to acquire interests under the rights issue before
                                   the opportunity is offered to other members, and require members who
                                   are wholesale clients that receive the offer to notify their acceptance of
                                   the offer at a time before other members must accept the offer (this is
                                   similar to relief afforded to responsible entities as outlined in
                                   RG 134.81–RG 134.85);
                             (c)   for dividend reinvestment plans—relief to allow a corporate director to
                                   exclude certain foreign members from participating in a dividend
                                   reinvestment plan (this is similar to relief afforded to responsible
                                   entities as outlined in RG 134.86–RG 134.88); and
                             (d)   for share purchase plans—relief to offer and issue shares under a share
                                   purchase plan in accordance with ASIC Instrument 2019/547 (this is
                                   similar to the relief afforded to responsible entities as outlined in
                                   RG 134.89–RG 134.91).

                                   Note 1: A corporate director of a wholesale CCIV is also subject to an equal treatment
                                   obligation under s1224D(3)(b) and similar relief is available under ASIC Instrument
                                   2023/697 in relation to rights issues and dividend reinvestment plans as applicable.

                                   Note 2: A corporate director of a retail CCIV or wholesale CCIV may also enter into
                                   negotiated fee arrangements in relation to a sub-fund of the CCIV as long as it meets the
                                   requirements in ASIC Instrument 2017/40. For additional information: see ASIC
                                   Instrument 2017/40.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                    Page 29
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




C          Rights of members—Retail investment funds

                               Key points

                               This guidance in this section is relevant to retail investment funds.

                               We have modified the requirements for changing the constitution of a
                               registered scheme to protect class rights: see RG 134.125–RG 134.126.

                               The constitution of a retail CCIV must make provision for the establishment
                               of sub-funds, and classes of shares referable to sub-funds. The constitution
                               must also make provision for any cross-investment of assets between
                               different sub-funds of the CCIV: see RG 134.127–RG 134.132.



Protecting class rights in a retail investment fund
              RG 134.125     The constitution of a registered scheme or retail CCIV may set out a
                             procedure for varying or cancelling rights of a class of members of the fund,
                             or the rights attached to a class of interests or shares under the fund.

              RG 134.126     We have modified s601GC and s1223D to require that, if the constitution
                             sets out such a procedure, those rights may only be varied or cancelled by a
                             special resolution under s601GC(1)(a) and s1223D(2) respectively if the
                             responsible entity complies with that procedure: see ASIC Corporations
                             (Changing Scheme and Retail CCIV Constitutions) Instrument 2019/700
                             (ASIC Instrument 2019/700). Any such procedure is also not able to be
                             modified without following the procedure itself.



Establishing sub-funds of CCIVs
              RG 134.127     A CCIV (whether retail or wholesale) must have at least one sub-fund when
                             it is first registered: see s1222R. The rights attaching to each share in a
                             CCIV must be referable to one (and only one) sub-fund: see s1230(1).

              RG 134.128     The constitution of a retail CCIV must make provision for the establishment
                             of sub-funds, and classes of shares referable to sub-funds: s1223G(a).

              RG 134.129     To comply with s1223G(a), the constitution of a retail CCIV should set out
                             that sub-funds will be established, which occurs upon registration of the sub-
                             fund by ASIC: see s1222T. The constitution should also provide for any
                             issue of classes of shares referable to sub-funds. The procedures in the
                             constitution should ensure that classes of shares referable to a sub-fund are
                             able to be identified against the shares of other sub-funds.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 30
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.130     The constitution of a retail CCIV may also set out any rights that apply to
                             members of a sub-fund, or a class of shares referable to a sub-fund, that differ
                             from those of other sub-funds, or classes of shares referable to sub-funds.



Cross-investment between sub-funds
              RG 134.131     A CCIV (whether retail or wholesale) is generally permitted to engage in
                             cross-investment between sub-funds of the CCIV: see s1230Q. This involves
                             a CCIV acquiring, in respect of any of its sub-funds, one or more shares that
                             are referable to another of its sub-funds.

              RG 134.132     The constitution of a retail CCIV must make provision for any cross-investment
                             proposed between sub-funds: see s1223G(e). The provisions must be consistent
                             with the restrictions on circular cross-investments and membership rights under
                             the Corporations Regulations 2001: see regs 8B.4.10 and 8B.4.15.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 31
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




D          Powers and rights of operators—Retail
           investment funds

                               Key points

                               The guidance in this section is relevant to retail investment funds.

                               For registered schemes, a responsible entity may determine the level of
                               detail to include in the constitution about its powers of investment or
                               dealing with property and assets, and any powers to borrow or raise money
                               for the purposes of the registered scheme: see RG 134.133–RG 134.138.

                               For retail CCIVs, the constitution must state that the CCIV has power to
                               borrow or raise money and, if there are to be any limits on the CCIV’s
                               exercise of that power, must set out those limits: see RG 134.139.

                               The constitution of a retail investment fund must specify the right of a retail
                               investment fund operator to any fees and indemnities that are payable out
                               of scheme property or CCIV assets. The constitution does not need to
                               expressly identify the actual amount of a fee that will be paid by members.
                               It can identify a maximum fee to which the retail investment fund operator is
                               entitled, as long as all of the variables that affect the amount of any fee are
                               specified: see RG 134.140–RG 134.153.




Powers to deal with property and raise money
              RG 134.133     The constitution of a registered scheme must make adequate provision for
                             the powers of the responsible entity in making investments of, or otherwise
                             dealing with, scheme property: see s601GA(1)(b).

              RG 134.134     If the responsible entity will have powers to borrow or raise money for the
                             purposes of the registered scheme:
                             (a)   those powers must be specified in the constitution; and
                             (b)   any other agreement or arrangement has no effect to the extent that it
                                   purports to confer such a power (see s601GA(3)).

              RG 134.135     The powers that may be appropriate depend on the particular scheme being
                             operated. On this basis, we consider it is appropriate for a responsible entity
                             to have the flexibility to determine the level of detail to include about its
                             powers, taking into account the particular scheme. This is consistent with
                             current commercial practice.

              RG 134.136     Because s601GA(1)(b) relates to the powers of investment, rather than how
                             a responsible entity intends to exercise these powers, we consider that it is
                             not necessary for the investment strategy to be set out in the constitution.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 32
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.137     However, a responsible entity should make known its policy on how it will
                             exercise its powers in the PDS and by reporting to members or under the
                             continuous disclosure regime. If the investment or borrowing strategy is to
                             change or not be followed, additional disclosure may be required, and in
                             some cases, this may not be permitted under the terms on which investments
                             have been accepted.

              RG 134.138     A degree of detail about the investment strategy and borrowing strategy is
                             information that we expect would be likely to influence persons considering
                             investment or seeking to understand their investment. In implementing an
                             investment strategy, a responsible entity should also ensure it is acting
                             within what is permitted under its Australian financial services
                             (AFS) licence.

              RG 134.139     The constitution of a retail CCIV must state that the CCIV has power to
                             borrow or raise money: see s1223G(c). Also, if there are to be any limits on
                             the CCIV’s exercise of that power, the constitution must set out those limits:
                             see s1223G(d).



Rights to fees and indemnities
              RG 134.140     If a retail investment fund operator will have any rights to be paid fees out of
                             scheme property or CCIV assets, or to be indemnified out of these for
                             liabilities or expenses incurred in relation to performing its duties, these
                             rights must be:
                             (a)   specified in the constitution; and
                             (b)   available only in relation to the proper performance of those duties.

                                   Note: For registered schemes, see s601GA(2); for CCIVs, see s1224N.

              RG 134.141     In our view, this requirement gives members an important protection by
                             ensuring that the rights to be paid fees or to be indemnified are only modified
                             in accordance with the processes for modifying a constitution. It is also
                             intended to preclude the recovery of fees or the exercise of indemnity rights if a
                             retail investment fund operator fails to properly perform their duties.

                                   Note: For more information on modifying the constitution, see Section F.

              RG 134.142     To ‘specify the right’, the constitution should either:
                             (a)   expressly state that any such rights to fees or indemnification are
                                   subject to the proper performance by the retail investment fund operator
                                   of its duties under the provisions for fees and indemnities; or
                             (b)   include a provision to the effect that incorporates this restriction (e.g.
                                   a provision which states that, to the extent a provision of the
                                   constitution is inconsistent with the Corporations Act, the provision will
                                   be of no effect).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                               Page 33
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.143     The right should be subject to the proper performance of duties only. The
                             constitution should not allow the right to be subject to the proper
                             performance of powers, unless those powers are exercised in the proper
                             performance of the operator’s duties.

                                   Note: For example, the constitution may provide for the right to be subject to the proper
                                   performance of powers in the proper performance of the operator’s duties.

              RG 134.144     We do not consider that the words ‘specify the right’ require that the actual
                             amount of the fee that will be paid by members must be expressly identified.
                             However, we consider that the time at which the fee accrues, the
                             performance to which it relates, and each variable (including timing
                             variables) affecting the amount of the fee that is payable or when it is
                             payable—all must be clearly identified in the constitution and not left to the
                             determination of the retail investment fund operator.

              RG 134.145     We consider that a fee provision that includes a timing or performance period
                             variable containing an indefinite expression will not sufficiently identify the
                             relevant variable. For example, provisions including expressions such as ‘as
                             determined by the operator’, ‘at least n days’, or ‘from time to time’, or a
                             provision that allows the retail investment fund operator to determine the
                             period over which performance is to be assessed against a performance
                             benchmark, will not satisfy the requirement to ‘specify the right’.

              RG 134.146     In our experience, retail investment fund operators often want to include
                             provisions in a constitution that allow a maximum entitlement to a fee. This
                             type of provision gives an operator the commercial flexibility to set fees
                             without having to constantly modify the constitution. We consider this type
                             of provision still meets the requirements of s601GA(2) for registered
                             schemes and s1224N for CCIVs because the right is ‘specified’, even if in
                             practice that right might be waived from time to time.

                                   Note: For example, the constitution may include a provision that allows a retail
                                   investment fund operator to charge an application fee of up to 5% of funds under
                                   management. However, the operator may decide to limit the amount it charges to 1.5%
                                   of funds under management and disclose this to investors in the PDS.

              RG 134.147     We have also seen that retail investment fund operators regularly want to
                             include in a constitution provisions that calculate a variable fee with
                             reference to an index benchmark. We also consider that this type of
                             provision can meet the requirements of s601GA(2) and 1224N because all
                             the variables affecting the calculation of the fee can be clearly identified.

              RG 134.148     Retail investment fund operators using an index benchmark should use one
                             that is appropriate to the type of retail investment fund to be operated. This
                             helps prevent the operator preferring their own interests over the best
                             interests of members by calculating a fee using an inappropriate index.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                     Page 34
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.149     We recognise that retail investment fund operators that include provisions
                             calculating fees using an index need flexibility to replace that index with
                             another index if the original index becomes redundant or inappropriate. We
                             consider that it is generally appropriate to allow for the operator to replace
                             an index with another index that is similar to the original index if the
                             provision clearly identifies when the index can be replaced.

                                   Note: For example, a provision that allows the responsible entity of an Australian real
                                   estate investment trust (A-REIT) to substitute the S&P/ASX 200 A-REIT Index with
                                   the S&P/ASX 200 Industrials Index may not be a similar index benchmark.

              RG 134.150     A retail investment fund operator may purport to indemnify themselves from
                             scheme property or CCIV assets at an ‘hourly rate to be determined by them
                             from time to time’ or ‘on standard commercial terms for work undertaken’
                             for performing functions in operation of the fund. In our view, this type of
                             purported indemnity is better characterised as a fee. Each variable (including
                             timing variables) affecting the amount of the fee that is payable or when it is
                             payable must be clearly identified in the constitution.

                                   Note: Sections 199A–199C may prohibit giving an indemnity for the corporate director
                                   of a CCIV. Those sections have extended operation in relation to a CCIV: see s1225E.

              RG 134.151     We also note that there is judicial authority (in the context of a registered
                             scheme) that a person in their capacity as trustee cannot contract with
                             themselves in their personal capacity, and so this type of arrangement may
                             be of no legal effect.

                                   Note: See MacarthurCook Fund Management Limited v Zhaofeng Funds Limited
                                   [2012] NSWSC 911.

              RG 134.152     We do not consider that s601GA(2) and s1224N allow for a right to payment
                             of a fee in advance of the proper performance of the retail investment fund
                             operator’s duties to which the fee relates. Payment in advance is
                             incompatible with the right to a fee only being available for proper
                             performance of the duty to which it relates. A retail investment fund operator
                             can only form a view about whether the duty has been properly performed
                             after having performed it.

                                   Note: However, we would not generally raise concerns with a provision that allows a
                                   fee to be payable for particular services (e.g. the issue of interests or shares in a retail
                                   investment fund) even though obligations will arise from the issue that will only be
                                   performed after the fee is paid.

              RG 134.153     In the process of withdrawal from a retail investment fund, our experience is
                             that money may be placed in a separate account to facilitate payments of
                             withdrawal proceeds. We consider that the rights in such an account remain
                             scheme property or CCIV assets if held for members. If any deductions from
                             such an account are made for fees or to make payments by way of indemnity
                             to the retail investment fund operator, any right to such payments must
                             comply with s601GA(2) and 1224N.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                          Page 35
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.154     For registered schemes, money received for the issue of interests that are not
                             immediately issued must generally be paid into an ‘application money’
                             account under s1017E, and can only be withdrawn to return it to the person
                             who paid for the interests or on the issue of the interests. We consider that
                             money cannot be withdrawn to pay fees except when an issue of interests
                             occurs. In our view, when an interest in a scheme is issued, money paid for
                             the interest will be a contribution of money to the scheme and, so, scheme
                             property as defined in s9. This means any fees paid out of the application
                             money account need to be permitted under s601GA(2).

                                   Note: ‘Scheme property’ is defined broadly in s9, and includes the contribution of
                                   money or money’s worth to the scheme, and any property or income derived directly or
                                   indirectly from the use of the contributions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                Page 36
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




E          Complaints, disputes and remedies—Retail
           investment funds

                               Key points

                               The guidance in this section is relevant to retail investment funds and
                               Australian passport funds.

                               The constitution of a registered scheme must make adequate provision for
                               handling complaints made by members. The constitution of a retail CCIV
                               must also make provision for complaints handling. These provisions should
                               ensure that complaints can be made by all members about:
                               • for registered schemes—all parts of the program or plan of action that
                                 constitute the scheme; and
                               • for retail CCIVs—all parts of the operating of the business and the
                                 conducting of the affairs of the CCIV (see RG 134.155–RG 134.159).

                               If a retail investment fund is open to retail clients, the constitution can comply
                               with the requirements for retail clients in s601GA(1)(c) for registered schemes,
                               and s1223G(b) for retail CCIVs, by containing a provision that the operator, as
                               an AFS licensee, will comply with the dispute resolution requirements in
                               s912A(2) for retail clients: see RG 134.161–RG 134.166.

                               If a retail investment fund is open to wholesale clients, the operator can either
                               adopt the same procedures that apply to retail clients or can devise its own
                               complaints handling procedures for these clients: see RG 134.167–RG 134.170.

                               We have granted relief from s601FC(1)(d) for registered schemes, and
                               from s1224D(2)(b) for retail CCIVs, to make it clear that retail investment
                               fund operators may treat retail and wholesale clients who are in the same
                               class differently in relation to complaints handling: see RG 134.171.

                               Under the Australian Passport Rules, the constitution of an Australian passport
                               fund must include provisions for certain matters relating to remedies for loss
                               and actions against members: see RG 134.172–RG 134.178.



Requirements for retail investment funds
              RG 134.155     The constitution of a retail investment fund must make adequate provision
                             for the method by which complaints made by members in relation to the
                             scheme or CCIV are to be dealt with: see s601GA(1)(c) for registered
                             schemes and s1223G(b) for retail CCIVs.

              RG 134.156     In our view, the words ‘in relation to the scheme’ in s601GA(1)(c) and ‘in
                             relation to the CCIV’ in s1223G(b) should be interpreted broadly, so that
                             complaints can be made by members about:
                             (a)   all parts of the ‘program or plan of action’ that constitute the scheme; and
                             (b)   all parts of the operation of the business and the conducting of the
                                   affairs of the retail CCIV.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 37
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.157     For example, we do not consider that a provision that seeks to restrict
                             complaints to those being made solely about the conduct of the retail
                             investment fund operator would constitute adequate provision for complaints
                             being made in relation to the fund.

                             Scope of complaints handling provisions for registered
                             schemes
              RG 134.158     The Corporations Act defines a ‘member’ of a registered scheme as a person
                             who holds an interest in the scheme. This means that, to comply with the
                             requirement in s601GA(1)(c), the complaints provisions must apply to a person
                             who holds an interest in the scheme, and not to a narrower class of persons.

              RG 134.159     The responsible entity will generally use a defined term in the constitution
                             (e.g. ‘member’ or ‘unitholder’) to refer to the people to whom the complaints
                             provisions apply. Where that definition is more restrictive than the definition
                             of ‘member’ in s9, the complaints provisions will not comply with
                             s601GA(1)(c) because they will not apply to all people who meet the
                             definition of ‘member’ in s9.

              RG 134.160     In these circumstances, the constitution will not have made adequate
                             provision for the method by which complaints made by persons who hold an
                             interest in the scheme, but do not fall within the scope of the relevant defined
                             term, are to be dealt with.
                                   Note: The complaints provisions would not be adequate despite any procedures the
                                   responsible entity has in place so that, in practice, a person who holds an interest in the
                                   registered scheme is only likely to not be entered on the register as the result of
                                   circumstances such as error or fraud.


                             Retail clients
              RG 134.161     A retail investment fund operator is also an AFS licensee. As an AFS
                             licensee, a retail investment fund operator that provides financial services to
                             retail clients must have a dispute resolution system that meets the
                             requirements in s912A(2): see s912A(1)(g).

              RG 134.162     Under s912A(2), an AFS licensee must:
                             (a)   have an internal dispute resolution procedure that satisfies the
                                   requirements set out in Regulatory Guide 271 Internal dispute
                                   resolution (RG 271); and
                             (b)   be a member of the external dispute resolution scheme operated by the
                                   Australian Financial Complaints Authority (AFCA).
                                   Note: For more information on what an AFS licensee must do to have a dispute resolution
                                   system in place to meet the requirements in s912A(2), see Regulatory Guide 267 Oversight of
                                   the Australian Financial Complaints Authority (RG 267), RG 271 and ASIC Corporations,
                                   Credit and Superannuation (Internal Dispute Resolution) Instrument 2020/98.

              RG 134.163     We recognise that the requirements in s601GA(1)(c) for registered schemes,
                             and s1223G(b) for retail CCIVs, do not directly align with the requirement in



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                        Page 38
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             s912A(2). The requirements in s601GA(1)(c) and 1223G(b) apply to
                             complaints made by members of a retail investment fund. We note that the
                             respective definitions of ‘member’ in s9 do not distinguish between a retail
                             client and a wholesale client. However, the requirement in s912A(1)(g) only
                             applies to retail clients.

              RG 134.164     We consider that a retail investment fund operator will be able to meet the
                             requirements of s601GA(1)(c) for registered schemes or s1223G(b) for retail
                             CCIVs in part by having a dispute resolution system for retail clients that
                             meets the requirements of s912A(2). This will allow operators to avoid the
                             need to have different sets of complaints handling procedures for retail
                             clients to meet their obligations under s601GA(1)(c) or s1223G(b), and
                             912A(2).

              RG 134.165     To minimise the need for the retail investment fund operator to have
                             duplicate procedures for retail clients, the constitution could include a
                             provision to the effect that the operator will comply, as an AFS licensee,
                             with the dispute resolution requirements in s912A(2) in dealing with
                             member complaints in relation to the retail investment fund. However, it is
                             open to the operator not to include a provision to that effect and instead
                             separately set out complaints handling provisions for retail clients, provided
                             these fully address all of the relevant requirements consistent with our
                             guidance in RG 267 and RG 271.

              RG 134.166     If the retail investment fund is only open to retail clients and the operator
                             relies on this as the basis on which the constitution makes adequate
                             provision for dealing with complaints, the constitution must also include a
                             provision that the operator will only issue interests in the scheme, or shares
                             in the CCIV, to retail clients.


                             Wholesale clients

              RG 134.167     Because s601GA(1)(c) and s1223G(b) are broader than s912A(1)(g), the
                             retail investment fund operator will also need to include provisions about
                             complaints handling for wholesale clients. This is unless the constitution
                             excludes the issue of interests or shares to wholesale clients.

              RG 134.168     We acknowledge that retail investment fund operators and wholesale clients
                             may have in place informal arrangements to resolve disputes and/or
                             agreements that provide assistance in resolving disputes. However, we
                             consider that, to meet their obligations under s601GA(1)(c) or s1223G(b), an
                             operator must include provisions about these arrangements to ensure that the
                             constitution also makes adequate provision for dealing with complaints in
                             relation to the retail investment fund by wholesale clients.

              RG 134.169     It may be appropriate for different requirements to apply for wholesale clients
                             who may have the knowledge, resources and bargaining power to have
                             complaints effectively resolved, and may escalate issues through arbitration


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 39
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             and the courts. In light of this, we consider the retail investment fund
                             operator should be able to:
                             (a)   devise and include its own complaints handling procedures for
                                   wholesale clients; or
                             (b)   apply the same procedures to all members (both retail and wholesale).

              RG 134.170     If the retail investment fund is only open to wholesale clients, and the
                             operator relies on this as the basis on which the constitution makes adequate
                             provision for dealing with complaints, there should be a provision in the
                             constitution to the effect that the operator will only issue interests in the
                             scheme or shares in the CCIV to wholesale clients.


                             Additional relief for complaints handling

              RG 134.171     We have granted relief from s601FC(1)(d) for registered schemes, and
                             s1224D(2)(b) for retail CCIVs, to make it clear that retail investment fund
                             operators may treat retail and wholesale clients who may be in the same
                             class differently in relation to complaints handling. This relief is given under
                             ASIC Instrument 2023/697.



Requirements for Australian passport funds
              RG 134.172     Under section 4 of the Australian Passport Rules, an Australian passport
                             fund operator must ensure that the Australian passport fund has a compliant
                             constitution at all times.

                                   Note: We have granted relief to facilitate the modification of the constitution of a
                                   registered scheme for consistency with certain requirements in the Australian Passport
                                   Rules: see Section F.


                             Seeking remedy

              RG 134.173     Under the constitution, each member must be entitled to seek remedy against
                             the Australian passport fund (if the fund is a legal entity) and its operator in
                             certain circumstances.

              RG 134.174     The member must be entitled to seek remedy, including through
                             compensation, for loss suffered by the member due to the Australian
                             passport fund or its operator breaching:
                             (a)   the laws of Australia and associated regulations administered by ASIC;
                             (b)   any other regulatory requirements administered by ASIC; or
                             (c) the Australian Passport Rules.
              RG 134.175     The member must be entitled to seek remedy in the member’s choice of
                             Australia or a host economy of the Australian passport fund.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                   Page 40
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.176     These provisions must apply unless:
                             (a)   the member and the Australian passport fund or its operator have agreed
                                   in writing that the member is not entitled to seek remedy in that place in
                                   relation to the particular proceedings; and
                             (b)   that agreement is effected after the conduct that is, or is to be, subject to
                                   the proceedings has first occurred.


                             Agreed forum

              RG 134.177     The constitution must set out that, if a member has commenced proceedings
                             against the Australian passport fund (if it is a legal entity) or its operator in a
                             court in the member’s economy, the court will be a convenient forum to hear
                             the proceedings. This is unless:
                             (a)   a similar action has been commenced against the Australian passport fund
                                   or its operator in another economy, and it would be reasonable for the
                                   member to participate in that action; or
                             (b)   the member and the Australian passport fund or its operator have agreed
                                   in writing that the court will not be a convenient forum for that
                                   particular proceeding and the agreement is effected after the conduct
                                   that is, or is to be, subject to the proceedings has first occurred.

                                   Note: The ‘member’s economy’ is the economy in which the member was located when
                                   they applied to be a member of the Australian passport fund. If that economy is not a
                                   participating economy, the member’s economy is taken to be Australia.

              RG 134.178     The constitution must also provide that the convenient forum for the
                             Australian passport fund (if the fund is a legal entity) or its operator to bring
                             an action against a member will be a court in the member’s economy. This is
                             unless:
                             (a)   the member and the Australian passport fund or its operator have agreed
                                   in writing that the court will not be a convenient forum for the particular
                                   proceedings; and
                             (b)   the agreement is effected after the conduct that is or is to be subject to
                                   the proceedings has first occurred.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                 Page 41
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




F          Changing the constitution—Retail investment
           funds and wholesale CCIVs

                               Key points

                               The guidance in this section is relevant to retail investment funds and
                               wholesale CCIVs.

                               The constitution of a retail investment fund may only be modified, or
                               repealed or replaced, in certain circumstances.

                               The constitution of a wholesale CCIV must specify the requirements for
                               modifying its constitution, or repealing and replacing the constitution.

                               Changes to the constitution of a retail investment fund or wholesale CCIV must
                               be lodged with ASIC, and do not take effect before lodgement (or as provided
                               by s137 for CCIVs in certain circumstances): see RG 134.179–RG 134.184.

                               We have granted relief from the requirements for changing the constitution
                               in certain circumstances: see RG 134.185–RG 134.189.




Requirements for retail investment funds
              RG 134.179     The constitution of a retail investment fund may be modified, or repealed
                             and replaced with a new constitution, either by:
                             (a)   a special resolution passed by members; or

                                   Note: In relation to a CCIV, this can be a special resolution of members of a sub-fund if
                                   the corporate director reasonably considers the change will not adversely affect the
                                   rights of any member of any other sub-fund: see 1223D.

                             (b)   the retail investment fund operator, if the operator reasonably considers
                                   the change will not adversely affect members’ rights (see s601GC).

                                   Note: In 360 Capital RE Ltd v Watts (2012) 91 ACSR 328, the Victorian Court of
                                   Appeal considered the circumstances in which the responsible entity of a registered
                                   scheme may unilaterally change the constitution under s601GC(1)(b). The court held
                                   that a member’s right to have the scheme managed in accordance with the constitution
                                   was a relevant right for the purposes of that provision. See also Lewski v Australian
                                   Securities & Investments Commission [2016] FCAFC 96.

              RG 134.180     When a change is made to the constitution, the retail investment fund
                             operator must lodge a copy of the modified or new constitution with ASIC.

              RG 134.181     For registered schemes, the modification or replacement will not take effect
                             until the copy has been lodged: see s601GC(2).

              RG 134.182     For retail CCIVs, s137 sets the date that a modification or replacement of the
                             constitution takes effect in certain circumstances. If s137 does not set the
                             date, the modification or replacement takes effect on the date on which it is



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                     Page 42
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             lodged with us or a later date determined by the corporate director: see
                             s1223D(5). The corporate director must lodge a copy of the modified or new
                             constitution with ASIC within 14 days: s1223D(3).

              RG 134.183     We may review the copy of the modified or new constitution and:
                             (a)   ask for further information on one or more specific provisions; and
                             (b)   suggest or require modifications to be made.

              RG 134.184     We may direct a responsible entity to lodge a consolidated copy of the
                             constitution: see s601GC(3).



Relief available for retail investment funds
              RG 134.185     We have provided relief from the requirements in s601GC and 1223D to
                             allow for changes of the constitution of a retail investment fund in certain
                             circumstances: see ASIC Instrument 2019/700.

              RG 134.186     Under our relief, changes can be made when:
                             (a)   the quorum requirement for a meeting of members cannot be met
                                   because the scheme has an insufficient number of members;
                             (b)   no member is entitled to vote at a meeting of members because of the
                                   restrictions of s253E; or
                             (c)   all interests were issued in situations that did not require a PDS.

              RG 134.187     For the relief to apply, the retail investment fund operator must ensure that
                             material information has been provided to each member and relevant
                             auditors, and each member gives their written consent.

              RG 134.188     Our relief also allows the responsible entity of a registered scheme to modify
                             the constitution to the extent it reasonably considers necessary to ensure the
                             constitution is consistent with section 4 of the Australian Passport Rules and
                             contains withdrawal provisions that are consistent with the requirements in
                             the rules.

                                   Note: A responsible entity can rely on this relief to make modifications to the
                                   constitution of a registered scheme before the scheme is registered as an Australian
                                   passport fund. However, the relief only allows modifications to be made that have effect
                                   where the Australian Passport Rules apply to the scheme.

              RG 134.189     We have also provided relief to address any uncertainty for a responsible
                             entity seeking to change the constitution of a registered scheme to allow the
                             scheme to use the attribution managed investment trust regime without
                             holding a meeting of members: see ASIC Corporations (Attribution




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                   Page 43
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Managed Investment Trusts) Instrument 2016/489. This relief is available
                             where:
                             (a)   the responsible entity publishes a notice on its website explaining the
                                   change and does not receive a sufficient number of requests for a
                                   meeting of members to consider the changes; or
                             (b)   all members are wholesale clients and the responsible entity takes
                                   reasonable steps to consult with each member about the changes before
                                   making them.



Requirements for wholesale CCIVs
              RG 134.190     A wholesale CCIV’s constitution must specify the requirements that must be
                             complied with for the CCIV to modify its constitution, or repeal and replace
                             its constitution: s1223F.

                                   Note: The constitution of a wholesale CCIV may be modified, or repealed and replaced
                                   with a new constitution, by complying with the requirements set out in the constitution
                                   for the modification or repeal: see s1223D(2)(b).

              RG 134.191     When a change is made to the constitution, the corporate director of the
                             wholesale CCIV must lodge a copy of the modified or new constitution with
                             ASIC within 14 days: s1223D(3).

              RG 134.192     Section 137 sets the date that a modification or replacement of the
                             constitution takes effect, in certain circumstances. If s137 does not set the
                             date, the modification or replacement takes effect on the date on which it is
                             lodged with us, or a later date notified to ASIC that is determined in
                             accordance with any requirements in the constitution.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                   Page 44
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




G          Withdrawal—Retail investment funds

                               Key points

                               The guidance in this section is relevant to retail investment funds.

                               A right to withdraw from a registered scheme is any right of a member to
                               cease to hold an interest in the scheme at the request of the member and
                               exercisable against the responsible entity or a person acting on its behalf:
                               see RG 134.193–RG 134.199.

                               The constitution of a registered scheme should address the key aspects of
                               the withdrawal process, including how the withdrawal right is triggered, any
                               amount that is to be paid or given to members, restrictions on dealing with
                               withdrawal requests and ceasing to be a member: see RG 134.200–
                               RG 134.222.

                               The right to withdraw from a registered scheme and any provisions for
                               making and dealing with withdrawal requests must be fair to members: see
                               RG 134.223–RG 134.231.

                               If a responsible entity will have discretion to suspend the right to withdraw,
                               the constitution should set out the circumstances in which it can exercise
                               that discretion: see RG 134.232–RG 134.233.

                               The constitution of a retail CCIV that has redeemable shares must make
                               provision for the shares to be redeemed. This provision must:
                               • specify a period within which a redemption must be satisfied while the
                                 relevant sub-fund is liquid;
                               • be fair and reasonable to the members of each sub-fund of the CCIV;
                                 and
                               • be consistent with the Corporations Act: see RG 134.234–RG 134.246.



Withdrawal from a registered scheme

                             Members’ right to withdraw

              RG 134.193     Under s601GA(4), if members have a right to withdraw from a registered
                             scheme, the constitution must:
                             (a)   specify the right;
                             (b)   if the right is to be exercised while the registered scheme is liquid, set
                                   out adequate procedures for making and dealing with these withdrawal
                                   requests; and
                             (c)   if the right may be exercised while the registered scheme is not liquid,
                                   provide for the right to be exercised in accordance with Pt 5C.6 and set




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 45
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                                   out any other adequate procedures that apply to making and dealing
                                   with these withdrawal requests.

                                   Note 1: In some circumstances, we have given relief from the requirements in
                                   RG 134.193(b)–RG 134.193(c). For more information, see, for example, ASIC
                                   Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159 and
                                   Section C of RG 136.

                                   Note 2: We have given relief from s601GA(4) for IDPS-like schemes. For more
                                   information, see ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services Provided
                                   Through a Registered Managed Investment Scheme) Instrument 2023/668 (ASIC
                                   Instrument 2023/668). Under ASIC Instrument 2023/668, a constitution for an IDPS-
                                   like scheme must specify the right to withdraw and set out procedures for how
                                   withdrawal requests will be dealt with in certain circumstances. These procedures must
                                   be fair to all members.

                                   Note 3: Our guidance on the scope of the complaints handling provisions in light of the
                                   definition of ‘member’ also applies to any withdrawal provisions: see RG 134.158–
                                   RG 134.159.

              RG 134.194     Section 601GA(4) also requires that the right to withdraw, and any
                             provisions setting out procedures for making and dealing with withdrawal
                             requests, be fair to members.

              RG 134.195     We note that s601GA does not require that members must be permitted to
                             withdraw from a scheme. However, a responsible entity may wish to give
                             members this right and include provisions in the constitution to allow them to
                             withdraw from the scheme. If the right to withdraw may be exercised when the
                             scheme is not liquid, the provisions of the constitution must be in accordance
                             with the provisions of Pt 5C.6 that apply to schemes that are not liquid.

              RG 134.196     In our view, a member can acquire the right to withdraw at any time before
                             the withdrawal occurs. We do not consider the right to withdraw needs to
                             exist when a request is made to trigger the application of s601GA(4).

                                   Note: For more information on the right to withdraw, see paragraph 9.4 of the
                                   Explanatory Memorandum to the Managed Investments Bill 1997.

              RG 134.197     We consider that provisions that allow a member (at their request) to cease
                             to be a member in relation to the interests that are the subject of the withdrawal
                             request can confer a ‘right to withdraw’. This is even if the responsible entity
                             has a discretion about whether to act on the request when it is received. When
                             the request is made, there may be no right to withdraw. However, a right to
                             withdraw will generally arise on the exercise of the discretion to allow
                             withdrawal or at a later point before the withdrawal is effected.

              RG 134.198     This right to withdraw may arise regardless of how the withdrawal process is
                             initiated by the member or whether it is subject to conditions imposed by the
                             responsible entity. We do not consider that a right to withdraw requires a
                             member to have an automatic or unconditional right to withdraw from a
                             scheme, because this would unduly limit the operation of s601GA(4) in a
                             manner that is inconsistent with its legislative purpose.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                    Page 46
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.199     A right to withdraw can also exist in circumstances where the responsible
                             entity (including by a nominee) acquires a member’s interests by transfer at
                             the member’s request.
                                   Note: We note that the member’s holding in the register must then be adjusted. It is a
                                   requirement under the modified provisions of ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes
                                   On-market Buy-backs) Instrument 2016/1159 that any interests acquired through the on-
                                   market buy-back must be cancelled.


                             Making and dealing with withdrawal requests

              RG 134.200     What constitutes ‘adequate procedures’ for making and dealing with withdrawal
                             requests will depend on the circumstances of the registered scheme.
                                   Note: We consider that the decision in Re Real Estate Capital Partners Managed Investments
                                   Ltd as Responsible Entity of the Real Estate Capital Partners USA Property Trust [2013]
                                   NSWSC 190 turns on the particular circumstances of the relevant scheme, and does not give
                                   rise to a generally applicable rule about what constitutes ‘adequate procedures’.

              RG 134.201     While we do not consider it necessary to state every aspect of the procedures,
                             key rights about the process should be set out in the constitution. This is so
                             members can determine their right to withdraw from the registered scheme and
                             be protected against adverse changes other than by special resolution.

              RG 134.202     In light of this view, we consider that the responsible entity and its advisers
                             should be able to devise provisions that deal with the procedures for making
                             and dealing with withdrawal requests. This is as long as the provisions deal
                             with all of the key steps in the process from commencement to completion.
                             This will enable responsible entities to design provisions about withdrawing
                             from registered schemes that best reflect their operational practices and
                             product design.

              RG 134.203     In our view, it is not sufficient to merely state in the constitution that the key
                             elements of the withdrawal procedures are set out in a separate document,
                             such as a PDS.

              RG 134.204     We consider that the key information on the withdrawal process will
                             generally cover how the withdrawal right is exercised, any amount that will
                             be paid or given to members, restrictions on dealing with withdrawal
                             requests and ceasing to be a member. However, there may be other steps in
                             the withdrawal process that a responsible entity will want to address, or must
                             address for the procedures to be adequate.
                                   Note: The responsible entity must also ensure that provisions on making and dealing
                                   with withdrawal requests are consistent with the constitution being enforceable under
                                   s601GB: see Section I.


                             Triggering a withdrawal right

              RG 134.205     We consider how a withdrawal right is triggered is important. For this
                             reason, the constitution should provide enough information so that it is
                             possible to determine how a member may trigger the right to withdraw and


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                   Page 47
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             what (if any) preconditions apply. This should include all steps that a
                             member will have to take and whether there are any prerequisites that need
                             to be satisfied before a right arises and is satisfied.

                                   Note 1: An example is where the exercise of a withdrawal right may be preceded by an
                                   offer (or an invitation to offer) that is made by the responsible entity.

                                   Note 2: Another example is that, if members may only exercise the right to withdraw
                                   subject to a requirement that the interests have been held for a minimum time period,
                                   that period should be specified in the constitution.

                                   Note 3: A further example is that, if members are able to make a withdrawal request in a
                                   number of different forms (e.g. in writing or by telephone), the constitution should set
                                   out all of the permissible forms that a withdrawal request can take.

              RG 134.206     We consider that provisions that are too general and leave too much
                             discretion to the responsible entity will not provide sufficient information on
                             the steps and preconditions (if any) for how a member may trigger the right
                             to withdraw. The constitution may require a withdrawal request to contain
                             information as required by the responsible entity.

                                   Note: For example, allowing the responsible entity to determine ‘from time to time’ the
                                   form that a withdrawal request must take will not provide sufficient information on the
                                   steps and preconditions (if any) for how a member may trigger the right to withdraw.

              RG 134.207     A provision that allows the responsible entity to determine any preconditions
                             at its discretion or from time to time does not give members information on
                             how they may exercise the right to withdraw and the preconditions that will
                             apply to the exercise of that right to comply with s601GA(4). In our view,
                             the exercise of such discretions could undermine the right of members to
                             withdraw, and remove such rights from the protection of requiring a special
                             resolution to be adversely changed.

                             Amounts paid to members

              RG 134.208     We consider a key aspect of withdrawing from a registered scheme is any
                             amount that will be paid or given to members. For this reason, there should
                             be provisions about the amounts that will be given to members to satisfy
                             withdrawal requests. This includes:
                             (a)   a price that will apply to the interests that are the subject of the
                                   withdrawal request (see RG 134.99–RG 134.102);
                             (b)   when the amount is paid to members and the maximum period for
                                   payment after withdrawal; and
                             (c)   the nature of the amount that members will receive and how non-
                                   monetary assets will be valued.

                                   Note: For more information on relief in relation to withdrawal amounts and the
                                   discretions that affect withdrawal amounts, see RG 134.99–RG 134.105 and
                                   RG 134.116–RG 134.118.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                     Page 48
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.209     If the consideration may be paid in-specie or in more than one form (e.g. a
                             combination of cash and other assets), we consider that the responsible
                             entity’s duties under s601FC(1)(c) and (d), and its fiduciary relationship with
                             members, mean it should consider the rights and interests of all members
                             (including the withdrawing member) when exercising any discretion in
                             relation to:
                             (a)   the nature of the consideration members will receive;
                             (b)   who bears liability for transaction costs associated with the transfer of
                                   assets; and
                             (c)   whether the consent of the withdrawing member is required (see also
                                   RG 134.230).

                             Restrictions on dealing with withdrawal requests

              RG 134.210     If a member’s right to withdraw is restricted in certain circumstances or can
                             be restricted at the discretion of the responsible entity, the constitution
                             should describe these restrictions because these are important aspects of the
                             withdrawal right.

              RG 134.211     In our view, the type of restrictions that should be stated in the constitution
                             include:
                             (a)   any circumstances in which a responsible entity may suspend and
                                   resume withdrawals;
                             (b)   the right to impose minimum and maximum limits on the number or
                                   value of interests that may be withdrawn by a member;
                             (c)   the ability to satisfy requests on a partial or staggered basis; and
                             (d)   any other circumstance that restricts a member’s right to withdraw.

              RG 134.212     We expect that any discretion would be exercised in a manner consistent with
                             the responsible entity’s statutory duties under s601FC and that, generally, any
                             suspension that is material in duration would be disclosed to members under
                             s1017B or s675 if the registered scheme is a disclosing entity.

              RG 134.213     The constitution should not contain a provision that allows the responsible
                             entity to set out the circumstances in which it may suspend the right to
                             withdraw in another document.

                             Ceasing to be a member of the scheme

              RG 134.214     A ‘member’ of a registered scheme is a person who holds an interest in the
                             scheme: s9. A person ceases to be a member in relation to the withdrawn
                             interest of the registered scheme when they cease to hold an interest in it.

              RG 134.215     The constitution should not include provisions that treat withdrawing
                             members as having ceased to be a member before the time when the scheme
                             property is valued for determining the withdrawal price. This is because until



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                           Page 49
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             that time the member can share in any increase in the value of scheme
                             property, and so retains an interest in the scheme.

                                   Note: For example, we consider that provisions that have the effect of denying
                                   withdrawing members the right to complain under the complaints handling procedures
                                   in the constitution, or that have the effect of applying withdrawal provisions for a
                                   scheme that is liquid when the scheme is not liquid at the time scheme property is
                                   valued, are provisions which deny withdrawing members their rights as members or are
                                   not in accordance with Pt 5C.6.

              RG 134.216     If a member has ceased to hold an interest in the registered scheme but has
                             not been paid the withdrawal amount, they do not have rights as a member,
                             but are taken to be a creditor of the scheme.

                                   Note: See MSP Nominees Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Stamps (South Australia) (1999)
                                   198 CLR 494 at 509 and Basis Capital Funds Management Ltd v BT Portfolio Services
                                   Ltd [2008] NSWSC 766.

              RG 134.217     A responsible entity will often include a provision about the timeframe
                             between acceptance of the withdrawal request and the date for payment of
                             the withdrawal amount to a member whose interests have been redeemed
                             (former member). We understand that this timeframe will vary depending on
                             the characteristics of the registered scheme and the operational practices of
                             the responsible entity.

              RG 134.218     We consider that, to be fair to all members, the constitution needs to include
                             a provision specifying the maximum payment period after a person ceases to
                             be a member. This may be expressed as a period from the date of withdrawal
                             of a member’s interest in the scheme or a time before this time, such as
                             acceptance of the withdrawal request.

                                   Note: The time at which withdrawal of a member’s interests occurs may be on or after
                                   the time as of which the interest is valued to determine the withdrawal amount.

              RG 134.219     Members whose interests have been redeemed will generally expect to
                             receive payment within a reasonable time of withdrawing. For a non-liquid
                             registered scheme, withdrawal requests must be satisfied by payment within
                             21 days: see s601KD. For liquid registered schemes, we expect that to
                             ensure fairness (as required by s601GA(4)), the constitution must provide
                             that generally former members will be paid within 21 days from when they
                             cease to hold an interest in the registered scheme.

              RG 134.220     The constitution may provide for payment to a former member within a
                             period that exceeds 21 days in certain circumstances, as long as it is fair and
                             the relevant circumstances exist. Circumstances in which we consider a
                             longer period may be fair are:
                             (a)   extreme market events—we consider a provision will be fair if it
                                   provides for an extended payment period due to an event that was not
                                   reasonably foreseen by the responsible entity at the time it accepted the
                                   withdrawal request and while the circumstances still exist. However, we
                                   do not consider it fair to use a provision that allows the responsible


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                  Page 50
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                                   entity to delay payment merely on the basis that it is ‘in the best
                                   interests of members’. This is because such a provision fails to take into
                                   account the interests of the former member awaiting payment;

                                   Note: For example, the constitution may allow for the payment period to be extended
                                   for the duration of a securities exchange closure that is the result of an extreme event, or
                                   for the duration of a trading halt by a market operator where this was not reasonably
                                   foreseen by the responsible entity.

                             (b)   systems and processes are already in place for a longer period—
                                   responsible entities who operate multiple registered schemes may want
                                   to have timeframes for payment of withdrawal amounts that are the
                                   same for all registered schemes. In some cases, schemes that were
                                   registered before 1 October 2013 had payment timeframes of 30 days.
                                   We recognise that there are costs associated with making changes to
                                   systems and processes to reduce the timeframe to 21 days. However, if
                                   other changes to systems and processes are made, we expect the
                                   timeframe will be adjusted to a 21-day payment period; and
                             (c)   the registered scheme is a ‘feeder fund’—if the registered scheme is a
                                   feeder fund of another retail investment fund (master fund) that has a
                                   longer timeframe to pay withdrawal amounts to former members, we
                                   consider that it will be difficult to have a timeframe for payment of the
                                   withdrawal amount that is shorter than the master fund.

                                   Note: The 21-day timeframe in this guidance relates to the period commencing from the
                                   time when a member ceases to hold an interest in a liquid registered scheme until the
                                   withdrawal amount is paid to a former member; it does not relate to, for example, the
                                   overall period for acceptance of, or processing, withdrawal requests.


                             Non-liquid schemes

              RG 134.221     In our view, the constitution should only permit members’ interests to be
                             redeemed in accordance with the procedures that apply to liquid registered
                             schemes if the registered scheme is liquid at the time when the value of
                             scheme property is determined for the purposes of calculating the withdrawal
                             price. If a registered scheme becomes non-liquid after a member has made
                             a request to withdraw, but before the time at which the value of scheme
                             property is to be determined for calculating the withdrawal price (even though
                             the time when the valuation process takes place may actually be later), we
                             consider that the constitution may only allow that member to withdraw in
                             accordance with the requirements in Pt 5C.6 for non-liquid registered schemes.
                                   Note: For example, we consider that a provision where interests are purported to be
                                   redeemed on acceptance by the responsible entity is inconsistent with the requirements
                                   in Pt 5C.6 for non-liquid registered schemes if this occurs before the time when the
                                   scheme property is valued for determining the withdrawal price.

              RG 134.222     Apart from any relief we give, a constitution must not contain provisions that
                             allow a member to exercise a right to withdraw in circumstances other than in
                             response to a current withdrawal offer while the scheme is non-liquid. This is
                             because, in our view, Pt 5C.6 requires that the exercise of a right to withdraw


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                       Page 51
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             should be made in reliance on a specific current offer. We consider that a
                             provision that allows a member to make a withdrawal request ‘from time to
                             time’, rather than in response to an offer by the responsible entity, is not a
                             withdrawal request envisaged under Pt 5C.6 for a non-liquid registered scheme.
                                   Note 1: An example is a provision to the effect that members can make a request to
                                   withdraw that the responsible entity may act on while the registered scheme is non-liquid
                                   that is not in response to a current withdrawal offer made by the responsible entity.

                                   Note 2: A provision that permits a responsible entity to treat a withdrawal request it has
                                   received before it makes a withdrawal offer as an acceptance of that withdrawal offer at
                                   the time the offer is made is not consistent with Pt 5C.6, as the earlier withdrawal
                                   request will not have been made in response to the later withdrawal offer.


                             Fairness to members
              RG 134.223     In our view, provisions involving withdrawal procedures should not
                             unreasonably disadvantage certain members or be otherwise inconsistent
                             with the Corporations Act. We consider ‘fairness’ in the context of
                             s601GA(4) means that the provisions in the constitution that affect the price
                             which members will receive on withdrawal, and the procedures for satisfying
                             withdrawal requests, must be fair to all members.

              RG 134.224     Withdrawals from a registered scheme will not only affect the entitlements
                             of withdrawing members, but also the remaining assets to be attributed to the
                             interests of non-exiting members. The price at which members can
                             withdraw, and the procedures that apply to the withdrawal, must be fair
                             because these affect the right to withdraw and how this right operates.
                                   Note: For non-liquid registered schemes, the concept of fairness applies to any
                                   procedures in addition to those set out in Pt 5C.6.

              RG 134.225     The constitution must provide for the withdrawal price to be determined in
                             accordance with a method or manner that is fair to all members under
                             s601GA(4). We consider that ‘fairness’ requires withdrawal provisions to
                             specify that the withdrawal amount be determined on the basis of valuations
                             of scheme property that are:
                             (a)   reasonably current; and
                             (b)   consistent with the range of ordinary commercial practice for valuing
                                   that type of scheme property.

                                   Note: A responsible is also subject to duties in relation to exercising pricing discretions.
                                   For additional information, see ASIC Instrument 2023/693 and RG 134.112–
                                   RG 134.118.

              RG 134.226     A valuation is reasonably current if it reflects current prices for the assets,
                             rather than the cost at which they were acquired (e.g. when the amount was
                             advanced for a loan). Where market prices cannot be used, the valuation for
                             pricing should still reflect the fair value of assets, taking into account current
                             market conditions that would apply to dealing in scheme assets, because the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                        Page 52
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             price needs to reflect the effect of potential dealings in assets that may result
                             from issues or withdrawals.

              RG 134.227     The International Organization of Securities Commission (IOSCO) has
                             provided the following guidance:
                                   In accordance with the general valuation principles applicable to collective
                                   investment schemes, responsible entities should ensure that the assets of the
                                   collective investment scheme are valued according to current market
                                   prices, provided that those prices are available, reliable, and up-to-date.
                                   Note: IOSCO, Policy recommendations for money market funds (PDF 8.45 MB),
                                   9 October 2012.

              RG 134.228     We consider this is essential for determining a price that results in a fair and
                             equitable outcome for all members. It is also consistent with a responsible
                             entity’s duty under s601FC(1)(j) to ensure that scheme property is valued at
                             regular intervals appropriate to the nature of the property.
                                   Note 1: For example, a provision for payment of a fixed amount that is contributed to the
                                   registered scheme by a member is unlikely to be fair if the entitlement of members is to a
                                   share of a pool and the value of the pool varies due to a change in value of the assets.

                                   Note 2: The valuation of a debt should reflect what the debt could be sold for if needed to
                                   realise cash to pay withdrawal amounts, and not the face value of the debt.

              RG 134.229     In our view, withdrawal offers should be made in a way that ensures all
                             members to whom the offer is made have access to a copy of the offer. If an
                             offer is only made via the internet or other form of public communication
                             (e.g. in a newspaper), a responsible entity should consider whether the
                             procedure will be ‘fair’ and consistent with their duties under s601FC(1)(d).

              RG 134.230     Appropriate valuations affect both the amount that a member is entitled to on
                             withdrawal and the value of the remaining interests. As such, if a responsible
                             entity chooses to make in-specie payments to satisfy a withdrawal request, to
                             be fair to all members the constitution should include provisions that the
                             relevant assets should be valued based on valuations that are:
                             (a)   reasonably current; and
                             (b)   consistent with the range of ordinary commercial practice for valuing
                                   assets of that type.
                                   Note 1: A valuation will not be reasonably current if the responsible entity has reason to
                                   believe that a more up-to-date valuation would result in a materially different value.

                                   Note 2: A reasonably current valuation will reflect current market prices for the assets,
                                   where available and reliable, and will reflect current market conditions that would affect
                                   dealing in the registered scheme’s assets.

              RG 134.231     To the extent that a responsible entity can select particular assets to satisfy
                             payment, that selection must be made on a fair basis and take into account
                             the responsible entity’s duties under s601FC(1). This also applies to the
                             deduction of transaction costs.
                                   Note: Responsible entities should also consider their obligation under s601FC(1)(d) to
                                   treat members who hold interests of the same class equally and members who hold




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 53
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                                   interests of different classes fairly when following withdrawal procedures. Although
                                   these procedures in the constitution may appear adequate to us when registering a
                                   scheme, responsible entities should not assume that they will satisfy their duties simply
                                   by following those procedures in all circumstances.


                             Suspension of withdrawals

              RG 134.232     A responsible entity may wish to include a provision giving it discretion to
                             suspend a right to withdraw by suspending the acceptance or processing of
                             withdrawal requests (other than the timeframe for payment after withdrawal
                             has occurred). In this case, the constitution should set out the circumstances
                             in which the responsible entity can exercise that discretion.

              RG 134.233     This could be a limited range of circumstances or the responsible entity
                             could be given the discretion whenever it thinks fit. We recognise that a
                             responsible entity may need to suspend or defer the acceptance or processing
                             of withdrawals for an extended period of time. Responsible entities should
                             ensure that powers of suspension are exercised consistently with their duties
                             under s601FC(1).
                                   Note: For example, a responsible entity may need to suspend withdrawal if there is an
                                   unexpected demand for withdrawal requests, if the valuations it has are not reasonably
                                   current, or if circumstances make it difficult to determine the withdrawal price.




Redemption of shares in a retail CCIV

                             General requirements for retail CCIVs

              RG 134.234     Under s1223H, if any shares in a retail CCIV are redeemable, the constitution
                             must make provision for them to be redeemed. The provision must:
                             (a)   specify a period within which a redemption must be satisfied while the
                                   relevant sub-fund is liquid;
                                   Note: See s1230H which specifies when a sub-fund is liquid.

                             (b)   be fair and reasonable to all members of each sub-fund of the CCIV; and
                             (c)   set out a price, or a method for determining a price, at which shares in
                                   the CCIV are to be redeemed while the relevant sub-fund is liquid.

              RG 134.235     A retail CCIV may only redeem redeemable shares where the requirements
                             in s1230F and 1230G are met, including that the redemption is permitted by
                             the CCIV’s constitution: s1231G(1).

              RG 134.236     A retail CCIV may only redeem redeemable shares when a sub-fund is non-
                             liquid if the requirements in s1230J and s1230K are satisfied, including
                             making a written redemption offer to members, lodging a copy of the offer
                             with ASIC and pro-rata participation by members if insufficient money is
                             available to satisfy all requests.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                     Page 54
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Period for payment after redemption

              RG 134.237     The constitution of a retail CCIV must specify a period within which a
                             redemption must be satisfied while a sub-fund is liquid: see s1223H(2)(a).
                             We understand that this timeframe will vary depending on the characteristics
                             of the CCIV and the operational practices of the corporate director.

              RG 134.238     We consider that, to be fair and reasonable to all members of the sub-fund as
                             required by s1223H(2)(b), the constitution needs to include a provision
                             specifying the maximum payment period after a person ceases to be a member.

              RG 134.239     Members whose shares have been redeemed will generally expect to receive
                             payment within a reasonable time of redemption. For a non-liquid sub-fund,
                             redemption requests must be satisfied by payment within 21 days: see
                             s1230K(1). For liquid sub-funds, we expect that in order to be fair and
                             reasonable, the redemption provisions in the constitution must provide that
                             generally former members will be paid within 21 days from when they cease
                             to hold a share in the CCIV.

              RG 134.240     The constitution may provide for payment to a former member within a
                             period that exceeds 21 days in certain circumstances, as long as it is fair and
                             reasonable, and the relevant circumstances exist. Circumstances in which we
                             consider a longer period may be fair and reasonable are:
                             (a)   extreme market events—we consider a provision will be fair and
                                   reasonable if it provides for an extended payment period due to an event
                                   that was not reasonably foreseen by the corporate director at the time it
                                   accepted the redemption request and while the circumstances still exist.
                                   However, we do not consider it fair or reasonable to use a provision that
                                   allows the corporate director to delay payment merely on the basis that it
                                   is ‘in the best interests of members’. This is because such a provision fails
                                   to take into account the interests of the former member awaiting payment;
                             (b)   the sub-fund is a ‘feeder fund’—if the sub-fund is a feeder fund of
                                   another retail investment fund (master fund) that has a longer timeframe
                                   to pay withdrawal amounts to former members, we consider that it will
                                   be difficult to have a timeframe for payment of the withdrawal amount
                                   that is shorter than the master fund.

                                   Note: The 21-day timeframe in this guidance relates to the period commencing from the
                                   time when a member ceases to hold a share in a retail CCIV until the redemption
                                   proceeds are paid to a former member; it does not relate to, for example, the overall
                                   period for acceptance of, or processing, redemption requests.


                             Determining the redemption price
              RG 134.241     A corporate director has the flexibility to set out in the constitution a price,
                             or method for determining a price, at which shares in the CCIV are to be
                             redeemed while the relevant sub-fund is liquid: s1223H(2)(c). The
                             provisions affecting the price members will receive on redemptions must be
                             fair and reasonable to all members: s1223H(2)(b).


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                 Page 55
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.242     In accordance with good practice, we generally expect the redemption price
                             of shares in a sub-fund that is not listed to be based on the value of CCIV
                             assets, less any liabilities that may be met from CCIV assets, divided by the
                             number of interests on issue.

              RG 134.243     We also expect that the redemption price is determined using valuations of
                             the CCIV assets that are:
                             (a)   reasonably current; and
                             (b)   consistent with the range of ordinary commercial practice for valuing
                                   those type of assets.

                                   Note 1: A valuation will not be reasonably current if the corporate director has reason to
                                   believe that a more up-to-date valuation would result in a materially different value. A
                                   reasonably current valuation will reflect current market prices for the assets, where
                                   available and reliable, and will reflect current market conditions that would affect
                                   dealing in the assets

                                   Note 2: We also consider this is consistent with a corporate director’s duty under
                                   s1224D(2)(j) to ensure that the assets of a sub-fund are valued at regular intervals
                                   appropriate to the nature of the assets.

              RG 134.244     To the extent that a corporate director can select particular assets to satisfy
                             payment, that constitution must provide that the selection be made on a fair
                             and reasonable basis and take into account the corporate director’s duties
                             under s1224D.


                             Restrictions on dealing with redemption requests

              RG 134.245     In order to be fair and reasonable to all members, we consider the
                             redemption provisions in a constitution should specify any circumstances in
                             which the corporate director may suspend the processing of redemption
                             requests. The constitution should not contain a provision that allows the
                             corporate director to set out the circumstances in which it may suspend
                             dealing with redemption requests in another document.

              RG 134.246     This could be a limited range of circumstances or the corporate director
                             could be given the discretion whenever it thinks fit. We recognise that a
                             corporate director may need to suspend or defer withdrawals for an extended
                             period of time. The corporate director should ensure that powers of
                             suspension are exercised consistently with their duties under s1224D.

                                   Note: For example, a corporate director may need to suspend redemptions if there is an
                                   unexpected demand for redemption requests, if the valuations it has are not reasonably
                                   current, or if circumstances make it difficult to determine the redemption price.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 56
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




H          Winding up—Registered schemes only

                               Key points

                               The guidance in this section is relevant to registered schemes.

                               The constitution of a registered scheme should address the following key
                               aspects of the winding up process:
                               • how assets, liabilities and scheme property are dealt with (see
                                 RG 134.254–RG 134.255);
                               • distribution of the proceeds of winding up (see RG 134.256–RG 134.257);
                               • the costs of winding up (see RG 134.258); and
                               • any payments to maximise proceeds of winding up (see RG 134.259–
                                 RG 134.260).

                               The constitution should include a provision for an independent audit of the
                               final accounts to be conducted by a registered company auditor or audit
                               firm after a scheme is wound up: see RG 134.265–RG 134.267.

                               The constitution can include provisions allowing the responsible entity to
                               postpone the realisation of a scheme on winding up: see RG 134.268–
                               RG 134.269.




Procedures for winding up
              RG 134.247     The constitution of a registered scheme must make adequate provision for
                             winding up the scheme: see s601GA(1)(d).

              RG 134.248     However, Ch 5C does not prescribe what constitutes winding up a registered
                             scheme, or what the process entails. The responsible entity of a registered
                             scheme must ensure that the scheme is wound up in accordance with its
                             constitution and any orders of the court under s601NF(2): see s601NE(2).

              RG 134.249     We consider that winding up a registered scheme is a process rather than an
                             event. As such, we expect that provisions will deal with the process of
                             winding up, not only the event of termination.

                                   Note: This is consistent with Justice Judd’s views in Environinvest Ltd [2009] VSC 33 at [99].

              RG 134.250     We also consider that the provisions need to deal with the process for
                             winding up the whole ‘program or plan of action’ that constitutes the
                             registered scheme.

              RG 134.251     What constitutes ‘adequate provision’ will depend on the circumstances
                             surrounding the registered scheme. In light of this, we consider the
                             responsible entity and its advisers should be able to devise provisions that
                             deal with winding up the scheme taking into account the characteristics of
                             that registered scheme, as long as the provisions cover the process of


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 57
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             winding up. We consider that this will enable responsible entities to preserve
                             flexibility in provisions about winding up registered schemes to deal with
                             unforeseen situations.

              RG 134.252     In our view, there are certain key steps in the process of winding up a
                             registered scheme. These are:
                             (a)   dealing with assets, liabilities and scheme property;
                             (b)   the distribution of proceeds;
                             (c)   costs of winding up; and
                             (d)   additional payments by members.

              RG 134.253     These key steps in the process of winding up a scheme should be addressed
                             in all constitutions. However, a responsible entity may also want to include
                             additional provisions to assist in the winding up of the scheme.


                             Dealing with assets, liabilities and scheme property

              RG 134.254     We consider that a key aspect of winding up a registered scheme is being
                             able to identify and deal with assets and liabilities of the scheme and scheme
                             property in order to realise them.

                                   Note: The responsible entity must ensure that scheme property is clearly identified: see
                                   s601FC(1)(i)(i).

              RG 134.255     In our view, this may require more specific treatment in some contract-based
                             schemes where it may be difficult to distinguish scheme property and other
                             assets of the registered scheme that are to be covered in winding up from
                             assets that are outside any winding up, such as certain non-scheme property.

                                   Note: Examples of this non-scheme property include personal assets of the responsible
                                   entity or scheme property belonging to another managed investment scheme operated
                                   by the same responsible entity.


                             Distribution of proceeds

              RG 134.256     We also consider that a key aspect of winding up a registered scheme is
                             determining how proceeds will be apportioned. For this reason, the
                             constitution should include provisions about the distribution of the net
                             proceeds of realisation of the scheme.

              RG 134.257     The constitution should explain who will apportion the net proceeds of
                             realisation between members who are entitled to receive a portion, what
                             criteria will be used to apportion the net proceeds of realisation between
                             members, and the priority of payment to relevant members and other
                             relevant parties.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                     Page 58
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Costs of winding up

              RG 134.258     We consider that the identification of the party that will bear the costs of
                             winding up the scheme is an important aspect of winding up the scheme.
                             This will generally be the responsible entity. As such, the constitution should
                             identify the party that will bear these costs and in what priority this party
                             will be paid.

                                   Note: For example, the expenses may be borne out of the assets of the responsible entity
                                   if there are no assets of the registered scheme that can be properly realised to meet the
                                   costs of winding up.


                             Payments to maximise proceeds

              RG 134.259     In our experience, a party winding up a registered scheme may require
                             members to continue to make payments during the winding up to maximise
                             the proceeds of realisation.

                                   Note: For example, members may be required to make annual payments for pesticide
                                   spraying for an agribusiness scheme irrespective of whether the scheme is being
                                   wound up.

              RG 134.260     If there is any ability for members to continue making payments during the
                             process of winding up the registered scheme to maximise the net proceeds of
                             realisation or, alternatively, if members are or may be required to continue
                             making payments, this should be included in the provisions on winding up
                             the registered scheme.


                             Dealing with a ‘worst case scenario’

              RG 134.261     The winding up of a registered scheme can occur where the responsible
                             entity is ‘insolvent’ and/or if the assets of the registered scheme are no
                             longer sufficient to indemnify the responsible entity for its liabilities.

                                   Note: In Capelli v Shepard [2010] VSCA 2 at [93], the court observed that a scheme may
                                   ‘colloquially be characterised as insolvent in the sense that … the liabilities referable to it
                                   cannot be satisfied as they fall due from its income or readily realisable assets’.

              RG 134.262     If a registered scheme is ‘insolvent’, provisions that authorise payment out
                             of the realisation of the assets of the scheme will be of less use because
                             sufficient assets will not be available to meet the costs and expenses of
                             winding up the scheme.

              RG 134.263     When drafting provisions about winding up, a responsible entity should
                             consider whether to include provisions that might assist it to wind up the
                             registered scheme if the scheme or the responsible entity is insolvent. For
                             unitised schemes, established principles of trust law provide some assistance
                             in determining the obligations of the responsible entity (or its successor) and
                             the rights of members and third parties. This means there may be less of a
                             need for a responsible entity of this type of registered scheme to include
                             provisions that address winding up in insolvency.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                         Page 59
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.264     Contract-based registered schemes cannot rely on the established principles
                             of trust law to provide a greater degree of clarity about winding up.
                             Responsible entities of this type of registered scheme should consider adding
                             provisions to deal with the situation of winding up the registered scheme
                             where the scheme or the responsible entity is insolvent.



Independent audit
              RG 134.265     We consider that the constitution needs to include a provision that provides
                             for an independent audit of the final accounts, to be conducted by a
                             registered company auditor or audit firm, after the registered scheme is
                             wound up. This should require that the audit itself is an independent audit,
                             and not merely that the auditor is independent. We do not consider that
                             providing for an independent review in place of an independent audit is
                             sufficient, in light of the different levels of assurance between the two.

              RG 134.266     On winding up a registered scheme, we consider it is an appropriate
                             safeguard for the accounts to be independently audited to ensure there has
                             been compliance with the Corporations Act.

                                   Note: A registered scheme to which s601NFA (as notionally inserted by ASIC
                                   Corporations (Externally-Administered Bodies) Instrument 2025/584) applies is subject
                                   to alternative reporting obligations.

              RG 134.267     In our view, an audit of the final accounts provides greater oversight than a
                             review as it involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about
                             the amounts and disclosures in the accounts.



Postponement of winding up
              RG 134.268     We recognise that a responsible entity may sometimes need to legitimately
                             postpone the realisation of the registered scheme’s assets on winding up to
                             maximise the net proceeds of realisation attributable to members, and
                             provision for a discretion to postpone may be included in the constitution. At
                             the same time, we recognise that the discretion to postpone the realisation of
                             a registered scheme on winding up might be improperly exercised to the
                             detriment of members and may be used to avoid the timely winding up of a
                             registered scheme.

              RG 134.269     If a responsible entity decides to postpone the realisation of registered
                             scheme assets, it should take into account its duties under s601FC(1).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                 Page 60
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




I          Enforceability of the constitution—Retail
           investment funds and wholesale CCIVs

                               Key points

                               The guidance in this section is relevant to retail investment funds and
                               wholesale CCIVs.
                               The constitution of a registered scheme must be contained in a document
                               that is legally enforceable between the members of the scheme and the
                               responsible entity. The particular form of the constitution will determine how
                               it needs to be drafted and executed for it to be legally enforceable: see
                               RG 134.270–RG 134.278.
                               The constitution of a CCIV (whether a retail or wholesale CCIV) is
                               enforceable as a statutory contract.



Constitution of registered schemes
              RG 134.270     The constitution of a registered scheme must be contained in a document that is
                             legally enforceable between the members and the responsible entity: see s601GB.

              RG 134.271     The form of the constitution is not prescribed. Regardless of the form, the
                             constitution must be legally binding between the responsible entity and the
                             members. Most constitutions take the form of a deed poll that contains a
                             provision that binds a person on becoming a member under the terms of the
                             deed. Some constitutions may take the form of a deed poll combined with a
                             pro forma of the contract arrangement between the responsible entity and a
                             member, which the member and responsible entity must execute for the
                             interests in the registered scheme to be issued.

              RG 134.272     In either of these circumstances, we expect that the constitution will be
                             expressed as binding between the responsible entity and the members.

              RG 134.273     The particular form of the constitution will determine how it needs to be
                             drafted and executed for it to be legally enforceable.
                                   Note 1: For example, a deed poll will need to be expressed to be executed as a deed poll
                                   and be executed by the parties authorised to sign on behalf of the responsible entity.

                                   Note 2: The Corporations Act does not mandate how a company must execute
                                   documents. However, s127 sets out acceptable methods of execution that other persons
                                   may assume to be valid. In summary, under s127(1) a company may execute a
                                   document without using a common seal if the document is signed by two directors or a
                                   director and company secretary. Under s127(2), a company with a common seal may
                                   execute a document if the seal is fixed to the document and the fixing of the seal is
                                   witnessed by two directors or by a director and company secretary. However, there is no
                                   restriction on the ways in which a company can execute a document: s127(4).

              RG 134.274     In our view, to be enforceable, the constitution must be contained in a
                             document that is validly executed by the proposed responsible entity. We



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                    Page 61
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             consider this requires that the constitution be executed by the parties
                             authorised to sign for the proposed responsible entity before the application
                             for registration of the scheme is lodged with ASIC.

              RG 134.275     In our experience, a constitution will generally contain a clause that binds
                             the responsible entity and each present and future member as if each of them
                             had been a party to the constitution. All constitutions should expressly bind
                             the responsible entity and the members of the scheme from time to time.
                             This is consistent with the legislative intention of s601GB that the
                             constitution is contained in a document that is or documents that are lawful
                             and binding between the responsible entity and the members.

              RG 134.276     We consider that s601GB requires that the constitution continues to be
                             contained in a document that is legally enforceable. This means that a
                             method of effecting a modification chosen by the responsible entity when
                             acting under s601GC(1)(b) will need to be one that ensures that, after the
                             modification, the constitution continues to be wholly contained in a
                             document that meets the requirements in s601GB.
                                   Note: See ING Funds Management Ltd v ANZ Nominees Ltd; ING Funds Management
                                   Ltd v Professional Associations Superannuation Ltd [2009] NSWSC 243.


                             Severance clauses
              RG 134.277     We encourage responsible entities to ensure that the constitution contains an
                             overriding provision to the effect that, to the extent a provision of the
                             constitution is inconsistent with the Corporations Act, it will be of no effect.

                             Impact on s601GA content
              RG 134.278     We also consider that a provision of the constitution will not make ‘adequate
                             provision’ for, or ‘specify’, the matters prescribed by s601GA if it is not
                             capable of being legally enforceable, as envisaged by s601GB.



Constitution of retail and wholesale CCIVs
              RG 134.279     Both retail and wholesale CCIVs must have a constitution that governs the
                             internal operation of the CCIV. The constitution of a CCIV is enforceable as
                             a statutory contract between:
                             (a)   the CCIV and each member;
                             (b)   the CCIV and the corporate director;
                             (c)   the corporate director and each member; and
                             (d)   a member and each other member (see s140(1) and s1223E).

              RG 134.280     We encourage corporate directors of retail CCIVs and wholesale CCIVs to
                             include a severance clause in the constitution (i.e. an overriding provision to
                             the effect that, to the extent a provision of the constitution is inconsistent
                             with the Corporations Act, it will be of no effect).


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 62
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




J          Incorporation by reference—Retail investment
           funds and wholesale CCIVs

                               Key points

                               The guidance in this section is relevant to retail investment funds and
                               wholesale CCIVs.

                               The constitution of a retail investment fund must make provision for,
                               specify, state and set out certain matters. The constitution of a wholesale
                               CCIV must specify requirements for changing its constitution.

                               Making these matters subject to documents external to the constitution, in
                               our view, means the constitution does not meet the relevant requirements.

                               We have provided relief to allow the constitution of a registered scheme to
                               incorporate by reference the listing rules of approved financial markets in
                               some circumstances.



Making provision for and specifying matters
              RG 134.281     The constitution of a registered scheme must make adequate provision for
                             certain matters and specify others, as outlined in RG 134.5–RG 134.6.

              RG 134.282     The constitution of a retail CCIV must also make provision for, state, set out
                             or specify certain matters, as outlined in RG 134.11. These matters should be
                             addressed in adequate detail; if they are not, ASIC may direct modifications
                             to ensure they are: see s1223C(2).

              RG 134.283     The constitution of a wholesale CCIV must specify the requirements for
                             modifying or repealing and replacing its constitution, as outlined in RG 134.13.

              RG 134.284     Provisions that seek to incorporate extrinsic material (e.g. terms of issue of
                             interests or shares, or material included in a PDS) instead of outlining in the
                             constitution the matters required under s601GA (for registered schemes),
                             s1223G, 1223H and 1224N (for retail CCIVs) or s1223F (for wholesale
                             CCIVs), in our view are not consistent with those sections. This is regardless
                             of how the extrinsic material is described or defined in the constitution.



Relief to incorporate listing rules of a financial market
              RG 134.285     Under ASIC Corporations (Chapter 5C—Miscellaneous Provisions)
                             Instrument 2017/125, a retail investment fund operator may include certain
                             provisions in the constitution of a retail investment fund that incorporates by
                             reference, and give overriding effect to, the listing rules of an approved
                             financial market.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 63
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




              RG 134.286     We consider that this relief is appropriate because, for each approved
                             financial market:
                             (a)   the listing rules are available to the public;
                             (b)   amendments to the listing rules are subject to regulatory oversight; and
                             (c)   amendments to the terms of the constitution are highly likely to be
                                   appropriate if the listing rules require those amendments in order to
                                   maintain listing.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 64
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




Key terms


                             Term                      Meaning in this document

                             ADI                       An authorised deposit-taking institution—a corporation that
                                                       is authorised under the Banking Act 1959. ADIs include:
                                                        banks;
                                                        building societies; and
                                                        credit unions

                             AFCA                      Australian Financial Complaints Authority—the external
                                                       dispute resolution scheme for which an authorisation under
                                                       Pt 7.10A of the Corporations Act is in force

                             AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of the
                                                       Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries on a
                                                       financial services business to provide financial services
                                                         Note: This is a definition contained in s9.

                             AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                       Corporations Act

                             ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                             ASIC Instrument        An ASIC instrument (in this example numbered 2019/547)
                             2019/547 (for example)

                             Asia Region Funds         An agreement between economies in the Asia region that
                             Passport                  allows passport funds established and regulated in one
                                                       participating economy to offer interests to investors in
                                                       another participating economy

                             ASX                       ASX Limited or the exchange market operated by ASX
                                                       Limited

                             Australian passport       A registered scheme or sub-fund of a retail CCIV that is
                             fund                      also registered as a passport fund under Pt 8A.3 of the
                                                       Corporations Act

                             Australian Passport       The Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018 made under
                             Rules                     s1211 and 1211A of the Corporations Act

                             CCIV                      A corporate collective investment vehicle—a company that
                                                       is registered as a corporate collective investment vehicle
                                                       under the Corporations Act
                                                         Note: This is a definition contained in s9 of the Corporations Act.

                             CCIV assets               The money and property of a CCIV, including the assets of
                                                       a sub-fund

                             Ch 5C (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                       numbered 5C), unless otherwise specified

                             Cboe                      Cboe Australia Pty Ltd




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 65
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Term                      Meaning in this document

                             [CO 13/655] (for          An ASIC class order (in this example numbered 13/655)
                             example)                    Note: Legislative instruments made from 2015 are referred to as
                                                         ASIC instruments.

                             Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                       purposes of that Act

                             Div 2 (for example)       A division of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                       numbered 2), unless otherwise specified

                             exchange traded fund      A registered scheme, the name of which does not contain
                                                       the expression ‘managed fund’ or ‘hedge fund’, where:
                                                        interests in the scheme are in a class that is able to be
                                                         traded on a financial market operated by ASX or Cboe
                                                         but the scheme is not listed on either of those markets;
                                                        the responsible entity has the power and approval to
                                                         issue interests in that class on any day that those
                                                         interests are able to be traded on the relevant financial
                                                         market;
                                                        the responsible entity allows applications for and
                                                         redemptions of interests in that class on any day that
                                                         those interests are able to be traded on the relevant
                                                         financial market; and
                                                        the price or value of any financial product, index,
                                                         currency, commodity or other thing that the scheme
                                                         invests in or tracks is continuously disclosed or can be
                                                         immediately ascertained

                             foreign member            A member of a registered scheme with a registered
                                                       address outside Australia or New Zealand

                             home economy              The participating economy in which a passport fund is first
                                                       registered, approved or authorised as a regulated collective
                                                       investment scheme

                             host economy              A participating economy that is not a passport fund’s home
                                                       economy and either:
                                                        permits the fund to offer interests in the fund in that
                                                         economy under the Asia Region Funds Passport; or
                                                        has accepted an application from the fund to offer
                                                         interests in the fund in that economy under the Asia
                                                         Region Funds Passport (but not to register the fund as a
                                                         passport fund in that economy)

                             IDPS-like scheme          An investor directed portfolio services-like scheme as
                                                       defined in ASIC Instrument 2023/668, or any instrument
                                                       that amends or replaces that instrument

                             investment fund           A managed investment scheme or a CCIV

                             investment fund           An operator of a managed investment scheme or a
                             operator                  corporate director of a CCIV




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                  Page 66
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Term                      Meaning in this document

                             managed fund              A registered scheme, the name of which contains the
                                                       expression ‘managed fund’ or ‘hedge fund’, where:
                                                        interests in the scheme are in a class that is able to be
                                                         traded on a financial market operated by ASX or Cboe,
                                                         but the scheme is not listed on either of those markets;
                                                        the responsible entity has the power and approval to
                                                         issue interests in that class on any day that those
                                                         interests are able to be traded on the relevant financial
                                                         market;
                                                        the responsible entity allows applications for and
                                                         redemptions of interests in that class on any day that
                                                         those interests are able to be traded on the relevant
                                                         financial market; and
                                                        the price or value of any financial product, index,
                                                         currency, commodity or other thing that the scheme
                                                         invests in or tracks is continuously disclosed or can be
                                                         immediately ascertained

                             managed investment        Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                             scheme                      Note: A notified foreign passport fund is a managed investment
                                                         scheme for the purpose of the Corporations Act: see s1213E.

                             MDA                       Managed discretionary account

                             MDA service               Has the meaning given in ASIC Corporations (Managed
                                                       Discretionary Account Services) Instrument 2016/968

                             member                    A member of a registered scheme or a CCIV

                             Memorandum of             The Memorandum of Cooperation on the Establishment
                             Cooperation               and Implementation of the Asia Region Funds Passport

                             participating economy     An economy that is a participant under the Memorandum of
                                                       Cooperation (while it is in effect) and has:
                                                        advised the Asia Region Funds Passport Joint
                                                         Committee that it has implemented the Asia Region
                                                         Funds Passport; and
                                                        not withdrawn from the Memorandum of Cooperation

                             passport fund             A regulated collective investment scheme, or sub-fund of a
                                                       regulated collective investment scheme, registered as a
                                                       passport fund in a participating economy
                                                         Note: Some regulated collective investment schemes, or sub-
                                                         funds of regulated collective investment schemes, that have
                                                         been deregistered as passport funds remain subject to
                                                         obligations as if they were still a passport fund.

                             passport fund             An entity that operates a passport fund
                             operator

                             Passport Rules             The requirements in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of
                                                        Cooperation, as incorporated into the domestic law of a
                                                        participating economy




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                  Page 67
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Term                      Meaning in this document

                             PDS                       A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that must be
                                                       given to a retail client for the offer or issue of a financial
                                                       product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                       Corporations Act
                                                         Note: See s9 for the exact definition.

                             Pt 7.9 (for example)      A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                       7.9), unless otherwise specified

                             registered scheme         A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                       s601EB of the Corporations Act

                             regulated collective      A regulated collective investment scheme as defined by the
                             investment scheme         Passport Rules for a participating economy

                             responsible entity        A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined in
                                                       s9 of the Corporations Act

                             retail CCIV               A CCIV that satisfies the retail CCIV test in s1222K of the
                                                       Corporations Act or is notified as a retail CCIV under
                                                       s1222L of the Corporations Act
                                                         Note: This is a definition in s1222J.

                             retail client             A client as defined in s761G of the Corporations Act and
                                                       Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Regulations

                             retail investment fund    A registered scheme or a retail CCIV
                                                         Note: This includes a registered scheme that is registered as an
                                                         Australian passport fund and a retail CCIV that has a sub-fund
                                                         that is registered as an Australian passport fund.

                             retail investment fund    A responsible entity of a registered scheme or corporate
                             operator                  director of a retail CCIV

                             RG 51 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 51)

                             s601GA (for example)      A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                       numbered 601GA)

                             sub-fund                  Has the meaning given in s1222Q of the Corporations Act
                                                         Note: A sub-fund is established on the day on which it is
                                                         registered: see s1222T.

                             wholesale client          A client who is not a retail client as defined in s761G of the
                                                       Corporations Act and Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations
                                                       Regulations

                             wholesale CCIV            A CCIV that is not a retail CCIV
                                                         Note: This is a definition contained in s1222J of the
                                                         Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                                      Page 68
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




Related information

                             Headnotes
                             Australian passport fund, Australian Passport Rules, corporate collective
                             investment vehicle, complaints handling procedures, constitution, content
                             requirements, enforceability requirement, fees, members, passport fund
                             operator, redemption, registered investment fund, registered managed
                             investment scheme, responsible entity, retail CCIV, scheme constitution,
                             shareholders, wholesale CCIV, winding up, withdrawal


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 6 Takeovers: Exceptions to the general prohibition

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 94 Unit pricing: Guide to good practice

                             RG 125 Share and interest purchase plans

                             RG 131 Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund

                             RG 136 Funds management: Discretionary powers

                             RG 137 Constitution requirements for schemes registered before 1 October 2013

                             RG 160 Time-sharing schemes

                             RG 267 Oversight of the Australian Financial Complaints Authority

                             RG 271 Internal dispute resolution


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 272 How to register a corporate collective investment vehicle and
                             sub-fund


                             Consultation papers and reports

                             CP 296 Funds management

                             REP 582 Response to submissions on CP 296 Funds management


                             ASIC instruments

                             [CO 13/655] Superseded Provisions about the amount of consideration to
                             acquire interests and withdrawal amounts not covered by ASIC
                             Corporations (Managed investment product consideration) Instrument
                             2015/847



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 69
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             [CO 13/656] Superseded Equality of treatment impacting on the acquisition
                             of interests

                             [CO 13/657] Superseded Discretions affecting the amount of consideration
                             to acquire interests and withdrawal amounts

                             Superseded ASIC Corporations (Externally-Administered Bodies) Instrument
                             2015/251

                             Superseded ASIC Corporations (Managed investment product
                             consideration) Instrument 2015/847

                             ASIC Corporations (Attribution Managed Investment Trusts) Instrument
                             2016/489

                             ASIC Corporations (Managed Discretionary Account Services) Instrument
                             2016/968

                             ASIC Corporations (ASX-listed Schemes On-market Buy-backs) Instrument
                             2016/1159

                             ASIC Corporations (Registered Schemes and CCIVs: Differential Fees)
                             Instrument 2017/40

                             ASIC Corporations (Chapter 5C—Miscellaneous Provisions) Instrument
                             2017/125

                             ASIC Corporations (Time-sharing Schemes) Instrument 2017/272

                             ASIC Corporations (Share and Interest Purchase Plans) Instrument
                             2019/547

                             ASIC Corporations (Changing Scheme and Retail CCIV Constitutions)
                             Instrument 2019/700

                             ASIC Corporations, Credit and Superannuation (Internal Dispute
                             Resolution) Instrument 2020/98

                             ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio Services Provided Through
                             a Registered Managed Investment Scheme) Instrument 2023/668

                             ASIC Corporations (Discretions for Setting the Issue Price and Withdrawal
                             Price of Interests in Managed Investment Schemes) Instrument 2023/693

                             ASIC Corporations (Equality of Treatment Impacting on the Acquisition of
                             Scheme Interests and CCIV Shares) Instrument 2023/697

                             ASIC Corporations (Externally-Administered Bodies) Instrument 2025/584

                             ASIC Corporations (Managed Investment Product Consideration)
                             Instrument 2025/629




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 70
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 134: Funds management: Constitutions




                             Legislation

                             Australian Passport Rules, section 4

                             Corporations Act 2001, Ch 5C, Pts 5C.6, 5C.7, 8B.3, Div 1, Subdiv C, s9,
                             9A, 127, 137, 253E, 254Q, 601EB, 601FC, 601FD, 601FG, 601GA,
                             601GAD, 601GAE, 601GB, 601GC, 601KD, 601NE, 601NF, 601NFA,
                             601PB, 606, 675, 912A, 988A, 1017B, 1017E, 1222R, 1222T, 1223A,
                             1223B, 1223C, 1223D, 1223E, 1223F, 1223G, 1223H, 1224D, 1224N,
                             1224P, 1225, 1225E, 1230, 1230F, 1230G, 1230H, s1230K, 1230Q

                             Corporations Regulations 2001, reg 8B.4.10, 8B.4.15

                             Explanatory Memorandum to the Corporate Collective Investment Vehicle
                             Framework and Other Measures Bill 2021

                             Explanatory Memorandum to the Managed Investments Bill 1997

                             Cases

                             360 Capital Re Ltd v Watts (as trustees for the Watts Family Superannuation
                             Fund) [2012] VSCA 234

                             Basis Capital Funds Management Ltd v BT Portfolio Services Ltd [2008]
                             NSWSC 766 at [142]

                             Capelli v Shepard [2010] VSCA 2 at [93]

                             Environinvest Ltd [2009] VSC 33 at [99]

                             ING Funds Management Ltd v ANZ Nominees Ltd; ING Funds Management
                             Ltd v Professional Associations Superannuation Ltd [2009] NSWSC 243

                             Lewski v Australian Securities & Investments Commission [2016] FCAFC 96

                             MacarthurCook Fund Management Limited v Zhaofeng Funds Limited
                             [2012] NSWSC 911

                             MSP Nominees Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Stamps (South Australia) (1999)
                             198 CLR 494 at 509

                             Re Real Estate Capital Partners Managed Investments Ltd as Responsible
                             Entity of the Real Estate Capital Partners USA Property Trust [2013]
                             NSWSC 190

                             Other documents

                             IOSCO, Policy recommendations for money market funds (PDF 8.45 MB)
                             (IOSCOPD392), 9 October 2012
                             Memorandum of Cooperation




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission October 2023                                          Page 71
