REGULATORY GUIDE 105

AFS licensing: Organisational
competence

June 2022




About this guide
This guide is for Australian financial services (AFS) licensees and AFS licence
applicants.

It describes what we look for when we assess compliance with the
‘organisational competence obligation’, which is one of the general obligations
under s912A(1) of the Corporations Act.
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in June 2022 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. In June 2025, we updated references to
                             reflect changes to RG 1 and related guidance.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 105 AFS licensing: Organisational
                                     competence, issued April 2020
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 105 Licensing: Organisational
                                     competence, issued October 2007, reissued December 2016

                             This guide replaced Section E of Regulatory Guide 164 Licensing:
                             Organisational capacities (RG 164), issued November 2001, updated
                             November 2002, withdrawn October 2007; parts of Regulatory Guide 130
                             Managed investments: Licensing, issued August 1998, updated November
                             1998, June 1999 and October 1999, withdrawn October 2007; and Responsible
                             officers: Demonstrating compliance with organisational competency
                             obligations—An ASIC guide, issued July 2003, withdrawn June 2007.


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                 Page 2
                                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




Contents

                             A      Overview .................................................................................................4
                                    Who this guide is for ................................................................................4
                                    What this guide is about ..........................................................................4
                                    The organisational competence obligation ..............................................5
                                    What you need to do to comply ...............................................................5
                                    When you need to comply .......................................................................6
                                    When you need to tell us about your responsible managers ..................7
                                    Our approach to setting minimum expectations ......................................7
                             B      Nominating your responsible managers .............................................8
                                    Who you can nominate as a responsible manager .................................8
                                    Covering all of your financial services and products .............................12
                                    The number of responsible managers that you need ............................14
                             C      The five options for demonstrating knowledge and skills ..............16
                                    Overview of the five options...................................................................16
                                    ‘Relevant’ qualifications/training and experience ..................................17
                                    The kind of qualifications/training and experience that we accept ........17
                                    Option 1: Relevant industry or APRA standard .....................................17
                                    Option 2: Individual assessment ............................................................18
                                    Option 3: University degree and short industry course .........................18
                                    Option 4: Industry-specific or product-specific diploma (or higher) .......19
                                    Option 5: Other demonstration of knowledge and skills ........................21
                                    Explanations ..........................................................................................25
                             D      Telling us about your responsible managers ...................................28
                                    Applying for an AFS licence or varying your licence authorisations ......28
                                    Changing your responsible managers ...................................................31
                             Key terms .....................................................................................................32
                             Related information .....................................................................................36




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                                            Page 3
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               Australian financial services (AFS) licensees must comply with the
                               organisational competence obligation in s912A(1)(e) of the Corporations Act
                               2001 (Corporations Act), and AFS licence applicants must be able to
                               demonstrate in their licence application that they can comply with this
                               obligation: see RG 105.4 and RG 105.12–RG 105.13.

                               We assess your compliance with this obligation by looking at the knowledge
                               and skills of your ‘responsible managers’: see RG 105.5 and RG 105.17–
                               RG 105.18.

                               What you need to do to comply will depend on the nature, scale and
                               complexity of your business. However, this guide sets out our minimum
                               expectations for demonstrating organisational competence: see RG 105.6–
                               RG 105.11.




Who this guide is for
              RG 105.1       This guide is for:
                             (a)   AFS licensees; and
                             (b)   applicants for an AFS licence or a variation of their licence.



What this guide is about
              RG 105.2       This guide describes what we look for when we assess compliance with the
                             ‘organisational competence obligation’, which is one of the general
                             obligations under s912A(1) of the Corporations Act.

              RG 105.3       This guide does not cover the obligation to ensure that your representatives are
                             trained and competent to provide the financial services covered by your
                             AFS licence: see s912A(1)(f). To find out about that obligation, see Section E
                             of Regulatory Guide 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general obligations
                             (RG 104). If your representatives provide financial product advice to retail
                             clients, see also Regulatory Guide 146 Licensing: Training of financial
                             product advisers (RG 146).

                                   Note 1: Sections D and E of RG 146 are currently under review.

                                   Note 2: As a result of the financial adviser professional standards reforms, the training
                                   standards in RG 146 no longer apply to relevant providers who provide personal advice to
                                   retail clients on relevant financial products. See our website for more information on how
                                   the reforms affect you.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                          Page 4
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




The organisational competence obligation
              RG 105.4       If you are an AFS licensee, you must maintain the competence to provide the
                             financial services covered by your AFS licence: see s912A(1)(e) of the
                             Corporations Act. We refer to this obligation as the ‘organisational
                             competence obligation’. This is because this obligation requires you to be
                             competent at the organisational level.

                                   Note 1: This is not the same as the obligation under s912A(1)(f) to ensure that the
                                   representatives who provide financial services on your behalf are trained and competent to
                                   do so: see RG 105.3.

                                   Note 2: In this guide, references to sections (s) are to the Corporations Act, unless
                                   otherwise specified. You can find a copy of the Corporations Act on the Federal Register
                                   of Legislation.

              RG 105.5       We assess your compliance with this obligation by looking at the knowledge
                             and skills of the people who manage your financial services business. We
                             refer to these people as your ‘responsible managers’.



What you need to do to comply
              RG 105.6       The Corporations Act places responsibility on you to ensure that you maintain
                             the competence to provide the financial services covered by your AFS licence.

              RG 105.7       What you need to do to comply will depend on the nature, scale and
                             complexity of your business, including the size of your business, the financial
                             services and products you provide, and the roles that individuals play in your
                             business. However, this guide sets out our minimum expectations for
                             demonstrating organisational competence.

              RG 105.8       At a minimum, you need to nominate responsible managers who:
                             (a)   are directly responsible for significant day-to-day decisions about the
                                   ongoing provision of your financial services (see Section B);
                             (b)   together, have appropriate knowledge and skills for all of your financial
                                   services and products (see Section B); and
                             (c)   individually, meet one of the five options for demonstrating appropriate
                                   knowledge and skills (see Section C).

              RG 105.9       You also need to have measures in place to ensure that you maintain your
                             organisational competence at all times: see condition 4 of the standard
                             AFS licence conditions in Pro Forma 209 Australian financial services licence
                             conditions (PF 209).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                          Page 5
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             Measures for maintaining organisational competence

              RG 105.10      We expect your measures for complying with the organisational competence
                             obligation will ensure that you:
                             (a)   review your organisational competence on a regular basis and whenever
                                   your responsible managers or business activities change;
                             (b)   maintain and update the knowledge and skills of your responsible
                                   managers; and
                             (c)   keep records showing that you have reviewed your organisational
                                   competence and the steps you have taken to maintain your organisational
                                   competence.
                                   Note: For more information on compliance measures, see Sections B and C of RG 104.

              RG 105.11      We expect you to document your measures in some form. In our view, it is
                             more difficult to show compliance when documentation is not in place.
                             Documentation helps you demonstrate whether or not you are complying with
                             the organisational competence obligation.


When you need to comply

                             Applying for an AFS licence

              RG 105.12      If you are applying for an AFS licence, you must be able to show that you can
                             comply with the organisational competence obligation from the time you are
                             granted a licence, and on an ongoing basis. We cannot grant you a licence if
                             we have any reason to believe you are likely to not comply with this
                             obligation: see s913B(1)(b).
                                   Note: If you are applying for an AFS licence, you should read Regulatory Guide 1
                                   Applying for and varying an AFS licence (RG 1) and the AFS Licensing Kit. These
                                   explain the AFS licence application process and the ‘proof’ documents you may need to
                                   provide to support your application.


                             Ongoing compliance

              RG 105.13      After you have an AFS licence, you must maintain your organisational
                             competence at all times. If we have reason to believe that you are not
                             complying, we may take administrative action, which could include
                             suspending or cancelling your licence, or imposing additional licence
                             conditions: see s915C(1)(a) and 914A(1).

                                   Note: For guidance on our administrative powers, see Regulatory Guide 98 ASIC’s
                                   powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make banning orders (RG 98).

              RG 105.14      If we conduct a surveillance visit on your business, we may check your
                             ongoing compliance with the organisational competence obligation, including
                             the measures you have for ensuring compliance.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                       Page 6
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




              RG 105.15      If you breach or are likely to breach the organisational competence obligation,
                             you may need to notify us of that breach: see s912DAA.

                                   Note: For guidance on notifying ASIC of reportable situations, see Regulatory Guide 78
                                   Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees (RG 78).


                             Making changes to your business

              RG 105.16      We expect you to review your organisational competence and ensure that you
                             will maintain it before you make any changes to your business, such as
                             expanding your range of financial services or products, or replacing a
                             responsible manager.



When you need to tell us about your responsible managers
              RG 105.17      You must nominate your responsible managers when you apply for an AFS
                             licence or apply to vary your licence authorisations. You must also notify us if
                             you change any of your responsible managers. This is explained in Section D.

              RG 105.18      We may ask you about your responsible managers if we conduct a
                             surveillance visit on your business.



Our approach to setting minimum expectations
              RG 105.19      In setting out minimum expectations for demonstrating organisational
                             competence, we aim to strike a balance between certainty and flexibility for
                             AFS licensees, while promoting consumer protection and market integrity.

              RG 105.20      This guide focuses on the people in your business who are responsible for the
                             quality of your financial services. In setting minimum expectations, we aim to
                             ensure that you have enough of these people with appropriate knowledge and
                             skills so that you have the competence to provide all of your financial services
                             efficiently, honestly and fairly.

              RG 105.21      What we consider to be appropriate knowledge is strongly influenced by the
                             Australian Qualifications Framework and recognises that short industry
                             courses, industry standards and the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
                             (APRA) also have a role to play in setting benchmarks for organisational
                             competence.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                        Page 7
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




B          Nominating your responsible managers

                               Key points

                               You can nominate someone as a responsible manager if they:
                               • are directly responsible for significant day-to-day decisions about the
                                 ongoing provision of your financial services (see RG 105.22–RG 105.27) or,
                                 for some small-scale, heavily automated businesses, provide sign-off on the
                                 financial services provided (see RG 105.28–RG 105.35);
                               • meet one of the five options for demonstrating knowledge and skills in
                                 Section C (see RG 105.36); and
                               • are ‘fit and proper’ (see RG 105.38).

                               You also need to ensure that you nominate responsible managers whose
                               combined knowledge and skills cover all of your financial services and
                               products: see RG 105.39–RG 105.48.

                               The number of people you need to nominate as responsible managers will
                               depend on the nature, scale and complexity of your business: see
                               RG 105.49–RG 105.53.



Who you can nominate as a responsible manager

                             Direct responsibility for significant day-to-day decisions

              RG 105.22      The people you nominate as responsible managers must have direct
                             responsibility for significant day-to-day decisions about your financial
                             services. The only exception is for some responsible managers of small-scale,
                             heavily automated businesses: see RG 105.28–RG 105.35.

              RG 105.23      Who you nominate as your responsible managers will depend on the nature,
                             scale and complexity of your business: see RG 105.53. In most cases, the
                             people who have direct responsibility for significant day-to-day decisions
                             about your financial services will be people who decide how your financial
                             services are provided and supervise the provision of those services.
                             A compliance manager or financial controller, for example, might not have the
                             level of direct responsibility required. Your responsible managers do not need
                             to actually provide financial services on your behalf, although they might do so.

              RG 105.24      The job description and title of responsible managers will vary from business
                             to business. For example, in a small advisory business, the directors are likely
                             to be the main people who have direct responsibility for significant day-to-day
                             business decisions but, in a larger financial services group, anyone ranging
                             from the chief executive officer down to middle management might have the
                             required direct responsibility.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                 Page 8
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




              RG 105.25      For AFS licensees that are regulated by APRA, the people with direct
                             responsibility would usually include those who are ‘responsible persons’ for
                             the purposes of APRA’s ‘fit and proper’ standard. If you are a body corporate,
                             the people you nominate do not need to be ‘officers’ of the body corporate as
                             defined in s9. Similarly, the people you nominate as responsible managers do
                             not have to be the same as your ‘fit and proper people’.

                                   Note: Your ‘fit and proper people’ are the people who are required to be ‘fit and proper
                                   persons’ under s913BA: see RG 1 and the AFS Licensing Kit for more information.


                             Level of involvement for responsible managers generally

              RG 105.26      Responsible managers who have direct responsibility for significant day-to-
                             day decisions about your financial services must have enough time available
                             to fulfil their responsibilities. Before you nominate a person as a responsible
                             manager, you need to consider their overall business commitments, including
                             whether they are already acting as a responsible manager for other
                             AFS licensees or hold other business roles. If they do, you should consider
                             whether they have enough time available to act as a responsible manager
                             for you.

              RG 105.27      In general, the more commitments a responsible manager has, the less likely
                             they will be to have enough time available to act as your responsible manager.
                             Examples of factors that may affect how much time a responsible manager has
                             available include:
                             (a)   whether they are a key person or responsible manager for any other
                                   AFS licensees;
                             (b)   how many staff they need to supervise and whether those staff are in
                                   different locations;
                             (c)   whether the other licensees share common systems or processes with you
                                   (e.g. they are in the same corporate group);
                             (d)   the nature, scale and complexity of the business of the other licensees—
                                   for example, the size of their business and how many managed
                                   investment schemes (registered schemes) and/or corporate collective
                                   investment vehicles (CCIVs) they operate; and
                             (e)   any other roles (both current and proposed) performed by the responsible
                                   manager, including engagement as a lawyer, accountant, or other
                                   professional adviser or consultant, and any directorships or other
                                   employment.

                             Level of involvement for responsible managers of small-scale, heavily
                             automated businesses providing limited financial services

              RG 105.28      We recognise that responsibility for decisions about the financial services
                             provided may not require significant day-to-day involvement from responsible
                             managers of all AFS licensees with heavily automated business models and a



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                           Page 9
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             small client base—referred to in this guide as ‘small-scale, heavily automated
                             businesses’. In this context, we consider that:
                             (a)   ‘heavily automated’ means the business relies on algorithms or other
                                   technology to deliver financial services in a consistent way following the
                                   input of required client information (i.e. there is extremely limited human
                                   discretion exercised by the AFS licensee or its representatives in
                                   providing the financial services on a day-to-day basis); and
                             (b)   a licensee is small-scale if it has provided financial services to fewer than
                                   1,000 retail clients.

              RG 105.29      An AFS licence applicant with a small-scale, heavily automated business may
                             nominate a responsible manager who will provide regular sign-off on the
                             licensee’s processes and systems, and the quality of the financial services
                             provided. Such a responsible manager does not need to have day-to-day
                             involvement in the business, but must be available as needed.

              RG 105.30      This reduced level of involvement is available when:
                             (a)   the responsible manager meets one of the five options for demonstrating
                                   knowledge and skills (see RG 105.36);
                             (b)   the responsible manager is nominated as a key person on the AFS licence
                                   (see RG 105.112);
                             (c)   the prospective licensee has a service agreement with the responsible
                                   manager (key person), under which:
                                   (i)    the responsible manager is responsible for decisions about the
                                          processes and systems that are subject to their sign-off, and for the
                                          quality of financial services generated through those systems; and
                                   (ii)   the responsible manager’s review and sign-off must be completed at
                                          the time of the licence application, at regular specified intervals and
                                          in other circumstances as appropriate (see RG 105.31–RG 105.34);
                             (d)   the licensee only provides limited financial services (see RG 105.35); and
                             (e)   a nominated director is named on the licence who has day-to-day
                                   involvement in the business and is responsible for ensuring that the
                                   responsible manager is consulted with and engaged, as needed, in relation
                                   to the financial services provided.

                             Sign-off requirements

              RG 105.31      A responsible manager who is nominated as the key person, and who does not
                             have day-to-day involvement in the business’s financial services, must sign
                             off on its processes and systems (and the services that are provided as a
                             result):
                             (a)   at the time you apply for your AFS licence;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 10
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             (b)   at regular specified intervals—every six months for the first year of
                                   operation, and every 12 months after that; and
                             (c)   in other circumstances as appropriate.

              RG 105.32      Situations when we expect that the responsible manager (key person) will
                             provide sign-off at the appropriate times include when there are material
                             changes to the financial services provided through the automated processes
                             and systems (e.g. changes to the business model, adjustments to the
                             assumptions underpinning an algorithm, or legislative reform), and when the
                             financial services provided are not delivering the outcomes intended.
                                   Note: If you are required to make changes to your financial services as a result of the
                                   sign-off process, you must also consider whether you have an obligation to notify ASIC
                                   of a reportable situation: see RG 78.

              RG 105.33      As the AFS licensee, we expect that you will:
                             (a)   monitor the financial services you provide, including the reports,
                                   recommendations or services that are produced by the algorithms and
                                   technology; and
                             (b)   establish processes to ensure that the responsible manager (key person) is
                                   involved as needed.

              RG 105.34      A failure to involve the responsible manager (key person), as needed, or to
                             maintain the appropriate processes, may indicate that you are not meeting your
                             organisational competence obligation. Similarly, a failure by the responsible
                             manager to provide sign-off at the appropriate times will mean that you are
                             not complying with your obligations as an AFS licensee.

                             Financial services that may be provided

              RG 105.35      As stated in RG 105.30(d), we will allow a responsible manager to have a
                             reduced level of involvement in a small-scale, heavily automated business
                             when the AFS licensee provides limited financial services. By ‘limited
                             financial services’, we mean financial product advice and dealing in (other than
                             issuing):
                             (a)   liquid financial products (listed and quoted Australian securities and
                                   simple managed investment schemes);
                                   Note: A simple managed investment scheme is a registered scheme that invests at least
                                   80% of its assets in a bank account where funds can be withdrawn within three months, or
                                   in arrangements where the investments can be realised at market value within 10 days:
                                   see reg 1.0.02 of the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations).

                             (b)   non-cash payment facilities; and
                             (c)   financial products issued by a prudentially regulated business
                                   (e.g. deposit products, superannuation products and insurance contracts).
                                   Note: For guidance on these financial services, see Regulatory Guide 36 Licensing:
                                   Financial product advice and dealing (RG 36).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                        Page 11
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             Knowledge and skills
              RG 105.36      The people you nominate as responsible managers also need appropriate
                             knowledge and skills for the financial services and products their role relates
                             to. You need to be able to demonstrate that:
                             (a)   each responsible manager you nominate meets one of the five options for
                                   demonstrating appropriate knowledge and skills—the five options are
                                   explained in Section C; and
                             (b)   together, the responsible managers you nominate have appropriate
                                   knowledge and skills to cover all of your financial services and
                                   products—this is explained in RG 105.39–RG 105.48.

              RG 105.37      If you nominate someone as a responsible manager but they do not meet one
                             of the five options for demonstrating appropriate knowledge and skills, you
                             cannot rely on this person to demonstrate that you meet the organisational
                             competence obligation. If the person later acquires the knowledge and skills to
                             meet one of the five options (e.g. by gaining enough relevant experience), you
                             may then rely on them for organisational competence purposes.

                             Fit and proper
              RG 105.38      When nominating your responsible managers, you also need to ensure that
                             they are ‘fit and proper’: see Section C of RG 1. It is important to note that
                             these responsible managers do not need to be one of the people in s913BA
                             who are required to be ‘fit and proper persons’.

                                   Note: We refer to the people who are required to be fit and proper persons as your ‘fit and
                                   proper people’. For more information on our requirements relating to fit and proper
                                   people, see RG 1.



Covering all of your financial services and products

                             What are appropriate knowledge and skills?

              RG 105.39      Together, your responsible managers need to have knowledge and skills that
                             demonstrate you can provide all of the financial services and products covered
                             by your AFS licence, while complying with the conditions of your licence and
                             any other relevant statutory obligations.

              RG 105.40      This experience may have been obtained in relation to activities associated
                             with a different licence authorisation. If this is the case, you will need to
                             demonstrate that this experience constitutes appropriate knowledge and skills
                             for the authorisations you are applying for.

              RG 105.41      If you operate a registered scheme, unregistered scheme (including an investor
                             directed portfolio service (IDPS), or managed discretionary account (MDA)
                             service) or CCIV, your responsible managers must demonstrate that they



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                          Page 12
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             understand the investment and operational issues of the assets under
                             management or, if relevant, the business proposed to be operated under your
                             AFS licence.


                             How do you ‘cover’ all of your financial services and
                             products?

              RG 105.42      If you have a responsible manager with appropriate knowledge and skills for
                             some, but not all, of your financial services or products, you need to ensure
                             that your other responsible managers have appropriate knowledge and skills
                             for the remaining services and products.

              RG 105.43      For example, if you deal in life and general insurance products, you could
                             have one responsible manager with knowledge and skills in relation to
                             advising and dealing in life insurance products and another with knowledge
                             and skills in advising and dealing in general insurance products. Alternatively,
                             one responsible manager could have knowledge and skills in relation to
                             advising on both types of insurance products, while the other responsible
                             manager has knowledge and skills for dealing in both types of insurance
                             products. In both examples, each responsible manager would need to meet one
                             of the five options in Section C for the services and products their role relates to.


                             Operating a managed investment scheme or CCIV

              RG 105.44      If you operate a registered scheme, unregistered scheme (including an IDPS or
                             MDA service) or CCIV, you also need to have at least one responsible
                             manager with knowledge and skills for the kinds of assets under management
                             or the business operated by the scheme or CCIV: see RG 105.75. For example,
                             if you operate a registered scheme or a CCIV that invests in financial assets
                             (e.g. cash or shares), you need to have:
                             (a)   a responsible manager with knowledge and skills for the operation of a
                                   registered scheme or for operating the business and conducting the affairs
                                   of a CCIV (i.e. the financial service you provide); and
                             (b)   the same or a different responsible manager with knowledge and skills in
                                   relation to investment in financial assets (i.e. the asset under
                                   management).

              RG 105.45      In assessing whether a responsible manager meets the knowledge and skills
                             component of Options 1 to 5 in Table 1, we will consider the following as
                             relevant:
                             (a)   for the financial service of operating the business and conducting the
                                   affairs of:
                                   (i)   a retail CCIV—qualifications and prior experience in operating a
                                         registered scheme or retail CCIV (or similar overseas experience);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 13
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                                   (ii)   a wholesale CCIV—qualifications and prior experience in operating
                                          a registered scheme or unregistered scheme, or a retail or wholesale
                                          CCIV (or similar overseas experience);
                             (b)   for the assets under management—qualifications and prior experience in
                                   relation to investment in the CCIV asset type(s).


                             Advising on, and dealing in, CCIV securities

              RG 105.46      When assessing a responsible manager’s competence to provide financial
                             product advice on and/or deal in CCIV securities, each responsible manager
                             must meet one of the five options in Table 1.

              RG 105.47      Further, when assessing whether a responsible manager meets the knowledge
                             and skills component of Options 1 to 5 in Table 1, we will consider the
                             following as relevant:
                             (a)   qualifications and prior experience in providing financial product advice
                                   on and/or dealing in securities or CCIVs;
                             (b)   qualifications and prior experience in providing financial product advice
                                   on and/or dealing in interests in a managed investment scheme; and/or
                             (c)   similar overseas experience.


                             Licensed custodial service providers

              RG 105.48      To be authorised as a licensed custodial service provider, you must have
                             responsible manager(s) who have knowledge and skills in custodial services
                             (i.e. the financial service) and in holding the kind of assets that you are
                             seeking authorisation to hold under your AFS licence.


The number of responsible managers that you need
              RG 105.49      The number of people you need to nominate as responsible managers will
                             depend on the nature, scale and complexity of your business: see RG 105.53.
                             However, we expect that you will nominate at least two responsible managers.

              RG 105.50      If you operate a large business, you will usually only need to nominate a subset
                             of the people who can be responsible managers. If you are a smaller business,
                             you may need to nominate everyone who can be a responsible manager. If you
                             are an individual who holds or is applying for an AFS licence in your own
                             name, you will need to nominate yourself as the responsible manager.

                                   Note: The maximum number of responsible managers you can have nominated at any
                                   given time is 20.

              RG 105.51      In some cases, we may accept you having only one responsible manager—for
                             example, when you operate a one-person advisory business or when your main
                             business is not the provision of financial services.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                 Page 14
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             ‘Key person’ licence conditions

              RG 105.52      If you are heavily dependent on the competence of one or two responsible
                             managers (e.g. in a small organisation with one or two principals), we will
                             generally impose a ‘key person’ condition on your AFS licence: see
                             RG 105.112.


                             Nature, scale and complexity of your business

              RG 105.53      Factors that can affect who you nominate as your responsible managers, and
                             how many you need, include:
                             (a)   the financial services and products you provide;
                             (b)   the number of representatives who provide financial services on your
                                   behalf;
                             (c)   the size, structure and diversity of your operations;
                             (d)   the number of investors you have;
                             (e)   whether your main business is the provision of financial services; and
                             (f)   any conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of other positions held
                                   by the responsible manager(s).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 15
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




C          The five options for demonstrating knowledge
           and skills

                               Key points

                               You need to be able to demonstrate that each responsible manager meets
                               one of the five options in Table 1: see RG 105.54.

                               The five options are different combinations of training, qualifications and
                               experience for demonstrating that responsible managers have knowledge
                               and skills appropriate to their role: see RG 105.55–RG 105.93.



Overview of the five options
              RG 105.54      You need to be able to demonstrate that each of your responsible managers
                             has appropriate knowledge and skills for their role in your business. There are
                             five options for demonstrating this: see Table 1. Each option has a knowledge
                             component (generally requiring completion of relevant qualifications or
                             relevant courses) and a skills component (generally requiring minimum years
                             of relevant experience). Your responsible managers must meet both
                             components of an option.

Table 1:     The five options for demonstrating knowledge and skills of responsible managers

Option                           Knowledge component                               Skills component
                                 (e.g. qualifications, training)                   (i.e. experience)

Option 1                         Meet widely adopted and relevant industry         Three years relevant experience
(see RG 105.60–RG 105.62)        standard or relevant standard set by APRA         over the past five years

Option 2                         Be individually assessed by an authorised         Five years relevant experience
(see RG 105.63–RG 105.65)        assessor as having relevant knowledge             over the past eight years
                                 equivalent to a diploma

Option 3                         Hold a university degree in a relevant            Three years relevant experience
(see RG 105.66–RG 105.70)        discipline and complete a relevant short          over the past five years
                                 industry course

Option 4                         Hold a relevant industry-specific or product-     Three years relevant experience
(see RG 105.71–RG 105.77)        specific qualification equivalent to a diploma    over the past five years
                                 (or higher)

Option 5                         If not relying on Options 1 to 4, you need to provide a written submission that   Thi
(see RG 105.78–RG 105.81         satisfies us that your responsible manager has appropriate knowledge and skills   s
and Example 1–Example 7)         for their role. Your submission must cover all of the information in RG 105.78.   cell

                                                                                                                   is
                                 Some example situations where ASIC may, or may not, accept a responsible
                                                                                                                   bla
                                 manager under Option 5 are outlined at RG 105.81.
                                                                                                                   nk




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                  Page 16
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




‘Relevant’ qualifications/training and experience
              RG 105.55      Your responsible managers need to have experience and qualifications or
                             training that are relevant to their role in your business. This means that their
                             experience and qualifications or training need to be relevant to one or both of
                             the following:
                             (a)   the financial services and products that their role relates to; and/or
                             (b)   if you operate a registered scheme, unregistered scheme (including an
                                   IDPS or MDA service) or CCIV, or provide a custodial service—the
                                   assets under management or held, or business that their role relates to (see
                                   RG 105.44 for an example).



The kind of qualifications/training and experience that we accept
              RG 105.56      RG 105.60–RG 105.77 give guidance on the qualifications and training we
                             will accept under Options 1 to 4.

              RG 105.57      Options 1 to 4 also require minimum periods of relevant experience. We
                             expect this to be practical experience that enables a responsible manager to
                             understand the responsibilities and requirements of their role in your business.
                             This generally includes experience in:
                             (a)   deciding how the financial services or products their role relates to are
                                   provided; and
                             (b)   either actually providing those financial services or products or
                                   supervising others who do.

              RG 105.58      Option 5 is a flexible option that does not set minimum qualifications, training
                             or periods of relevant experience: see RG 105.78–RG 105.81.

              RG 105.59      We will accept relevant overseas qualifications if they are comparable to
                             Australian qualifications that meet one of the five options: see RG 105.87–
                             RG 105.93.



Option 1: Relevant industry or APRA standard
              RG 105.60      We will accept a wide range of relevant standards for the knowledge
                             component of Option 1. The onus is on you to demonstrate the relevance of a
                             standard to your responsible manager’s role. Your responsible manager must
                             also have three years relevant experience over the past five years.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 17
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             Industry standards

              RG 105.61      As well as being relevant, industry standards must also be widely adopted. To
                             be widely adopted, industry standards generally need to:
                             (a)   be endorsed by the appropriate industry body or bodies;
                             (b)   have been developed with industry;
                             (c)   address the competencies required for that sector, financial service or
                                   product; and
                             (d)   represent the views of a significant number of industry participants.


                             APRA standards

              RG 105.62      We will accept a standard set by APRA if you are a body regulated by APRA
                             and the standard is relevant to your responsible manager’s role. For example,
                             if you are a general insurer regulated by APRA, we will accept that a person
                             who is a ‘responsible person’ for the purposes of APRA’s Prudential Standard
                             CPS 520 Fit and proper has appropriate knowledge about dealing in general
                             insurance products.



Option 2: Individual assessment
              RG 105.63      Individual assessment means an assessment of a person’s capability to
                             undertake their current duties, taking into account their previous work
                             experience. This type of assessment does not necessarily include a formal
                             written examination. It may take the form of an oral or practical test, on-the-
                             job assessment or some other form.

              RG 105.64      Individual assessment must be carried out by an authorised assessor. The
                             assessor must verify that your responsible manager has knowledge relevant to
                             their role and equivalent to a diploma.

                                   Note: You can get an indication of authorised assessors that carry out individual
                                   assessments by looking at the ASIC Training Register. The register content is valid up to
                                   24 September 2012: see RG 105.84.

              RG 105.65      Individual assessment is generally more suited to experienced responsible
                             managers who do not have formal qualifications. This is why Option 2
                             requires a longer period of relevant experience (i.e. five years relevant
                             experience over the past eight years).



Option 3: University degree and short industry course
              RG 105.66      Under Option 3, we will accept a responsible manager with a university
                             degree that is only broadly relevant to their role if they have also completed a



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                         Page 18
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             short industry course covering the specific knowledge not covered by their
                             degree. Your responsible manager must also have three years relevant
                             experience over the past five years.


                             University degree

              RG 105.67      To rely on Option 3, your responsible manager’s degree must be in a relevant
                             discipline. We generally prefer this to be a financial discipline (e.g. economics,
                             commerce, business, accounting or equivalent). In some cases, we may accept
                             a degree in some other technical discipline (e.g. a degree in geology if your
                             responsible manager’s role relates to giving financial product advice about
                             shares in a company in the mining and resources sector).

              RG 105.68      If your responsible manager has a university degree that is specifically
                             relevant to the industry or product their role relates to, you will generally be
                             able to rely on Option 4 instead.


                             Short industry course

              RG 105.69      To rely on Option 3, your responsible manager’s short industry course must be
                             specifically relevant to the industry or product their role relates to.

              RG 105.70      We will accept relevant short industry courses that are:
                             (a)   listed on the ASIC Training Register (see RG 105.84); or
                             (b)   approved under the Australian Qualifications Framework or self-
                                   accredited by universities or other institutions of higher education (see
                                   RG 105.82–RG 105.83).



Option 4: Industry-specific or product-specific diploma (or higher)
              RG 105.71      To rely on Option 4, your responsible manager must have a qualification that is
                             specifically relevant to the industry or product their role relates to. The
                             qualification must be equivalent to a diploma or higher. They must also have
                             three years relevant experience over the past five years.

              RG 105.72      We will accept relevant qualifications that are:
                             (a)   if still relevant, courses completed prior to 24 September 2012 as listed
                                   on the ASIC Training Register or current equivalent courses (see
                                   RG 105.84); or
                             (b)   approved under the Australian Qualifications Framework or self-
                                   accredited by a university or other institution of higher education (see
                                   RG 105.82–RG 105.83).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 19
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




              RG 105.73      Examples of qualifications that we will accept include the Diploma or Advanced
                             Diploma of Financial Services (various providers) and the Diploma of Financial
                             Markets (FINSIA), provided they are relevant to your responsible manager’s
                             role.

              RG 105.74      We will not accept an individual assessment by an authorised assessor for the
                             purposes of Option 2 as an industry-specific or product-specific diploma.


                             Asset specialist qualifications for operating a registered
                             scheme or CCIV

              RG 105.75      If you operate a registered scheme or operate the business and conduct the
                             affairs of a CCIV, we will accept the qualifications in Table 2 as demonstrating
                             under Option 4 that your responsible managers have appropriate knowledge
                             for the type of assets under management. We will also accept other
                             appropriate asset specialist qualifications.

                                   Note: You also need to have at least one responsible manager with knowledge and skills
                                   relevant to the legal and compliance obligations of the financial service: see RG 105.55.

              RG 105.76      You can also rely on any of the other options to demonstrate that your
                             responsible managers have appropriate knowledge and skills—you do not
                             have to rely on Option 4.

                             Table 2:      Examples of relevant asset specialist qualifications for
                                           operating a registered scheme or CCIV

                               Kind of scheme or type of          Qualification
                               CCIV assets

                               Financial assets                   Tertiary qualification (at least diploma) in
                                                                  business, accounting or actuarial studies
                               Derivatives

                               Mortgages

                               IDPS-like schemes*

                               IDPSs*

                               Primary production                 Tertiary qualification (at least diploma) relevant to
                                                                  the underlying product (e.g. horticulture,
                                                                  viticulture, forestry)

                               Direct real property               Tertiary qualification (at least diploma) in real
                                                                  estate or property, or a real estate agent’s licence
                               Time-sharing schemes*

                             Note: Those items marked with an asterisk cannot be selected as asset types of sub-funds of
                             CCIVs.


              RG 105.77      For a registered scheme or CCIV, your AFS licence authorisations will outline
                             the kind of scheme that you can operate or the type of CCIV assets that you
                             can hold. When applying for your licence, you must specify the dominant kind
                             of scheme or type of CCIV assets.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                         Page 20
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




Option 5: Other demonstration of knowledge and skills
              RG 105.78      If you do not rely on Options 1 to 4, you need to be able to satisfy us that your
                             responsible manager has appropriate knowledge and skills for their role by
                             providing us with a written submission. Your submission must explain:
                             (a)   the nature of your responsible manager’s role;
                             (b)   any relevant qualifications or courses they have completed;
                             (c)   their relevant experience over the past 10 years (this does not necessarily
                                   mean they need 10 years relevant experience);
                             (d)   any relevant credentials they have, including professional association
                                   membership or affiliation, or skills or knowledge recognised by an
                                   industry association, a regulatory body such as APRA, or some relevant
                                   overseas body; and
                             (e)   why you think they have appropriate knowledge and skills for the
                                   financial services and products their role relates to.

              RG 105.79      Whether or not we accept a responsible manager as having adequate
                             knowledge and experience under Option 5 will depend on:
                             (a)   each applicant’s circumstances (based on the financial services or
                                   financial product authorisations sought); and
                             (b)   the knowledge and experience of the particular responsible manager
                                   relative to the authorisations the AFS licence applicant has sought.

              RG 105.80      Example 1–Example 3 below outline some situations in which we would consider
                             that a responsible manager has appropriate knowledge and skills under Option 5.
                             Example 4–Example 7 outline some situations in which we would not consider
                             that a responsible manager has appropriate knowledge and skills.

              RG 105.81      These examples are meant to provide guidance and are not strict threshold
                             requirements for a particular AFS licence applicant. This means that each case
                             needs to be considered on its merits according to the relevant facts.


                             Examples where we may accept responsible managers
                             under Option 5

                               Example 1: Digital advice business

                               Scenario

                               An AFS licence applicant proposes to provide personal advice to wholesale
                               and retail clients across a range of financial products through a digital advice
                               business model.
                                   Note: Digital advice is the provision of automated financial product advice using
                                   algorithms and technology and without the direct involvement of a human adviser.

                               The applicant nominates three responsible managers (RMs) to demonstrate
                               its organisational competence.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                 Page 21
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                               RM1 has a Bachelor of Economics, Master of Business Administration and
                               graduate diploma in applied finance and investment. RM1 has never
                               provided financial advice to clients, but has six years experience at a senior
                               level in a paraplanning division and supervised representatives providing
                               financial planning advice to retail clients for one year.

                               RM2 has worked at an AFS licensee and developed financial product offers
                               to medium-to-large-sized organisations. RM2 has over six years of
                               experience in financial product educational support services, development of
                               investment mandates and portfolios, provision of client and custodial
                               documentation, fund accounting and unit pricing.

                               RM3 satisfies Option 4 because they hold a Master of Applied Finance from
                               an Australian university and have 10 years experience in the investment
                               management industry.

                               Commentary

                               While RM1 has insufficient experience in considering retail clients’
                               circumstances, the experience of RM2 and RM3 is relevant to the
                               development of asset allocation alternatives.

                               Taking into account the nature, scale and complexity of the applicant’s
                               proposed business, ASIC would be prepared to accept the collective
                               knowledge and experience of the three responsible managers for the
                               purposes of granting the AFS licence authorisations sought.


                               Example 2: Securities trading and advice via a mobile application

                               Scenario

                               An AFS licence applicant proposes to provide general advice to retail clients,
                               and to deal in securities to facilitate clients trading in securities, via a mobile
                               application.

                               RM1 has a university degree in computer science, economics and
                               international business. They have three years experience in advising on and
                               dealing in securities, and have spent about two years developing the
                               securities trading software.

                               RM2 has a non-financial markets degree from a foreign university, with
                               six years regulated experience advising on and dealing in securities in the
                               United Kingdom over the past 10 years. RM2 has also worked for a
                               securities adviser in Australia for one year.

                               Both responsible managers have completed courses focused on educating
                               responsible managers about Australian financial services laws and training
                               that complies with RG 146 in providing advice to retail clients on securities.

                               RM1 meets the requirements of Option 3.

                               Commentary

                               ASIC may be satisfied that RM2 has demonstrated sufficient relevant
                               experience over the past 10 years under Option 5.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 22
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                               Example 3: Non-cash payment facility issuer and market maker in
                               foreign exchange contracts

                               Scenario

                               An AFS licence applicant intends to provide online cross-border remittance
                               services and make a market in foreign exchange contracts to retail and
                               wholesale clients.

                               RM1 has a Bachelor of Computer Science. RM1 has never provided financial
                               services to clients directly, but has seven years experience in developing foreign
                               exchange trading systems, foreign risk management and settlement systems, as
                               well as supporting foreign settlement and trading for major banks.

                               RM2 holds a Bachelor of Engineering. They have investment consulting
                               experience in a foreign investment bank for more than three years, and a
                               further six years experience in managing the proprietary portfolio of
                               investment companies, involving deposit products and foreign exchange
                               contracts.

                               RM1 and RM2 have completed training that complies with RG 146 in deposit
                               products, non-cash payment facilities and foreign exchange contracts.

                               Commentary

                               While RM1 has not directly provided financial services, their experience in
                               the foreign exchange technology platform with major Australian banks would
                               be considered relevant to the applicant’s proposed provision of financial
                               services relating to automated foreign exchange remittance and making a
                               market.

                               RM2 does not have relevant qualifications so cannot be considered under
                               either Option 3 or Option 4. However, the relevant financial services
                               experience of RM2 in the advisory and dealing areas of the business
                               complements RM1’s experience.

                               Accordingly, we would be prepared to accept RM1 and RM2 under Option 5
                               because their collective knowledge and experience mean the business will
                               have adequate organisational competence for the AFS licence authorisations
                               sought.


                             Examples where we may not accept responsible managers
                             under Option 5

                               Example 4: Marketplace lending through securities

                               Scenario

                               An AFS licence applicant proposes to provide marketplace lending services
                               to small-to-medium-sized enterprises funded by issuing securities.

                               The sole nominated responsible manager has 10 years experience in
                               regulatory affairs and compliance, and two years experience in providing
                               general advice and dealing services to wholesale clients in relation to deposit
                               products.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 23
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                               Commentary

                               ASIC would not consider that this responsible manager has sufficient
                               knowledge and skills under Option 5 because their experience is not relevant
                               to the AFS licence authorisations being sought. The responsible manager’s
                               advice and dealing experience does not relate to the applicant’s proposed
                               business (i.e. the provision of advice and issue of securities associated with
                               marketplace lending).


                               Example 5: Unregistered scheme offered to wholesale clients

                               Scenario

                               An AFS licence applicant intends to operate an unregistered scheme offered
                               to wholesale clients as a marketplace lender. We require the applicant to
                               have:
                               • a responsible manager with knowledge and experience in relation to
                                 operating a managed investment scheme; and
                               • a responsible manager with knowledge and skills in relation to the type of
                                 assets under management (see RG 105.44).

                               RM1 has eight years experience in commercial lending, credit and risk
                               management. RM2 has two years experience in financial accounting and
                               five years experience in business advisory services.

                               Commentary

                               ASIC would be satisfied that RM1 has demonstrated the required knowledge
                               and skills in relation to the assets under management under Option 5.

                               We would not consider that RM2 has demonstrated the required knowledge
                               and skills under Option 5 for operating a managed investment scheme.

                               We would not be satisfied that, when considered collectively, the responsible
                               managers have the appropriate knowledge and skills for all of the AFS
                               licence authorisations sought.


                               Example 6: Marketplace lending through an unregistered scheme

                               Scenario

                               An AFS licence applicant proposes to provide marketplace lending services
                               to small businesses through an unregistered scheme.

                               RM1 seeks to be assessed under Option 5. RM1 has university degrees in
                               mechanical engineering and computer science. RM1 also has over 10 years
                               experience in corporate governance as a company director across multiple
                               jurisdictions, with responsibility for capital raising and business development
                               in the environmental, technology and financial sectors.

                               RM 2 seeks to be assessed under Option 4. RM2 has an Advanced Diploma
                               of Financial Services and a Certificate IV in Finance and Mortgage Broking,
                               with over 10 years experience in funds management and five years
                               experience in finance broking.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 24
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                               Commentary

                               We would not consider that RM1 has demonstrated the necessary
                               competence under Option 5. This is because RM1’s experience is not related
                               to the financial services the AFS licence applicant wishes to provide or the
                               financial products these services would relate to.

                               However, we would be satisfied that RM2 has sufficient relevant knowledge
                               and experience under Option 4.


                               Example 7: Wholesale CCIV

                               Scenario

                               An AFS licence applicant intends to operate a wholesale CCIV that
                               predominantly invests in securities. We require the applicant to have:
                               • a responsible manager with knowledge and skill in relation to the financial
                                 services to be provided—that is, knowledge and skill in relation to
                                 operating the business and conducting the affairs of a CCIV; and
                               • a responsible manager with knowledge and skills in relation to the type of
                                 assets under management—that is, financial assets (see RG 105.75).

                               RM1 has five years’ experience in issuing and dealing in securities as a
                               stockbroker both in Australia and abroad (including dealing in interests of the
                               Undertakings for the Collective Investment in Transferable Securities in the
                               United Kingdom). RM2 has five years in accounting consultancy services.

                               Commentary

                               ASIC would accept that RM1 has demonstrated the required knowledge and
                               skills in relation to the assets under management under Option 5. We would
                               also impose a key person condition on RM1, given the applicant’s reliance
                               on RM1’s relevant asset expertise.

                               We would not consider that RM1 and RM2 have, either individually or
                               collectively, demonstrated the required competence (knowledge and skills) to
                               operate a CCIV.

                               We would accept the engagement of another responsible manager (RM3) as
                               demonstrating appropriate organisational competence to be granted an
                               authorisation to operate a CCIV. However, RM3 must have sufficient and
                               relevant knowledge, and skills gained at other entities (such as a responsible
                               entity, unregistered scheme trustee, corporate director or foreign equivalent
                               of a CCIV).



Explanations
                             What is the Australian Qualifications Framework?
              RG 105.82      The Australian Qualifications Framework is a government initiative that
                             provides a nationally consistent framework for all qualifications in post-
                             compulsory education. For a qualification to be accepted under the Australian
                             Qualifications Framework, it must be assessed as meeting certain standards.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 25
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




              RG 105.83      You can find qualifications that are accepted under the Australian
                             Qualifications Framework by visiting www.aqf.edu.au. You can also go to this
                             website to check which universities and other higher education institutions can
                             self-accredit their own qualifications.


                             What is the ASIC Training Register?

              RG 105.84      The ASIC Training Register is a register of training courses and authorised
                             assessment services set up for our requirements for financial product advisers
                             under RG 146. The ASIC Training Register is no longer current. For
                             additional guidance see the ASIC Training Register page on the ASIC
                             website.

                                   Note: The ASIC Training Register is valid up to 24 September 2012 and is currently
                                   under review. For courses completed after that date, you will need to contact individual
                                   training providers directly to get information about the courses they provide and if they
                                   meet the standards in RG 146.

              RG 105.85      The ASIC Training Register gives an indication of some training providers
                             that may have continued (since 24 September 2012) to provide:
                             (a)   individual assessments (under Option 2);
                             (b)   a relevant short industry course; or
                             (c)   a relevant industry-specific or product-specific qualification.

              RG 105.86      Given the content is no longer current, you are not limited to the guidance for
                             short courses and industry-specific or product-specific qualifications listed on
                             the ASIC Training Register. However, you need to be able to demonstrate the
                             relevance of the course to your responsible manager’s role.


                             What if your responsible manager has overseas
                             qualifications?

              RG 105.87      If your responsible manager has a relevant overseas qualification, you need to
                             be able to show that the qualification is comparable to an Australian
                             qualification that meets one of the five options.

              RG 105.88      If your responsible manager has a relevant overseas qualification from a
                             foreign university or other higher education institution, you need to provide a
                             submission setting out the responsible manager’s relevant overseas
                             qualification and demonstrate:
                             (a)   the comparability of the overseas qualifications with Australian
                                   qualifications; and
                             (b)   how it is relevant to the option selected.

              RG 105.89      International Education Online provides official information and advice on the
                             comparability of overseas qualifications with Australian qualifications. The




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                          Page 26
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             International Education Online’s Country Education Profiles is an online
                             recognition tool to assist in determining the equivalence of qualifications from
                             more than 120 countries with Australian qualifications. Country Education
                             Profiles (CEPs) can be purchased and accessed from International Education
                             Online or by phoning 1300 615 262.

              RG 105.90      If there is any doubt about the adequacy of your responsible manager’s
                             qualification based on the information from International Education Online,
                             you can apply to International Education Online to make an assessment of the
                             comparability of the individual qualification with Australian qualifications.
                             This process may take up to three months.

              RG 105.91      To find out more about CEPs and International Education Online’s assessment
                             of qualifications, go to International Education Online.

              RG 105.92      If your responsible manager has some other kind of relevant overseas
                             qualification, you need to be able to show that the qualification is recognised
                             by a relevant overseas regulator. Relevant overseas regulators include the
                             Financial Conduct Authority (UK), the Financial Markets Authority (New
                             Zealand), the National Association of Securities Dealers (US), the Canadian
                             Dealers Association, the Securities and Futures Commission (Hong Kong),
                             and the Monetary Authority of Singapore.

                             Overseas qualifications and financial product advice

              RG 105.93      If your responsible manager’s role relates to the provision of financial product
                             advice, then (depending on the type of advice) we expect your responsible
                             manager to also complete a relevant short industry course so that they can
                             become familiar with Australian regulatory requirements (e.g. obligations
                             under the Corporations Act), and relevant features of the financial services
                             industry peculiar to Australia (e.g. taxation and superannuation requirements).

                                   Note: As a result of the financial adviser professional standards reforms, the training
                                   standards in RG 146 no longer apply to relevant providers who provide personal advice to
                                   retail clients on relevant financial products.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                       Page 27
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




D          Telling us about your responsible managers

                               Key points

                               You must tell us about your responsible managers when you:
                               • apply for an AFS licence or apply to vary your licence authorisations (see
                                 RG 105.94–RG 105.114); or
                               • change any of your responsible managers (see RG 105.115–RG 105.117).

                               You may also need to tell us about your responsible managers if we conduct
                               a surveillance visit on your business.




Applying for an AFS licence or varying your licence authorisations
              RG 105.94      You must demonstrate your organisational competence when you apply for an
                             AFS licence. You may also need to demonstrate your organisational
                             competence if you later apply to vary your licence authorisations.

              RG 105.95      When you apply for an AFS licence, or to vary your licence authorisations,
                             you must nominate your responsible managers in your application and answer
                             questions about their role, training and experience, and which of the
                             five options in Section C they meet. You must also support your application
                             with a ‘core proof’ demonstrating that your responsible managers:
                             (a)   individually meet one of the five options in Section C for demonstrating
                                   appropriate knowledge and skills; and
                             (b)   together have appropriate knowledge and skills to cover all of your
                                   financial services and products (see Section B).

                                   Note: For information on the licence application and licence variation processes and the core
                                   proof for demonstrating organisational competence, see RG 1 and the AFS Licensing Kit.

              RG 105.96      If you apply to vary your AFS licence authorisations, you may need to add
                             responsible managers to cover your new financial services or products. If so,
                             you must also notify us: see RG 105.115.


                             What if you cannot demonstrate organisational competence?

              RG 105.97      If you cannot demonstrate your organisational competence, we may refuse
                             your AFS licence application (under s913B(1)(b)) or decide to grant you more
                             limited authorisations than those you are applying for.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                           Page 28
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             Licence authorisations for registered schemes and IDPSs

              RG 105.98      If you want to operate a registered scheme or IDPS, you can either apply for:
                             (a)   a narrow authorisation—that is, authorisation to operate a ‘named
                                   scheme’ or ‘named IDPS’ of a particular asset kind; or
                             (b)   a broad authorisation—that is, authorisation to operate any number of
                                   schemes or IDPSs of a particular kind.

              RG 105.99      The narrow authorisation will only permit you to operate the particular
                             registered scheme or IDPS named on your AFS licence.

              RG 105.100     If you are a new applicant, we are likely to impose a ‘named scheme’ or
                             ‘named IDPS’ authorisation to enable you to demonstrate that you have the
                             organisational competence and capacity (e.g. systems and financial,
                             technological and human resources) when first commencing before we will
                             grant you a broad authorisation.

              RG 105.101     You will generally need to demonstrate organisational competence by
                             operating two or more registered schemes or IDPSs (as applicable) for at least
                             the past two years to be granted the broad authorisation.

                             Licence authorisation to operate the business and conduct
                             the affairs of a CCIV
              RG 105.102     If you want to operate the business and conduct the affairs of a CCIV, you
                             need to indicate whether you are applying for an authorisation to operate the
                             business and conduct the affairs of wholesale CCIVs only, retail CCIVs only,
                             or retail CCIVs and wholesale CCIVs. You also need to specify which
                             particular CCIV asset types you are seeking authorisation for.

                             Type of CCIV
              RG 105.103     You should only apply for an authorisation to operate the business and
                             conduct the affairs of a retail CCIV if you can demonstrate that you are likely
                             to comply with the additional obligations that apply to retail CCIVs.
                             Otherwise, you should apply for an authorisation to operate the business of
                             and conduct the affairs of a wholesale CCIV. For information on these
                             additional obligations, see Ch 8B of the Corporations Act.

                             Limit on operations of retail CCIVs

              RG 105.104     When you apply for an authorisation to operate the business and conduct the
                             affairs of a retail CCIV, you can request to have a condition imposed limiting
                             you to the operation of one retail CCIV with a single sub-fund (limiting
                             condition). If you request the limiting condition, you:
                             (a)   may only be the corporate director of one retail CCIV; and
                             (b)   may issue shares that are only referable to a single sub-fund.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 29
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




              RG 105.105     We may, at our discretion, impose the limiting condition. This condition may
                             be imposed only in relation to retail CCIVs.

              RG 105.106     When we consider imposing the limiting condition, we will take into account
                             your:
                             (a)   organisational competence as assessed against Section B and Section C.
                                   This will include consideration of:
                                   (i)     the prior experience of your responsible managers in operating
                                           registered schemes or retail CCIVs, as applicable;
                                   (ii)    the prior experience of your responsible managers with the same
                                           types of assets under management; and
                                   (iii)   the size and scale of prior operations; and
                             (b)   capacity (this includes whether you have sufficient systems and
                                   resources, including financial, technological and human resources, to
                                   operate multiple CCIVs and sub-funds).

              RG 105.107     To remove the limiting condition, you will need to apply to vary your AFS
                             licence.

              RG 105.108     In our view, a larger-scale business increases the demands on your
                             organisation. We may impose the limiting condition if you cannot demonstrate
                             the competence and capacity required for a larger scale business involving
                             multiple CCIVs and sub-funds.

              RG 105.109     You can generally demonstrate the competence and capacity required for a
                             larger scale business if you have a track record of operating two or more
                             registered schemes or retail CCIVs, as applicable, for at least the past two
                             years.


                             Advising on, and dealing in, CCIV securities

              RG 105.110     If you have an existing authorisation to advise on and/or deal in securities, you
                             are considered to be also authorised to advise on and/or deal in CCIV
                             securities and will not need to apply to ASIC for a separate authorisation. This
                             is because CCIV securities fall under the definition of ‘securities’ in s92 of the
                             Corporations Act.

              RG 105.111     All other AFS licensees or AFS licence applicants seeking an authorisation to
                             advise on and/or deal in CCIV securities will need to apply for an AFS licence
                             authorisation to advise on and/or deal in ‘securities’ (this is a broad category
                             covering all types of securities, including CCIV securities).


                             Key person licence conditions

              RG 105.112     If we are satisfied with your organisational competence but we think you are
                             heavily dependent on the capacity, knowledge and skills of one or


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                 Page 30
                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                             two responsible managers, we will generally impose a ‘key person condition’
                             on your AFS licence. The key person condition will name those responsible
                             managers whose competence we think you heavily depend on.

              RG 105.113     For example, we may impose a key person condition if you are a small
                             organisation with one or two principals, or if only one responsible manager
                             has the knowledge and skills relevant to a particular financial service or
                             product. We will also impose a key person condition for AFS licensees who
                             nominate a responsible manager who will provide sign-off: see RG 105.28–
                             RG 105.35.

              RG 105.114     If a responsible manager who is a key person leaves your business, the
                             AFS licence condition will require you to:
                             (a)   nominate another responsible manager to replace them, or if you have not
                                   appointed someone to replace them, give us reasons why not; and
                             (b)   demonstrate that you continue to have the organisational competence for
                                   all of your financial services and products.

                                   Note: The standard key person condition is condition 3 of PF 209.




Changing your responsible managers
              RG 105.115     After you have an AFS licence, you have an ongoing obligation to formally
                             notify us when you change any of your responsible managers. This means you
                             must tell us when you add or remove any of your responsible managers.

                                   Note: We maintain details of your responsible managers as part of our register of
                                   AFS licensees under s922A and reg 7.6.05. You must notify us if information in the
                                   register changes: see reg 7.6.04(1)(b). To do this, use Form FS20 Change of details for an
                                   Australian financial services licence.

              RG 105.116     If the responsible manager you are changing is named on your AFS licence as
                             a key person, you must also apply to vary the key person condition on your
                             licence.

                                   Note: To vary a key person condition, use Form FS03 Application for variation of
                                   authorisation and other conditions.


                             When do you need to add or remove a responsible
                             manager?

              RG 105.117     You may need to add or remove a responsible manager if:
                             (a)   your business changes (e.g. it expands to cover new services or products,
                                   or the roles of people within your business change); or
                             (b)   a responsible manager leaves your business or is no longer involved in
                                   significant day-to-day decisions about your business.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                          Page 31
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




Key terms


                               Term                        Meaning in this document

                               advice                      Financial product advice

                               AFS licence                 An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                           the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                           on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                           services
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                               AFS licensee                A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                           Corporations Act

                               APRA                        Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

                               ASIC                        Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               CCIV                        A corporate collective investment vehicle—a company
                                                           that is registered as a corporate collective investment
                                                           vehicle under the Corporations Act
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s9 of the Corporations
                                                               Act.

                               CCIV assets                 Means the money and property of a CCIV, including
                                                           assets of the CCIV’s sub-fund

                               CCIV security               A security in a CCIV

                               client                      A retail client (unless otherwise specified)

                               corporate director          The company named in ASIC’s record of the CCIV’s
                                                           registration as the corporate director or temporary
                                                           corporate director of the CCIV
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s1224(3) of the
                                                               Corporations Act.

                               Corporations Act            Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                           purposes of that Act

                               Corporations                Corporations Regulations 2001
                               Regulations

                               custodial service           The service provided under an arrangement between the
                                                           provider and the client, or between the provider and
                                                           another person with whom the client has an arrangement
                                                           (whether or not there are also other parties to any such
                                                           arrangement), under which a financial product, or a
                                                           beneficial interest in a financial product, is held by the
                                                           provider in trust for, or on behalf of, the client or another
                                                           person nominated by the client unless the service is not a
                                                           custodial service under s766E(3) of the Corporations Act
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s766E of the Corporations
                                                               Act for the term ‘provide a custodial or depository service’.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                             Page 32
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                               Term                        Meaning in this document

                               financial product           Generally, a facility through which, or through the
                                                           acquisition of which, a person does one or more of the
                                                           following:
                                                            makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                            manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                            makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                               Note: See Div 3 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Act for the exact
                                                               definition. In addition to the general categories above, this
                                                               specifies certain things as being included or excluded from the
                                                               definition.

                               financial product advice    A recommendation or a statement of opinion, or a report
                                                           of either of these things, that:
                                                            is intended to influence a person or persons in making
                                                             a decision about a particular financial product or class
                                                             of financial product, or an interest in a particular
                                                             financial product or class of financial product; or
                                                            could reasonably be regarded as being intended to
                                                             have such an influence.

                                                           This does not include anything in an exempt document or
                                                           statement.
                                                               Note: This is the definition contained in s766B of the
                                                               Corporations Act.

                               financial service           Has the meaning given in Div 4 of Pt 7.1 of the
                                                           Corporations Act

                               general advice              Financial product advice that is not personal advice
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s766B(4) of the
                                                               Corporations Act.

                               general obligations         The obligations of an AFS licensee under s912A(1) of the
                                                           Corporations Act

                               IDPS                        An investor directed portfolio service as defined in Class
                                                           Order [CO 13/763] Investor directed portfolio services, or
                                                           any instrument that amends or replaces that class order

                               licensee                    A person who holds an AFS licence

                               managed investment          Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                               scheme                          Note: A notified foreign passport fund is a managed
                                                               investment scheme for the purpose of the Corporations Act:
                                                               see s1213E.

                               MDA                         Managed discretionary account

                               MDA service                 Has the meaning given in ASIC Corporations (Managed
                                                           Discretionary Account Services) Instrument 2016/968

                               organisational              The obligation in s912A(1)(e) of the Corporations Act
                               competence obligation




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                             Page 33
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                               Term                        Meaning in this document

                               personal advice             Financial product advice given or directed to a person
                                                           (including by electronic means) in circumstances where:
                                                            the provider of the advice has considered one or more
                                                             of the client’s objectives, financial situation and needs;
                                                             or
                                                            a reasonable person might expect the provider to have
                                                             considered one or more of these matters
                                                               Note: This is the definition contained in s766B(3) of the
                                                               Corporations Act.

                               reg 7.6.04 (for             A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                               example)                    example numbered 7.6.04)

                               registered scheme           A managed investment scheme that is registered under
                                                           s601EB of the Corporations Act

                               relevant financial          Financial products other than basic banking products,
                               product                     general insurance products, consumer credit insurance,
                                                           or a combination of any of these products
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s922C of the
                                                               Corporations Act.

                               relevant provider           An individual that is authorised to give personal advice to
                                                           retail clients on relevant financial products: see s921B

                               responsible entity          A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined in
                                                           s9 of the Corporations Act

                               retail CCIV                 A CCIV that satisfies the retail CCIV test in s1222K of the
                                                           Corporations Act or is notified as a retail CCIV under
                                                           s1222L of the Corporations Act
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s1222J.

                               retail client               A client as defined in s761G of the Corporations Act and
                                                           Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Regulations

                               RG 78 (for example)         An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 78)

                               s912A (for example)         A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                           numbered 912A), unless otherwise specified

                               simple managed              A registered scheme that invests at least 80% of its
                               investment scheme           assets in a bank account where funds can be withdrawn
                                                           within three months, or in arrangements where the
                                                           investments can be realised at market value within
                                                           10 days: see reg 1.0.02 of the Corporations Regulations




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                               Page 34
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




                               Term                        Meaning in this document

                               small-scale, heavily        An AFS licensee, or an AFS licence applicant, with a
                               automated business          heavily automated business model and a small client
                                                           base. ‘Heavily automated’ means the business relies on
                                                           algorithms or other technology to deliver financial
                                                           services in a consistent way following the input of
                                                           required client information (i.e. there is extremely limited
                                                           human discretion exercised by the licensee or its
                                                           representatives in providing the financial services on a
                                                           day-to-day basis). A licensee or applicant is small-scale if
                                                           it has provided financial services to fewer than 1,000
                                                           retail clients

                               sub-fund                    Has the meaning given in s1222Q of the Corporations Act
                                                               Note: A sub-fund is established on the day on which it is
                                                               registered: see s1222T.

                               wholesale CCIV              A CCIV that is not a retail CCIV
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s1222J of the
                                                               Corporations Act.

                               you                         An AFS licensee or an applicant for an AFS licence




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                           Page 35
                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 105: AFS licensing: Organisational competence




Related information

                             Headnotes
                             compliance measures; general obligations; knowledge and skills; nature, scale
                             and complexity; organisational competence; responsible manager

                             Regulatory guides
                             RG 1 Applying for and varying an AFS licence

                             RG 36 Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing

                             RG 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees

                             RG 98 ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make
                             banning orders

                             RG 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general obligations

                             RG 146 Licensing: Training of financial product advisers

                             Consultation
                             CP 360 Corporate collective investment vehicles: Preparing for the
                             commencement of the new regime

                             Reports

                             REP 728 Response to submissions on CP 360 Corporate collective investment
                             vehicles: Preparing for the commencement of the new regime

                             Pro formas
                             PF 209 Australian financial services licence conditions

                             Legislation
                             Corporations Act, Ch 8B, s9, 92, 912A, 912DAA, 913B, 913BA, 914A, 915C,
                             922A

                             Corporations Regulations, regs 1.0.02, 7.6.04, 7.6.05

                             ASIC forms
                             Form FS01 Application for AFS licence

                             Form FS03 Application for variation of authorisation and other conditions

                             Form FS20 Change of details for an Australian financial services licence



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2022                                                Page 36
