REGULATORY GUIDE 100

Court enforceable undertakings

November 2021




About this guide
A court enforceable undertaking is an administrative remedy for
contraventions of legislation administered by ASIC. It contains a set of
undertakings provided by another person to ASIC that ASIC has accepted.
This guide is for an entity or person and their legal advisers who are
considering offering a court enforceable undertaking to ASIC.

It explains our approach to accepting court enforceable undertakings under
the legislation we administer, including:
   s93A or 93AA of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission
    Act 2001 (ASIC Act);
   s322 of the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 (National
    Credit Act); and
   s262A of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 (SIS Act).
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in November 2021 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 100 Enforceable undertakings, issued
                                     February 2008, reissued February 2012 and February 2015
                                    Superseded Guide 300, issued March 2007, rebadged as a regulatory
                                     guide 5 July 2007
                                    Superseded Practice Note 69, issued 7 April 1999


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                          Page 2
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                             B      What is a court enforceable undertaking? .................................... 5
                                    ASIC’s power to accept court enforceable undertakings ................... 5
                                    How a court enforceable undertaking works ..................................... 5
                             C      When will we consider accepting a court enforceable
                                    undertaking? .................................................................................... 7
                                    Our approach to accepting court enforceable undertakings .............. 7
                                    When we will not accept a court enforceable undertaking ................ 8
                                    Examples of court enforceable undertakings we may accept ........... 8
                             D      What terms should a court enforceable undertaking include?..... 10
                                    Acceptable and standard terms ....................................................... 10
                                    Unacceptable terms ......................................................................... 11
                             E      Are court enforceable undertakings made public? ................... 12
                                    Our approach to publicising court enforceable undertakings .......... 12
                                    Disclosure to the market operator ................................................... 13
                                    Reporting on compliance ................................................................. 13
                             F      Can a court enforceable undertaking be varied or withdrawn? 15
                                    Varying a court enforceable undertaking ......................................... 15
                                    Withdrawing an offer of a court enforceable undertaking ................ 15
                             G      What happens if a court enforceable undertaking is not
                                    complied with? ............................................................................... 16
                             Appendix: Guidance on the use of independent experts ................... 17
                                Reports by independent experts ...................................................... 17
                                Appointment of an independent expert by ASIC ............................. 18
                                Appointment of an independent expert by the party ........................ 18
                                Assessing the independence of the expert...................................... 19
                                Expert’s arrangements to manage conflicts of interest ................... 21
                                Publicity for independent expert reports .......................................... 22
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 24
                             Related information ............................................................................... 25




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                                                      Page 3
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




A          Overview

                              Key points

                              ASIC accepts court enforceable undertakings where we consider that they
                              will be likely to improve and enforce compliance with the law. This guide
                              explains our approach to court enforceable undertakings, including:
                              • when we will consider accepting an undertaking;
                              • what terms may be acceptable and when we will consider consenting to
                                requests to vary or withdraw an undertaking;
                              • public reporting on compliance with undertakings; and
                              • what happens if an undertaking is not complied with.


              RG 100.1       Court enforceable undertakings are a flexible remedy that ASIC may accept
                             to improve and enforce compliance with the law.

                                   Note: Court enforceable undertakings were previously referred to as ‘enforceable
                                   undertakings’.

              RG 100.2       This guide explains our approach to accepting court enforceable
                             undertakings, using the numerous powers given to ASIC by the legislation
                             that we administer. Some of these powers are in:
                             (a)   s93A and 93AA of the Australian Securities and Investments
                                   Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act);
                             (b)   s322 of the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 (National
                                   Credit Act); and
                             (c)   s262A of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 (SIS Act).

              RG 100.3       This guide explains:
                             (a)   what a court enforceable undertaking is (Section B);
                             (b)   when we will consider accepting a court enforceable undertaking
                                   (Section C);
                             (c)   the types of terms that are generally acceptable to ASIC (Section D);
                             (d)   when we will make court enforceable undertakings public (Section E);
                             (e)   when we will consider consenting to requests to vary or withdraw a
                                   court enforceable undertaking (Section F);
                             (f)   what happens if a court enforceable undertaking is not complied with
                                   (Section G).

              RG 100.4       We have also set out our guidance and requirements for using independent
                             experts as part of a court enforceable undertaking: see the appendix.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                                      Page 4
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




B          What is a court enforceable undertaking?

                              Key points

                              A court enforceable undertaking is an administrative remedy that ASIC may
                              accept to address contraventions of legislation: see RG 100.5.

                              This section sets out the parties from whom we will accept a court
                              enforceable undertaking: see RG 100.6 and Table 1.

                              It also sets out how court enforceable undertakings work, including who
                              can offer and accept the undertaking, and when the undertaking takes
                              effect: see RG 100.7–RG 100.11.



ASIC’s power to accept court enforceable undertakings
              RG 100.5       Court enforceable undertakings are one of a range of enforcement remedies
                             available to ASIC. We use them to address contraventions of the legislation
                             we are responsible for administering.

              RG 100.6       We may accept a court enforceable undertaking from the parties set out in
                             Table 1.

Table 1:    Parties from whom we may accept a court enforceable undertaking

 Party                        Situation                                                 Legislative reference

 A person or company          The person or company has contravened the ASIC Act        s93AA(1) of the ASIC
                              or the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act)           Act

 A responsible entity of a    The responsible entity or registered scheme has           s93A(1) of the ASIC
 registered scheme            contravened the Corporations Act                          Act

 A person or company          The person or company has contravened the National        s322(1) of the National
                              Credit Act                                                Credit Act

 A trustee of a               The trustee has contravened the SIS Act                   s262A(1) of the SIS Act
 superannuation fund




How a court enforceable undertaking works
              RG 100.7       The party providing a court enforceable undertaking to ASIC can be a
                             company, an individual or a responsible entity. The party can initiate the
                             court enforceable undertaking, or it can be initiated by ASIC. ASIC does not
                             have the power to require a person to provide an undertaking. Similarly, a
                             person cannot compel ASIC to accept an undertaking.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                           Page 5
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




              RG 100.8       The terms of an undertaking may be the subject of negotiation between the
                             party offering the undertaking and ASIC. ASIC’s Commission, or a delegate
                             of the Commission, will make the decision to accept or reject the
                             undertaking.

              RG 100.9       A court enforceable undertaking will not take effect until the Commission or
                             a delegate formally accepts it.

              RG 100.10      Each party will keep a signed original of the court enforceable undertaking.

              RG 100.11      Court enforceable undertakings are available for public inspection on the
                             court enforceable undertakings register: see RG 100.30.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                          Page 6
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




C          When will we consider accepting a court
           enforceable undertaking?

                              Key points

                              A court enforceable undertaking is an administrative remedy we may
                              accept as an alternative to, or in conjunction with, civil court action or
                              administrative action.

                              We may accept a court enforceable undertaking if we consider it will
                              provide an effective and appropriate regulatory outcome that is in the public
                              interest: see RG 100.12–RG 100.18.

                              We will not usually accept a court enforceable undertaking:
                              • for criminal conduct;
                              • in cases of deliberate misconduct; or
                              • for conduct involving a high level of recklessness (see RG 100.19).

                              We have set out examples of the types of undertakings we may accept at
                              Table 2.



Our approach to accepting court enforceable undertakings
              RG 100.12      We will only accept a court enforceable undertaking when we consider it
                             will achieve an effective and appropriate regulatory outcome that is in the
                             public interest. We have set out our general approach to enforcement remedies
                             in Information Sheet 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement (INFO 151).

              RG 100.13      We will consider a range of factors before accepting a court enforceable
                             undertaking. These factors will vary according to the circumstances. Factors
                             we typically consider include:
                             (a)   whether the person is likely to comply with the undertaking;
                             (b)   the likely effect of the undertaking on the person’s future conduct,
                                   including whether the undertaking is likely to deter the person from
                                   engaging in misconduct in the future;
                             (c)   whether the undertaking will deter others from engaging in similar
                                   conduct; and
                             (d)   the public interest, including remediation outcomes such as
                                   compensation for affected consumers.

              RG 100.14      We will also take into account:
                             (a)   the significance of the issues to the market and the community;
                             (b)   the nature and seriousness of the alleged contravention; and
                             (c)   the compliance history of the party providing the court enforceable
                                   undertaking.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                           Page 7
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




              RG 100.15      We will not accept a court enforceable undertaking unless we have reason to
                             believe there has been a contravention of relevant legislation.

              RG 100.16      We will generally only consider accepting a court enforceable undertaking
                             after we have weighed up the effectiveness of the regulatory outcome
                             offered by the undertaking compared to outcomes offered by other available
                             enforcement remedies.

              RG 100.17      We may also accept a court enforceable undertaking in conjunction with
                             other enforcement action. For example, we may commence or continue civil
                             penalty proceedings against a party, but also accept an undertaking from that
                             party that results in remediation outcomes for a wider class of affected
                             consumers than those referred to in the court proceedings.

              RG 100.18      Our acceptance of a court enforceable undertaking in a particular set of
                             circumstances should not be regarded as binding on ASIC in the future. For
                             example, accepting an undertaking from one person does not necessarily
                             mean we will accept an undertaking for similar misconduct from another
                             person, or that we will accept a further undertaking from the same person.


When we will not accept a court enforceable undertaking
              RG 100.19      We will not usually accept a court enforceable undertaking from a party:
                             (a)   instead of referring a brief of evidence to the Commonwealth Director
                                   of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) for potential criminal prosecution;
                             (b)   where the misconduct is deliberate or involves a high level of recklessness;
                             (c)   after a matter has been referred to an ASIC delegate or other specialist
                                   body; or
                             (d)   as an alternative form of relief if conditional relief has not been
                                   complied with.



Examples of court enforceable undertakings we may accept
              RG 100.20    The examples in Table 2 illustrate in general terms the kinds of court
                           enforceable undertakings we may accept. These examples are intended as a
                           guide only and are not exhaustive.

Table 2:    Examples of court enforceable undertakings

 Corporate governance         The party will refrain from taking part in the management of specified corporations
                              for a specific period of time.
                              The party will remedy deficiencies in the company’s compliance systems. They will
                              take specified action and have this reviewed by an auditor or expert.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                            Page 8
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




 Auditors and                 The party will refrain from performing a significant role in an audit engagement for
 liquidators                  a set period of time. They will also complete additional professional education and
                              be subject to technical supervision on future audit engagements for a set period of
                              time.
                              The party will refrain from accepting appointments to insolvency administrations
                              for a set period of time. They will also complete additional professional education
                              and be subject to technical supervision on future insolvency administrations.

 Disclosure                   The party will inform the market to correct previous false or misleading disclosure,
                              or any continuing misrepresentation for which the person is responsible.

                              The party will set up and implement an internal compliance plan. They will
                              periodically report on this plan to the market.

 Takeovers                    The party will remedy the unacceptable circumstances that have occurred, or may
                              have occurred, in a takeover. They will do this by carrying out certain necessary
                              action (provided that the matter has not been referred to the Takeovers Panel).

 Remediation                  The party will investigate the conduct that is the subject of the court enforceable
                              undertaking. The investigation should identify affected consumers and any loss
                              suffered. The remediation should aim to return affected consumers as closely as
                              possible to the position they would have otherwise been in. The process for
                              bringing this about may be described in the undertaking.

 Systemic compliance          The party will remedy the underlying compliance or systems error. They will also
 issues                       take any necessary rectification steps to ensure that existing compliance
                              measures, systems and controls are corrected or strengthened. If necessary, they
                              will undertake appropriate remediation steps to remedy any loss to consumers .

 Corrective notices           The party will write to investors or parties affected by the misconduct. The
                              corrective notice will inform them of the court enforceable undertaking, its terms
                              and how a copy of it can be obtained.

                              The party will also issue an advertisement or engage in corrective advertising (on
                              a website or otherwise) to rectify any misleading conduct.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                              Page 9
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




D          What terms should a court enforceable
           undertaking include?

                              Key points

                              This section provides guidance about the terms that should be included in a
                              court enforceable undertaking: see RG 100.21 and Table 3. It also explains
                              when the undertaking should contain admissions that the law was
                              contravened: see RG 100.22.

                              There are some terms that we will generally not accept: see RG 100.23.


Acceptable and standard terms
              RG 100.21      Table 3 lists the areas that a court enforceable undertaking may cover.

Table 3:    What a court enforceable undertaking may cover

 Background                   This section sets out the details of the relevant conduct and the nature of our
                              views about the conduct.

 Compliance and               We must be satisfied the court enforceable undertaking identifies the relevant
 monitoring                   misconduct and explains how the party providing the court enforceable
                              undertaking will ensure it does not occur again. We must also be satisfied that
                              there are adequate arrangements for monitoring how the undertaking is
                              implemented and for reporting to ASIC.

                              Details might include:
                               monitoring and reporting mechanisms (e.g. internal control or compliance
                                programs);
                               any external assessment of the changes that are put in place;
                               the name of the contact officer who is responsible for monitoring compliance
                                with the court enforceable undertaking (and any external expert); and
                               the ASIC officer who the party will report to about compliance with the court
                                enforceable undertaking.

 Remediation                  When a court enforceable undertaking includes remediation, we may require the
                              party to:
                               investigate the conduct the subject of the court enforceable undertaking;
                               identify the affected consumers;
                               identify any loss suffered; and
                               return affected consumers as closely as possible to the position they would have
                                otherwise been in.

                              For more guidance on our expectations for how a remediation should be
                              conducted, see Regulatory Guide 256 Client review and remediation conducted by
                              advice licensees (RG 256).

 Corrective notices           In cases of misleading conduct, we may require the party to correct the misleading
                              impression for which it is responsible.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                            Page 10
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




 Other action                 The party must acknowledge that the court enforceable undertaking does not
                              affect the rights of other parties or constitute any restraint on ASIC. The exception
                              to this is any specific enforcement action that ASIC has agreed to compromise.
                              We may accept an undertaking while continuing with our investigation into other
                              matters not covered by the undertaking.

 Compliance                   Where appropriate, we will require a party to provide ASIC with a statement
 attestations                 attesting to compliance with the terms of a court enforceable undertaking. This
                              may be required from an appropriate senior officer or from the party’s board or
                              governing body.

 Independent expert           Some court enforceable undertakings will contain terms requiring an independent
 report                       expert to review and report on specified matters. Further information about ASIC’s
                              requirements for court enforceable undertakings that involve the appointment of an
                              independent expert are set out in the appendix.

 Publicity and public         All court enforceable undertakings accepted by ASIC are made public, must
 access                       contain a clause that waives confidentiality, and acknowledges ASIC’s publicity
                              and public access policy: see RG 100.24–RG 100.30. The clause may exclude
                              certain information where necessary: see RG 100.28.

                              We will publicly report on a promisor’s compliance with undertakings given in a
                              court enforceable undertaking.



                             When admissions of contravening conduct will be required

                RG 100.22    When ASIC accepts a court enforceable undertaking in final resolution of a
                             matter, we will generally require that it contains admissions that the
                             promisor contravened specific legislative provisions. The admissions must
                             properly reflect the seriousness of the conduct.



Unacceptable terms
                RG 100.23    Generally, we will not accept a court enforceable undertaking that:
                             (a)   contains a clause denying liability or omitting any standard terms;
                             (b)   does not include details of the conduct that gave rise to the undertaking;
                             (c)   contains any clause that sets up defences for possible non-compliance
                                   with the undertaking; or
                             (d)   contains terms of confidentiality (see RG 100.25).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                             Page 11
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




E          Are court enforceable undertakings made
           public?

                              Key points

                              This section provides guidance about our approach to publicising and
                              giving access to court enforceable undertakings: see RG 100.24–
                              RG 100.27.

                              We will not accept court enforceable undertakings on a confidential basis.
                              However, there may be times when we will agree not to disclose some
                              information contained within a court enforceable undertaking: see
                              RG 100.28–RG 100.29.

                              We will not remove a court enforceable undertaking from the register: see
                              RG 100.30.

                              Listed companies may need to disclose the court enforceable undertaking
                              to the relevant market operator: see RG 100.31.

                              We may report publicly on whether a court enforceable undertaking has
                              been complied with or if we become aware of a failure to comply with the
                              undertaking: see RG 100.32–RG 100.36.




Our approach to publicising court enforceable undertakings

              RG 100.24      Our approach to public comment on enforcement action is contained in
                             Information Sheet 152 Public comment on ASIC’s regulatory activities
                             (INFO 152). There is significant public interest in ensuring that consumers,
                             industry and the broader community are aware of the enforcement action we
                             take. Transparency and disclosure are important factors in market integrity
                             and consumer confidence—they serve to promote deterrence and educate
                             consumers and industry.

              RG 100.25      Given this, we will not accept court enforceable undertakings in confidence,
                             or on the basis that the terms of an undertaking or the parties to it are
                             confidential.

              RG 100.26      Court enforceable undertakings accepted by ASIC are made available to the
                             public on the court enforceable undertakings register on the ASIC website
                             (see www.asic.gov.au/euregister).
                                  2TU




              RG 100.27      It is also our practice to issue a media release in a form determined by ASIC
                             when we accept an undertaking. We may also report on compliance with the
                             undertaking, and make available for public inspection summaries of reports
                             by independent experts on compliance with the undertaking.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                         Page 12
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




              RG 100.28      A party providing a court enforceable undertaking may ask for certain
                             information not to be released. We will not release information if we are
                             satisfied that the information:
                             (a)   is commercial in confidence;
                             (b)   consists of personal details of an individual; or
                             (c)   should not be disclosed because its release would be against the public
                                   interest.

                                   Note: Other information about an undertaking will also be made available for public
                                   inspection—see RG 100.67–RG 100.74.

              RG 100.29      If information is deleted, the copy of the court enforceable undertaking will
                             include a note stating that certain information has been deleted.

              RG 100.30      The court enforceable undertakings register provides a complete record of
                             the undertakings ASIC has accepted over time. It is our policy not to remove
                             an undertaking from the register once the obligations of the undertaking have
                             been fulfilled.



Disclosure to the market operator
              RG 100.31      A company listed on a prescribed financial market may give ASIC a court
                             enforceable undertaking. In this circumstance, the listing rules of that market
                             may require the company to release a copy of the undertaking to the market
                             operator. The company should also ensure they comply with s674 of the
                             Corporations Act.

                                   Note: For example, if a company is listed on the financial market operated by ASX
                                   Limited (ASX), this obligation may arise under ASX Listing Rule 3.1.




Reporting on compliance
              RG 100.32      We may report publicly on whether a party that has provided a court
                             enforceable undertaking has complied with it.

              RG 100.33      A court enforceable undertaking may require reporting by an independent
                             expert. In these cases, we will generally make a summary of the final report,
                             or a statement that refers to the content, public: see RG 100.67.

              RG 100.34      Our statements on compliance with undertakings will also be available on
                             the court enforceable undertakings register on the ASIC website (see
                             www.asic.gov.au/euregister).
                             2TU




              RG 100.35      We will not usually report publicly on compliance with a court enforceable
                             undertaking to refrain from engaging in particular conduct or activities. For



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                                  Page 13
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




                             example, undertakings to refrain (whether permanently or for a period of
                             time) from:
                             (a)   taking part in the management of corporations;
                             (b)   providing financial services;
                             (c)   performing a significant role in an audit; or
                             (d)   accepting appointments to insolvency administrations.

              RG 100.36      However, we will report publicly if we become aware there has been a
                             failure to comply with the undertaking.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                         Page 14
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




F          Can a court enforceable undertaking be varied
           or withdrawn?

                              Key points

                              A party who has provided a court enforceable undertaking may withdraw or
                              vary the undertaking only with ASIC’s consent in writing: see s93A(2) and
                              93AA(2) of the ASIC Act, s322(2) of the National Credit Act and s262A(2)
                              of the SIS Act.

                              We will agree to vary a court enforceable undertaking (see RG 100.37–
                              RG 100.39), or allow for a court enforceable undertaking to be withdrawn
                              (see RG 100.40–RG 100.41), in limited circumstances.




Varying a court enforceable undertaking
              RG 100.37      Variations of a court enforceable undertaking do not replace the original
                             undertaking—they merely modify it.

              RG 100.38      We will generally only agree to vary a court enforceable undertaking when:
                             (a)   the variation will not alter the spirit of the original undertaking;
                             (b)   compliance with the original undertaking is frustrated; or
                             (c)   there has been a material change in the circumstances that led to the
                                   original undertaking being given.

              RG 100.39      A variation of a court enforceable undertaking should be in writing. It should
                             be offered by the party and accepted by ASIC in the same manner as the
                             original undertaking. The original undertaking should be attached to the
                             variation document. Both the original undertaking and the variation
                             document remain on the court enforceable undertakings register on the ASIC
                             website (see www.asic.gov.au/euregister).
                                            2TU




Withdrawing an offer of a court enforceable undertaking
              RG 100.40      In exceptional circumstances, we may allow a party to withdraw a court
                             enforceable undertaking after we have accepted it. If we consent to the
                             withdrawal, the party is no longer bound by the terms of the undertaking. An
                             example of an exceptional circumstance is where an Australian financial
                             services (AFS) licensee has asked ASIC to revoke its licence and is no longer
                             able to comply with the undertaking (and nor is it necessary that it do so).

              RG 100.41      Withdrawals of court enforceable undertakings are also recorded on the
                             court enforceable undertakings register on the ASIC website.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                          Page 15
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




G          What happens if a court enforceable
           undertaking is not complied with?

                              Key points

                              We will ordinarily apply to the court for appropriate orders if we consider
                              there has been a breach of a term of a court enforceable undertaking and
                              further action by ASIC is warranted


              RG 100.42      If we have reason to believe that a party has not complied with a term of a
                             court enforceable undertaking, we may apply to the court for appropriate
                             orders.

              RG 100.43      We will publicise our application to the court and may seek legal costs.

              RG 100.44      If the court is satisfied that the party has breached a term of the court
                             enforceable undertaking, it has several options. The court can:
                             (a)   direct the party to comply with the particular term of the undertaking;
                             (b)   direct the party to transfer money to:
                                   (i)    the Commonwealth, if it is a person or a company; or
                                   (ii)   the scheme property, if it is a responsible entity under the ASIC
                                          Act.
                                   The amount of money can be up to the amount of any financial benefit
                                   the party obtained, directly or indirectly, that is reasonably attributable
                                   to the breach.
                             (c)   direct the party to compensate any other person who has suffered loss or
                                   damage as a result of the breach of the undertaking; or
                             (d)   make any other order that the court considers appropriate.

                                   Note: See s93A(4) and 93AA(4) of the ASIC Act, s322(4) of the National Credit Act
                                   and s262A(4) of the SIS Act.

              RG 100.45      The aim of the court orders is to compel the party to comply with the court
                             enforceable undertaking. The aim is also to put all parties in the position
                             they would have been in had the undertaking not been breached.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                               Page 16
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




Appendix: Guidance on the use of independent experts

                              Key points

                              This appendix provides guidance on our requirements whenever a court
                              enforceable undertaking requires an independent expert to report on
                              specified matters: see RG 100.46–RG 100.50.
                              The expert can be appointed by ASIC (see RG 100.51–RG 100.52) or by
                              the party providing the undertaking (see RG 100.53–RG 100.55).
                              Experts must be capable of exercising objective and impartial judgement
                              during an engagement. We will assess the independence of the expert
                              before we appoint them or consent to their appointment: see RG 100.56–
                              RG 100.66.

                              We will make public a summary of the report or a statement that refers to
                              the content of the report: see RG 100.67–RG 100.74.



Reports by independent experts
              RG 100.46      The guidance in this appendix applies whenever a court enforceable
                             undertaking requires independent reporting on undertakings given by, or the
                             conduct of, the party providing the undertaking.

              RG 100.47      In most cases the party may appoint the expert, subject to ASIC consent.
                             However, in some cases, we will appoint the independent expert and require
                             the party to undertake to bear the cost of the expert’s work under the court
                             enforceable undertaking: see RG 100.51–RG 100.52.

              RG 100.48      Regardless of who appoints the independent expert, we will assess:
                             (a)   the competence of the expert (see RG 100.49);
                             (b)   the independence of the expert (see RG 100.56–RG 100.62); and
                             (c)   the expert’s arrangements for managing conflicts of interest arising
                                   during the engagement (see RG 100.63–RG 100.66).

                             Our assessment of these factors will help ensure the expert is capable of
                             exercising objective and impartial judgement during an engagement.

              RG 100.49      We will assess the competence of the independent expert against the
                             following factors:
                             (a)   whether the expert has adequate resources to perform the necessary
                                   work. ‘Adequate resources’ may include access to appropriate third-
                                   party specialists;
                             (b)   the qualifications of the expert and whether the expert has the requisite
                                   level of technical expertise. This will include whether the expert meets
                                   the requirements of any relevant industry codes;


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                         Page 17
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




                             (c)   the experience of the expert (e.g. whether the expert has undertaken
                                   comparable work); and
                             (d)   whether the expert can meet relevant reporting timeframes.

                                   Note: These factors non-exhaustive. They are adapted from Regulatory Guide 112
                                   Independence of experts (RG 112) at RG 112.40.

              RG 100.50      The independent expert appointed under a court enforceable undertaking will
                             provide the report to ASIC, and usually to the party providing a court
                             enforceable undertaking. ASIC will publish a summary of the final report of
                             the expert, or a statement that refers to the content of the final report: see
                             RG 100.67.



Appointment of an independent expert by ASIC
              RG 100.51      We will generally appoint an independent expert when:
                             (a)   a court enforceable undertaking requires an expert to assess the
                                   development or implementation of a large scale, complex or significant
                                   compensation or remediation program or rectification of compliance
                                   systems;
                             (b)   there have previously been significant shortcomings in work undertaken
                                   or remediation implemented by the party providing a court enforceable
                                   undertaking; or
                             (c)   the party has a history of failing to adequately address compliance
                                   issues.

              RG 100.52      The party must bear the cost of the independent expert’s work under the
                             court enforceable undertaking.



Appointment of an independent expert by the party
              RG 100.53      If we do not appoint an independent expert, a party providing a court
                             enforceable undertaking may appoint an independent expert. When this is
                             the case, we require a standard term in the court enforceable undertaking that
                             the promisor will obtain our consent to the appointment, and to the terms of
                             the expert’s retainer, before appointment. For some of the matters we will
                             consider before consenting to an appointment, see RG 100.57 and
                             RG 100.64.

              RG 100.54      When a party appoints an independent expert, we will also require the
                             standard terms to set out that:
                             (a)   the party’s retainer for the expert must include a statement that the work
                                   of the expert is being carried out for the party and ASIC. The statement



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                               Page 18
                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




                                   must also acknowledge that ASIC is relying on the work of the expert;
                                   and
                             (b)   we are entitled to be informed of, provided with, or copied into all
                                   communications between the party and the expert. This includes, but is
                                   not limited to, negotiations about fees.

              RG 100.55      These terms will help ASIC ensure an expert retains independence when
                             performing an engagement under a court enforceable undertaking.



Assessing the independence of the expert
              RG 100.56      In deciding whether to appoint an expert or to consent to the appointment of
                             an expert proposed by a party providing a court enforceable undertaking, we
                             will consider whether the proposed expert is independent of the party. We
                             will not appoint an expert or consent to an appointment unless we are satisfied
                             that the proposed expert can exercise objective and impartial judgement.

                                   Note: See RG 112 and Regulatory Guide 111 Content of expert reports (RG 111).

              RG 100.57      We will assess the following non-exhaustive factors in our consideration of
                             the independence of a proposed expert:
                             (a)   whether the expert is the auditor of the party;
                             (b)   whether fees and remuneration from the party in the two years before
                                   the proposed appointment are material to the expert’s revenue in
                                   Australia;
                             (c)   whether the staff undertaking work on the engagement or their
                                   immediate family have a financial interest in the party, including
                                   financial interests held through an intermediary;
                             (d)   whether the staff undertaking work on the engagement or the expert
                                   owe an amount to the party that has been advanced other than in the
                                   ordinary course of business or on terms and conditions other than those
                                   that would normally apply to such a loan. The loan can also be from a
                                   related body corporate of the party;
                             (e)   whether there are any existing or previous business or personal
                                   relationships between the expert or the expert’s staff or their immediate
                                   family and the party or its officers;
                             (f)   whether the expert or the expert’s staff are officers of the party, or have
                                   been in the previous two years;
                             (g)   whether the expert has participated in strategic planning for the party;
                             (h)   whether the expert has previously reviewed the transactions or
                                   compliance systems that are to be evaluated, or has designed or
                                   implemented those systems;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                              Page 19
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




                             (i)   whether there is actual or potential litigation between the expert and the
                                   party;
                             (j)   whether the expert has acted on behalf of the party in litigation or
                                   disputes with third parties;
                             (k)   if the expert has done work related to another court enforceable
                                   undertaking in the past, whether the expert, in the two years following
                                   appointment under the undertaking, has performed work for that party
                                   (other than under the undertaking) that generated material fees;
                             (l)   whether the expert has appropriate arrangements to manage conflicts of
                                   interest that may arise in the engagement under the court enforceable
                                   undertaking (see RG 100.63 and RG 100.66); and
                             (m)   any other matters that render, or may reasonably be perceived to render,
                                   the expert or the expert’s staff incapable of exercising objective and
                                   impartial judgement.

              RG 100.58      A party providing a court enforceable undertaking should obtain information
                             about all of these factors from a proposed expert, and provide that
                             information to ASIC when seeking our consent to the appointment of the
                             proposed expert. We may refuse to consent to an appointment where this
                             information is not provided.

              RG 100.59      We will assess all of the factors in RG 100.57 on a case-by-case basis. Our
                             assessment will aim to determine the cumulative effect of the factors on a
                             proposed expert’s ability to exercise objective and impartial judgement.

              RG 100.60      We will carefully scrutinise any proposal by a party providing a court
                             enforceable undertaking to appoint the promisor’s auditor as an independent
                             expert under a court enforceable undertaking. We will consider the nature of
                             the engagement, the risk of self-review and the public perception created by
                             any such appointment.

              RG 100.61      We will also look carefully at the information provided about the following
                             factors from RG 100.57:
                             (a)   whether fees and remuneration from the party in the two years before
                                   the proposed appointment are material to the expert’s revenue in
                                   Australia (see RG 100.57(b)) or
                             (b)   whether the expert can demonstrate appropriate arrangements to
                                   manage conflicts of interest that may arise in the engagement, taking
                                   into account the nature of the engagement and the size, scope and nature
                                   of the expert’s business (see RG 100.57 and RG 100.63–RG 100.66).

              RG 100.62      We consider that these are factors that indicate risks relating to an expert’s
                             ability to exercise objective and impartial judgement.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                          Page 20
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




Expert’s arrangements to manage conflicts of interest
              RG 100.63      We will assess the independence factors set out at RG 100.57 before we
                             consent to the appointment of an independent expert. However, it is
                             important that an expert is able to manage conflicts of interest that may arise
                             during an engagement under a court enforceable undertaking. Conflicts of
                             interest may compromise the expert’s ability to exercise objective and
                             impartial judgement during the engagement.

              RG 100.64      Accordingly, we will also consider whether the proposed expert can
                             demonstrate appropriate arrangements to manage conflicts of interest. We
                             will assess the following non-exhaustive factors:
                             (a)   procedures for identifying conflicts of interest;
                             (b)   procedures for assessing and evaluating conflicts of interest;
                             (c)   procedures for dealing with, and responses to, particular conflicts;
                             (d)   whether there is a written conflicts management policy;
                             (e)   the period of time that has elapsed since the arrangements were last
                                   reviewed internally or by a third party (e.g. an auditor);
                             (f)   the structural arrangements in place to manage conflicts of interest and
                                   how they support management of conflicts of interest;
                             (g)   the information barriers in place to assist in managing conflicts of
                                   interest;
                             (h)   how the conflicts management arrangements in place ensure that
                                   conflicts do not affect the quality of work undertaken for a party
                                   providing a court enforceable undertaking, or ASIC, under a court
                                   enforceable undertaking, and how the effectiveness in achieving this is
                                   tested;
                             (i)   how conflicts management arrangements are formulated and approved
                                   (e.g. whether they were approved by the board or governing body—or
                                   by a delegated body);
                             (j)   how conflicts management arrangements are communicated to staff;
                             (k)   whether a person is nominated to be responsible for the implementation,
                                   review and updating of the conflicts management arrangements, and
                                   who the relevant staff report to;
                             (l)   the procedures in place to identify instances of non-compliance with the
                                   conflicts management arrangements, how non-compliance is dealt with,
                                   and how non-compliance is recorded and reported;
                             (m)   how the arrangements in place ensure remuneration policies and the
                                   provision of benefits practices do not significantly compromise the
                                   integrity and quality of services provided;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                         Page 21
                                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




                             (n)   whether the processes in place ensure that more serious conflicts are
                                   referred to senior management or a governing body; and
                             (o)   the circumstances where conflicts of interest are avoided (as opposed to
                                   dealing with conflicts through disclosure or internal controls) and the
                                   procedure for making and recording these decisions.

                                   Note: The factors in RG 100.64 are adapted from Table 1 in Regulatory Guide 181
                                   Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest (RG 181). RG 112 also contains relevant
                                   guidance for managing conflicts of interest under an engagement. Most entities
                                   undertaking independent reviews and reports under a court enforceable undertaking will
                                   be AFS licensees, and accordingly ought to be able to demonstrate the matters in
                                   RG 100.64.

              RG 100.65      We do not suggest that all the issues are relevant to every particular
                             proposed expert, or that they are exhaustive: see RG 181.64. The party
                             should obtain from a proposed expert information about as many of the
                             factors in RG 100.64 as are relevant in the circumstances. The party should
                             then provide that information to ASIC when seeking our consent to the
                             appointment of the proposed expert. We will carefully consider whether a
                             proposed expert can demonstrate appropriate arrangements to manage
                             conflicts of interest: see RG 100.64(b). We may be satisfied that particular
                             arrangements are not relevant to an engagement or to the size, scope and
                             nature of the proposed expert’s business.

              RG 100.66      The expert must notify ASIC if a conflict of interest arises during an
                             engagement. We may require the party to terminate an expert’s engagement
                             if the conflict compromises, or may reasonably be seen to compromise, the
                             expert’s ability to exercise objective and impartial judgement.



Publicity for independent expert reports
              RG 100.67      We will publish a summary of the independent expert’s final report, or a
                             statement that refers to the content of the report. We will publish this on the
                             court enforceable undertakings register on the ASIC website (see
                             www.asic.gov.au/euregister).
                             2TU




              RG 100.68      We may also issue a media release referring to the content of an expert
                             report, and may from time to time refer publicly to the content of the report.

              RG 100.69      Publishing summaries of expert reports promotes the integrity of, and public
                             confidence in, our financial markets and corporate governance.

              RG 100.70      Generally, we will not accept a court enforceable undertaking that limits our
                             rights to publish a summary of an expert’s final report and make reference to
                             the content of that report. If an undertaking requires delivery of an interim
                             report, we will normally also make publicly available a summary of the
                             interim report or a statement that refers to the content of the interim report.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                                 Page 22
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




                             However, we may agree not to publish a summary of an interim report. We
                             expect those cases to be rare. We consider that public confidence in our
                             financial markets and corporate governance is likely to be promoted by
                             publishing summaries of all expert reports under a court enforceable
                             undertaking.

              RG 100.71      When we make a summary of an expert report available to the public, we
                             may agree to use a summary prepared by the expert. Experts appointed to do
                             work required by a court enforceable undertaking should, accordingly,
                             prepare a summary of their report that is suitable for publication.

              RG 100.72      We may supplement the summary provided by the expert, or prepare our
                             own summary of a report. We will do this if we consider a summary
                             prepared by an expert is not adequate or accurate.

              RG 100.73      Generally, we will not refer to any information from an expert report that:
                             (a)   is personal information of an identified natural person whose acts or
                                   omissions are not the subject of, or a concern mentioned in, the court
                                   enforceable undertaking;
                             (b)   we are satisfied would be unreasonable to release. Information is
                                   generally unreasonable to release if it would unreasonably affect the
                                   business, commercial or financial affairs of the party providing a court
                                   enforceable undertaking or a third party. The effect must be other than
                                   an effect that arises from the execution, implementation and reporting
                                   of the outcomes of the court enforceable undertaking;
                             (c)   we are satisfied should not be released because it would be against the
                                   public interest to do so; or
                             (d)   the party has asked ASIC not to release. We must be satisfied that:
                                   (i)    it would be unreasonable to release (see RG 100.73(b); or
                                   (ii)   it should not be released because it would be against the public
                                          interest to do so (see RG 100.73(c).

              RG 100.74      The standard terms of a court enforceable undertaking will reflect our policy.
                             The terms will require the party to acknowledge that we:
                             (a)   may issue a media release referring to the content of the expert report;
                             (b)   may from time to time publicly refer to the content of the expert report;
                                   and
                             (c)   will make available for public inspection a summary of the content of
                                   the expert report, or a statement that refers to the content of the expert
                                   report.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                         Page 23
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




Key terms


                              Term                      Meaning in this document

                              AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                        the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                        on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                        services
                                                          Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                              ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                              ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                        2001

                              CDPP                      Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions

                              Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                        purposes of that Act

                              INFO 151 (for             An ASIC information sheet (in this example numbered
                              example)                  151)

                              National Credit Act       National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009

                              RG 256 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered
                                                        256)

                              SIS Act                   Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993

                              s93A (for example)        A provision of the ASIC Act (in this example numbered
                                                        93A), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                           Page 24
                                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 100: Court enforceable undertakings




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             acceptable and standard terms, appointment of independent experts,
                             compliance with the law, court enforceable undertaking, court enforceable
                             undertakings register, effective regulatory outcome, enforcement remedy,
                             expert report, public reporting, unacceptable terms


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees

                             RG 98 ASIC’s powers to suspend, cancel and vary AFS licences and make
                             banning orders

                             RG 111 Content of expert reports

                             RG 112 Independence of experts

                             RG 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest

                             RG 218 Licensing: Administrative action against persons engaging in credit
                             activities

                             RG 256 Client review and remediation conducted by advice licensees


                             Information sheets

                             INFO 28 About the enforceable undertakings register

                             INFO 151 ASIC’s approach to enforcement

                             INFO 152 Public comment on ASIC’s regulatory activities


                             Legislation

                             ASIC Act, s93A, 93A(1), 93A(2), 93A(4), 93AA, 93AA(1), 93AA(2),
                             93AA(4)

                             Corporations Act, s674

                             National Credit Act, s322, 322(1), 322(2), 322(4)

                             SIS Act, s262A, 262A(1), 262A(2), 262A(4)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission November 2021                                         Page 25
