REGULATORY GUIDE 112

Independence of experts
March 2011




About this guide
This is a guide for experts and any person who commissions, issues or uses
an expert report.

It explains how ASIC interprets the requirement that an expert is independent
of the party that commissions the expert report (commissioning party) and
other interested parties.

    Note: In this guide, a reference to expert means the person or entity that issues the report.
    In most cases, this will be a corporate entity holding an Australian financial services
    licence, even though a senior director or employee may sign the report in the name of the
    corporate entity and be principally responsible for preparing the report.
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This version was issued on 30 March 2011 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at 30 March 2011. The reference to the relief instrument in
                             RG 112.37 was updated in August 2015 because this instrument was
                             reviewed as part of the sunsetting of legislative instruments under the
                             Legislative Instruments Act 2003. In December 2025 we inserted the Note
                             on the cover page, simplified language in RG 112.7 and RG 112.12, inserted
                             a sub-heading before RG 112.36 and made further minor updates to reflect
                             current style and drafting practices.


                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 112, issued 30 October 2007.


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                            Page 1
                                                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




Contents

                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 3
                                    Reports covered by this guide ........................................................... 3
                                    Underlying principles ......................................................................... 4
                             B      Expert needs to be independent .................................................... 5
                                    Independence .................................................................................... 5
                                    Genuine opinion ................................................................................. 6
                             C      Relationship between the expert and the commissioning party 8
                                    Identifying relationships ..................................................................... 8
                                    Declining the engagement ................................................................. 9
                                    Disclosing relationships and interests ............................................. 10
                                    Other measures ............................................................................... 11
                                    Commissioning an expert ................................................................ 11
                             D      Expert’s conduct in preparing its report ..................................... 13
                                    Interactions with commissioning party ............................................. 13
                                    Preparing the report ......................................................................... 15
                             E      Use of specialists .......................................................................... 19
                                    Engagement of specialists ............................................................... 19
                                    Review of specialist report ............................................................... 20
                                    Use of specialist report .................................................................... 20
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 22
                             Related information ............................................................................... 23




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                                         Page 2
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               This guide gives ASIC’s view on:

                               •   the need for an expert to be independent (see Section B);

                               •   how previous and existing relationships with commissioning and other
                                   interested parties may affect the independence of an expert (see
                                   Section C);

                               •   how an expert should deal with the commissioning party and other
                                   interested parties to maintain its independence (see Section D); and

                               •   when and how an expert should use a specialist when preparing an
                                   expert report (see Section E).



Reports covered by this guide
              RG 112.1       This guide focuses on reports prepared for transactions under Chs 2E, 5, 6
                             and 6A of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act), whether the
                             reports are required in the Corporations Act or are commissioned voluntarily.
                             The principles in this guide may also be relevant to independent expert reports
                             commissioned for other purposes—for example, specialist reports like
                             geologist reports or traffic forecast reports (see Section E) for inclusion in
                             Ch 6D disclosure documents and Ch 7 Product Disclosure Statements (PDSs).

                                   Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), chapters (Ch), divisions (Div) and parts
                                   (Pt) are to the Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified. References to regulations
                                   (reg) are to the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations), unless
                                   otherwise specified.

              RG 112.2       We consider that security holders regard an expert report as being prepared
                             by an independent expert irrespective of whether the report has been
                             prepared voluntarily or because it is required under statute.

              RG 112.3       This approach is consistent with the obligations on the holder of an
                             Australian financial services licence (AFS licensee) to manage conflicts of
                             interest. An AFS licensee’s obligation to manage conflicts of interest applies
                             to all of its activities as an AFS licensee and, as such, an expert who holds an
                             AFS licence needs to manage conflicts of interest for all expert reports it
                             prepares.

              RG 112.4       This guide does not apply to independent or investigating accountant reports.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                          Page 3
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




Underlying principles
              RG 112.5       An expert report that is biased frustrates informed decision-making. Security
                             holders will assume that an expert report is an independent opinion and will
                             be misled if the opinion is not.

              RG 112.6       Brooking J described the role of an expert in Phosphate Co-operative v
                             Shears (No 3) (1988) 14 ACLR 323 (Pivot) at 339 in the following terms:
                                   Those who prepare experts’ reports in company cases carry a heavy moral
                                   responsibility, whatever their legal duties may be. These reports are either
                                   required by the [Corporations Act] or provided by way of analogy with
                                   those requirements. In either case, they are supposed to be for the
                                   protection of individuals who are being invited to enter into some kind of
                                   transaction. Unless high [independence] standards are observed by those
                                   who prepare these reports, there is a danger that systems established for the
                                   protection of the investing public will, in fact, operate to their detriment
                                   through reliance on these reports and on the reputations of those who
                                   furnish them. In lending his name, the expert will often, as in this case, be
                                   lending a name to conjure with … The expert’s integrity and freedom from
                                   baneful influences are essential.

              RG 112.7        To be independent, an expert:
                             (a)   must not be associated with certain interested parties and must disclose
                                   certain interests and relationships when preparing reports required by
                                   the Corporations Act for:
                                   (i)     a takeover bid under Ch 6 (s648A);
                                   (ii)    a scheme of arrangement (reg 5.1.01 and Sch 8, cls 8303 and 8306
                                           of the Corporations Regulations); and
                                   (iii)   a compulsory acquisition or buy-out under Ch 6A (s667B); and
                             (b)   in the case of an AFS licensee, must establish and maintain systems to
                                   comply with its obligations to manage conflicts of interest.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                             Page 4
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




B          Expert needs to be independent

                               Key points

                               An expert should be, and should appear to be, independent: see
                               RG 112.8–RG 112.15.

                               An expert should give an opinion that is genuinely its own opinion: see
                               RG 112.16–RG 112.20.




Independence
              RG 112.8       The Corporations Act contains indicators that an expert must be, and must
                             appear to be, independent in the provisions requiring an expert report for
                             certain takeover bids, schemes of arrangement, for any compulsory
                             acquisition and in the AFS licensee conflicts management provisions.

              RG 112.9       The need for an expert to be, and to appear to be, independent is also
                             indicated in case law establishing that the independence of an expert is
                             critical for the protection of security holders. Mullighan J observed in Duke
                             Group v Pilmer (1998) 27 ACSR 1 at 268:
                                   It may be seen that a true state of independence on the part of the expert is
                                   crucial to the efficacy of the [takeover] process and for the protection of the
                                   public generally and the company and its members in particular.

              RG 112.10      We will consider regulatory action if we have concerns about the
                             independence of an expert: see Section E of Regulatory Guide 111 Content
                             of expert reports (RG 111).

                                   Note: In addition to the term ‘independence’, language also used by the courts, our
                                   policies and commentators include: ‘impartial judgment’; ‘disinterested’; ‘objective’;
                                   ‘unbiased’; ‘genuine expression of opinion’; ‘integrity’ and, negatively: ‘conflict of
                                   interest’; ‘compromised’; ‘collusion’ and ‘acting in a partisan capacity’.


                             AFS licensee obligations to manage conflicts

              RG 112.11      An expert report typically includes a statement of opinion or recommendation
                             intended to influence investors in making a decision on a financial product:
                             see s766B(1). This means the expert report usually constitutes financial
                             product advice, triggering the need for an AFS licence: see s766A and
                             911A(1). Accordingly, in most cases, an expert who prepares an independent
                             expert report that will be made available to retail investors will hold an AFS
                             licence.

              RG 112.12      An AFS licensee must have in place adequate arrangements for the
                             management of conflicts of interest that may arise wholly, or partially, in



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                        Page 5
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




                             relation to activities undertaken in the provision of financial services as part
                             of the financial services business of the licensee or the representative: see
                             s912A(1)(aa).

              RG 112.13      This conflicts management obligation applies irrespective of:
                             (a)   whether the expert states that it is independent of the commissioning party;
                             (b)   any requirement that the expert not be an associate of the commissioning
                                   party or any other interested party to a transaction (e.g. s648A); or
                             (c)   whether the expert report has been prepared to meet a statutory obligation.

              RG 112.14      Whether an expert’s conflicts management arrangements (i.e. measures,
                             processes, and procedures) are adequate will depend on the nature, scale and
                             complexity of the expert’s business and the circumstances of the expert’s
                             engagement. The expert should document its conflicts management policies
                             and procedures. The expert should keep records demonstrating how it has
                             complied with those procedures. General guidance on these obligations is
                             provided in Regulatory Guide 181 AFS Licensing: Managing conflicts of
                             interest (RG 181).

              RG 112.15      Certain expert reports are exempt from the licensing regime when the advice
                             is an opinion on matters other than financial products (e.g. a geologist
                             report) and:
                             (a)   it does not include advice on a financial product;
                             (b)   the document includes a statement that the person is not operating under
                                   an AFS licence when giving the advice; and
                             (c)   the expert discloses remuneration, interests and relationships: see reg
                                   7.6.01(1)(u).



Genuine opinion
              RG 112.16      The opinion of an expert must be genuine and a product of the expert’s
                             professional judgment. An expert’s opinion that is tailored to support the
                             views of the commissioning party or any other interested party is not a
                             genuine opinion. It may also be misleading or deceptive.

              RG 112.17      A court found that a commissioning party’s active role in shaping an expert
                             report meant that the expert report was not the product of ‘an exercise of
                             judgment’ by the expert ‘uninfluenced by pressure brought to bear by or on
                             behalf of [the commissioning party]’ and was not ‘a genuine expression of
                             opinion … but was the result of an exercise carried out for the purpose of
                             arriving at a desired result’: see Phosphate Co-operative v Shears (No 3)
                             (1988) 14 ACLR 323 (Pivot) at 340 and 342 per Brooking J.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                           Page 6
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




              RG 112.18      An expert is subject to statutory obligations to avoid making misleading or
                             deceptive statements and engaging in misleading or deceptive conduct: see,
                             for example, s412(8), 670A(1)(h), 1041E, 1014F and 1041H of the
                             Corporations Act, and s12DA of the Australian Securities and Investments
                             Commission Act 2001.

              RG 112.19      An expert has been found to have engaged in misleading or deceptive
                             conduct when the expert did not hold the opinions expressed in the expert
                             report: see MGICA v Kenny & Good (1996) 140 ALR 313 at 356–357 (a
                             case involving a property valuation).

              RG 112.20      Similarly, in Reiffel v ACN 075 839 226 (2003) 45 ACSR 67 at 92–93, the
                             court held that the expert report was misleading and deceptive in
                             circumstances when ‘there was no reasonable basis for the [expert’s]
                             statement in the report’ and the expert ‘did not hold the opinion it
                             expressed’. The court held that the expert should have disclosed that it
                             disagreed with the methodology used by a promoter in its forecasts and
                             disclosed the methodology that the expert in fact used.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 7
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




C          Relationship between the expert and the
           commissioning party

                               Key points

                               An expert should identify relationships and interests that may affect, or may
                               be perceived to affect, the expert’s ability to prepare an independent report:
                               see RG 112.21–RG 112.24.
                               The expert should then consider whether, on the basis of that relationship
                               or interest:
                               • it should decline the engagement (see RG 112.25–RG 112.27); or
                               • the relationship or interest can be adequately dealt with by way of
                                 disclosure in the expert report (see RG 112.28–RG 112.1).
                               The expert may also need to take other actions to manage a conflict of
                               interest: see RG 112.38.
                               Before engaging an expert, a commissioning party should be satisfied that
                               the expert is independent and has sufficient expertise and resources to
                               provide a thorough report: see RG 112.39–RG 112.41.


Identifying relationships
              RG 112.21      Previous and existing relationships may threaten, or appear to threaten, the
                             independence of an expert. The objectivity of an expert may also be
                             compromised, or called into question, if the expert has an interest in the
                             outcome of the transaction that is the subject of its report.

              RG 112.22      The closer the relationship between the expert and a commissioning party or
                             any other interested party, the greater the onus on the expert to demonstrate
                             the absence of bias.

              RG 112.23      In identifying relationships and interests that may affect, or may be perceived to
                             affect, the expert’s ability to prepare an independent report, the expert should
                             not only identify relationships with, and interests of, the expert but also of:
                             (a)   the expert’s associates;
                             (b)   those directors and senior employees who are principally responsible
                                   for preparing and issuing the expert report; and
                             (c)   the spouse, children and associates of the directors and senior employees
                                   who are principally responsible for preparing and issuing the expert report.

              RG 112.24      The need to undertake this identification process also arises from the
                             obligation to manage conflicts of interest if the expert is an AFS licensee.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 8
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




Declining the engagement
              RG 112.25      An expert should seriously consider declining an engagement when:
                             (a)   a person to be involved in preparing the expert report is an officer of the
                                   commissioning party or an interested party;
                             (b)   the expert, a director or a senior employee who is involved in preparing
                                   the expert report has a substantial interest in or is a substantial creditor
                                   of the commissioning party or has other material financial interests in
                                   the relevant transaction;
                             (c)   the expert has participated in strategic planning work for the
                                   commissioning party as a lawyer, financial consultant, tax adviser or
                                   accountant, whether in connection with the relevant transaction or
                                   generally (e.g. advising on possible takeovers or takeover defences); or
                             (d)   the expert has acted as a lawyer, financial consultant, tax adviser or
                                   accountant to the commissioning party (other than providing
                                   professional services strictly for compliance purposes rather than
                                   strategic or operational decisions or planning).

              RG 112.26      The Corporations Act specifically states that an expert must decline an
                             engagement for the preparation of an expert report in each of the following
                             circumstances:
                             (a)   when the report is to be cited or included in a target statement if the
                                   expert is an associate of the bidder or the target and the bidder has 30%
                                   or more of the voting power in the target entity or there are common
                                   directors of the target and the bidder (s640 and 648A(2));
                             (b)   when the report is to be cited or included in a bidder’s statement if the
                                   expert is an associate of the bidder or the target and the consideration
                                   for a pre-bid stake acquired in a target was unquoted securities
                                   (s636(1)(h)(iii), 636(2) and 648A(2));
                             (c)   when the report is to be cited or included in the explanatory statement
                                   for a scheme of arrangement if the expert is an associate of the parties
                                   to the scheme if the other party to a reconstruction in a scheme of
                                   arrangement has at least 30% of the voting shares of the scheme
                                   company or there are common directors (reg 5.1.01(b) and Sch 8, cls
                                   8303 and 8306 of the Corporations Regulations); and
                             (d)   if the expert is an associate of the person issuing a compulsory
                                   acquisition or buy-out notice (s663B, 664C, 665B and 667B).

              RG 112.27      An expert’s AFS licensee obligations to manage conflicts of interest may
                             oblige an expert to decline engagements in some circumstances. Licensee
                             experts may be offered an engagement in which relationships and interests
                             pose such a serious risk of conflict of interest that the threat to the expert’s
                             independence cannot be adequately managed through disclosure or internal
                             controls. The only way an expert can adequately manage these threats is to



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                            Page 9
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




                             avoid them and the expert’s conflicts management policies and procedures
                             should give specific guidance on circumstances when it should decline
                             engagements.


Disclosing relationships and interests
              RG 112.28      As security holders rely on an expert report, they must be clearly informed
                             about any relationships or interests (including financial or other interests)
                             that could reasonably be regarded as relevant to the independence of the
                             expert. This requirement arises from the Corporations Act and case law: see
                             ANZ Nominees v Wormald International Ltd (1988) 13 ACLR 698 at 707.

              RG 112.29      Disclosure of relationships or interests is required under the Corporations
                             Act for an expert report when the report is included in:
                             (a)   a target statement, when the bidder has 30% or more of the voting
                                   power in the target entity or there are common directors of the target
                                   and the bidder (s648A(3));
                             (b)   a bidder’s statement, when the consideration for a pre-bid stake
                                   acquired in a target is unquoted securities (s648A(3)); and
                             (c)   a compulsory acquisition or buy-out notice (s667B(2)).

              RG 112.30      Similarly, if they are an AFS licensee, an expert needs to make appropriate
                             disclosure of conflicts of interest to commissioning parties and to those
                             relying on the report as part of the conflicts management obligation. This is
                             an aspect of their general obligation to have adequate arrangements for the
                             management of conflicts of interests: see s912A(1)(aa).


                             Content of disclosure

              RG 112.31      An expert must disclose in the report:
                             (a)   the business or professional relationships with a commissioning party or
                                   any other interested party;
                             (b)   any financial or other interest that could reasonably be regarded as
                                   capable of affecting the expert’s ability to give an unbiased opinion on
                                   the matter being reported on; and
                             (c)   any fee or benefit (whether direct or indirect) to be received in
                                   connection with the report: see s648A(3) and 667B(2).

              RG 112.32      If an expert has, within the previous two years, valued assets representing
                             more than a de minimis (i.e. trivial) proportion by value of the assets that it
                             has been engaged to value for the commissioning party, this should also be
                             prominently disclosed in the report.

                                   Note: Disclosure is also required if the expert was previously engaged to value the
                                   relevant assets by the commissioning party or any other interested party.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                       Page 10
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




              RG 112.33      These disclosures should be made in all expert reports irrespective of
                             whether the report is required to be prepared by the Corporations Act or is
                             voluntarily commissioned and supplied to security holders.

              RG 112.34      These disclosures should relate to relationships or interests existing at the
                             time of preparation of the report or existing in the previous two years. This
                             two-year period is a minimum period for disclosure and earlier relationships
                             might be so significant that they warrant disclosure as well.

              RG 112.35      Disclosures should be timely, prominent, specific and meaningful. An expert
                             should not use ‘boilerplate’ disclosures (e.g. that the expert has been paid ‘a
                             normal professional rate’). An actual amount should be shown for fees paid
                             to an expert for the report.

                             Other disclosure requirements

              RG 112.36      When an expert report is cited or included in a bidder’s statement in which
                             any securities in the bidder (or a person who controls the bidder) are offered
                             as consideration under the bid, these disclosures must also meet the specific
                             disclosure obligations that apply to prospectuses under s711(2)–(4),
                             including:
                             (a) any interests that the expert has in the bidder; and
                             (b) any fees or benefits given or agreed for the expert’s services (s636(1)(g)).

              RG 112.37      As an expert report will usually constitute financial services advice, an
                             expert will need to give retail investors a Financial Services Guide (FSG).
                             We have given relief to allow an expert to include an FSG as a separate and
                             clearly identifiable part of an expert report: see ASIC Corporations
                             (Financial Services Guide, General Advice Warning and Advertising Related
                             Relief) Instrument 2025/234. In view of this relief, we consider that an
                             expert should include all of its disclosure of interests and benefits, whether
                             flowing from the FSG requirements, conflicts management, s648A or case
                             law, in the FSG rather than duplicating that disclosure in another part of the
                             expert report.


Other measures
              RG 112.38      In addition to disclosing any conflict of interest, an expert will need to
                             consider whether other measures to properly manage the conflict of interest
                             are appropriate (e.g. implementing information barriers).



Commissioning an expert
              RG 112.39      In commissioning an expert, a commissioning party should consider whether
                             the expert is independent and whether the expert has sufficient expertise and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                         Page 11
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




                             resources to give a thorough opinion on the proposed transaction. The
                             quality of an expert report may be affected if this is not the case. If an expert
                             considers that it is not independent or does not have sufficient expertise or
                             resources to give a thorough opinion, it should decline the engagement.

              RG 112.40      In selecting an appropriate expert, we consider that relevant factors are likely
                             to include:
                             (a)   whether the expert has adequate resources (which may include access to
                                   appropriate third-party specialists) to perform the necessary work;
                             (b)   the qualifications of the expert and whether the expert has the requisite
                                   level of technical expertise (including whether the expert meets the
                                   requirements of any relevant industry codes);
                             (c)   the experience of the expert. For example, a commissioning party may
                                   ask what comparable transactions the expert has given an opinion on
                                   and whether that experience is relevant to the current transaction;
                             (d)   whether the expert can meet the timeframe required for the report to be
                                   produced; and
                             (e)   whether there are any independence issues.

              RG 112.41      While a commissioning party should satisfy itself that an expert is
                             competent, it should ensure that any pre-engagement discussions do not
                             compromise the expert’s independence. For example, these discussions
                             should not deal with how the expert proposes to evaluate the transaction or
                             the merits of the transaction: see RG 112.46–RG 112.48.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 12
                                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




D          Expert’s conduct in preparing its report

                               Key points

                               An expert should:
                               • obtain written terms of engagement from the commissioning party
                                 before commencing work;
                               • take care to avoid any communication with the commissioning party or
                                 any other interested party that may undermine, or appear to undermine,
                                 independence; and
                               • consent to the use or incorporation of its report.

                               Commissioning parties should be careful not to release the conclusions of
                               an expert report in advance of the final report.




Interactions with commissioning party
                             Terms of engagement

              RG 112.42      Before commencing work, an expert should obtain written terms of
                             engagement from the commissioning party that:
                             (a)   set out the scope and purpose of the report;
                             (b)   set out the facts of the proposal and relevant data;
                             (c)   recognise the expert’s right to refuse to give an opinion or report at all if it is
                                   not given the information and explanations it requires to prepare the report;
                             (d)   give the expert the same access to the commissioning party’s records as
                                   the auditor of the commissioning party; and
                             (e)   set out the fee.


                             Approval of appointment
              RG 112.43      It is possible that some directors of a commissioning party may have a
                             conflict of interest in the proposed transaction, such as cross-directorships
                             held in the target and the bidder. In these circumstances, the expert and
                             commissioning party should ensure that the directors without a conflict
                             select and engage the expert.

              RG 112.44      The commissioning party should ensure that the method by which an expert
                             is appointed, and the scope of its engagement, is consistent with the concepts
                             of independence and perceived independence of the expert. For example, it
                             may be appropriate to have a non-executive director oversee the appointment
                             process if management is likely to be perceived to have a strong interest in
                             the outcome of the expert report.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                             Page 13
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




                             Expert’s fee

              RG 112.45      We will consider that an expert is not independent if the amount it is to receive
                             for the expert report depends in any way on the outcome of the transaction to
                             which the report relates. This is consistent with the requirement that a person
                             who provides financial services must not hold itself out as ‘independent’,
                             ‘impartial’ or ‘unbiased’ if it is paid success fees or has a conflict of interest
                             arising from a relationship with an issuer of financial products that might
                             reasonably be expected to influence the report: see s923A.


                             Manner of communication

              RG 112.46      Ensuring security holders receive an objective expression of opinion in an
                             expert report involves more than identifying and dealing with previous or
                             existing relationships or interests. An expert’s objectivity, or the appearance
                             of objectivity, may be undermined by the interactions between the expert
                             and the commissioning and other interested parties.

              RG 112.47      We are likely to view the following interactions as indicators of a lack of
                             independence:
                             (a)   the commissioning party having rejected another expert after the expert
                                   disclosed its likely approach to evaluating the proposal;
                             (b)   an expert attending discussions on the development of the transaction,
                                   the merits of the transaction or on strategies to be adopted by the
                                   commissioning party;
                             (c)   an expert taking instructions from, or holding discussions with, a
                                   commissioning party, its advisers or any interested party on the choice of
                                   methodologies for the report or evaluation of the transaction (including the
                                   underlying assumptions or reasoning), although the expert may interrogate
                                   those parties for the purpose of the expert’s own analysis;
                             (d)   an expert accepting from a commissioning party, its advisers or any
                                   interested party their analysis of the transaction, although the expert may
                                   interrogate those parties for the purpose of the expert’s own analysis;
                             (e)   the expert discussing preliminary views or findings with the
                                   commissioning party or any other interested party;
                             (f)   the expert entering into a success fee arrangement with the
                                   commissioning party or any other interested party;
                             (g)   the expert discussing future business relationships with the
                                   commissioning party or any other interested party before finalising the
                                   report. This includes refraining from cross-selling other services of the
                                   expert; and
                             (h)   the expert changing its opinion at the suggestion of the commissioning
                                   party or any other interested party without adequate explanation: see
                                   RG 112.56–RG 112.57.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 14
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




              RG 112.48      We expect that an expert who is an AFS licensee will include in its internal
                             policies and procedures guidelines to address:
                             (a)   communications and interactions with the commissioning party and any
                                   other interested party during the commissioning of the expert and the
                                   preparation of the report;
                             (b)   remuneration arrangements; and
                             (c)   supervision of the preparation of the report.


Preparing the report
                             Access to information
              RG 112.49      The expert, not the commissioning party, should determine what information
                             will be required for the report. The commissioning party should give the
                             expert all the information it is aware of about the subject of the expert report,
                             in sufficient detail to enable the expert to determine its relevance.

              RG 112.50      If the expert is not given access to the records it requires, or is given an
                             unduly short time to complete the report (relative to any applicable statutory
                             time constraints), it should consider refusing to prepare a report at all. An
                             expert should not prepare an unsatisfactory report and attempt to deal with
                             deficiencies in the report by disclaiming responsibility.


                             Communication

              RG 112.51      An expert and its commissioning party may communicate and meet with
                             each other during the preparation of the expert report for the expert to:
                             (a)   discuss the progress of the report;
                             (b)   gain access to information;
                             (c)   ascertain matters of fact or to correct factual errors (Re Matine (1998)
                                   28 ACSR 268 at 288); and
                             (d)   interrogate the commissioning party or another interested party for the
                                   purposes of its own analysis.

              RG 112.52      To help maintain independence and negate any inference of bias, we
                             consider that an expert should direct and lead all meetings and discussions
                             with the commissioning party, its advisers and any other interested party.
                             The expert should keep appropriate file notes of discussions and retain
                             copies of documents worked on in discussions with the commissioning
                             party, its advisers and any other interested party.

              RG 112.53      Brooking J in Pivot at 339 summarised this issue in the following terms:
                                   The guiding principle must be that care should be taken to avoid any
                                   communication which may undermine, or appear to undermine, the
                                   independence of the expert.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                             Page 15
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




                             Drafts of reports

              RG 112.54      An expert may give draft copies of parts of its report to a commissioning
                             party or its advisers for factual checking before delivery of a full draft copy
                             of the report. These early drafts should not contain the expert’s analysis of
                             the transaction, the merits of a transaction or the methodologies employed.

              RG 112.55      The expert should only provide a full draft copy of the report to the
                             commissioning party for factual checking when the expert is reasonably
                             assured that the conclusions in the report are unlikely to change.

              RG 112.56      If a commissioning party or an adviser disagrees with the expert’s analysis in
                             a draft of the expert report, the report should only be altered if the expert is
                             persuaded that all or part of the expert’s assessment is based on an error of
                             fact. We would expect an expert, in this situation, to independently reassess
                             the whole or relevant part of the report based on its view of the revised facts.

              RG 112.57      After a full draft copy of an expert report has been provided to a
                             commissioning party or its advisers, any alteration of the report made at the
                             suggestion of the commissioning party or its advisers that affects an expert’s
                             analysis of the transaction or the expert’s conclusions should be clearly and
                             prominently disclosed in the report. This disclosure should include an
                             explanation of the changes, the reasons why the expert considered the
                             changes appropriate and the significance of the changes to the expert’s
                             opinion.

              RG 112.58      Minor factual corrections made at the suggestion of the commissioning party
                             or its advisers that are immaterial to an expert’s analysis, conclusions or
                             opinion need not be disclosed in the report.


                             Use and distribution

              RG 112.59      If a party commissions two or more reports, a copy of each report should be
                             sent to security holders. This should be done regardless of whether more
                             than one report is prepared by the same expert or by different experts. It
                             should also be done regardless of whether the commissioning party is
                             obliged to do so under s648A(1).

              RG 112.60      An expert should deliver its final, signed report to the commissioning party
                             even if the commissioning party requests otherwise (unless the transaction is
                             discontinued or varied substantially).

              RG 112.61      The directors of a commissioning party should not adopt or recommend that
                             security holders accept the findings of an expert report without critically
                             analysing the report. The directors should satisfy themselves that the
                             information relied on in the report is accurate and that the report has not omitted
                             material information known to the directors but not given to the expert.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                          Page 16
                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




                             Release of conclusions of expert reports
              RG 112.62      An expert report needs to contain sufficient information to assist security
                             holders to make a decision, including providing details of the methodologies
                             and material assumptions on which the report is based, together with any
                             qualifications: see Regulatory Guide 111 Content of expert reports
                             (RG 111). The directors of a commissioning party need to ensure that an
                             expert report is not used or referred to in a way that may be misleading or
                             deceptive.

              RG 112.63      If a commissioning party releases the conclusions of an expert report in advance
                             of the final report, this is likely to be misleading or deceptive, particularly if the
                             final report contains any ‘surprises’ for a person who has only read the
                             conclusions. Releasing conclusions without providing relevant supporting
                             information may cause confusion or uncertainty since security holders and the
                             market will not be able to determine whether those conclusions are reasonable.
                                   Note: In Re Origin Energy Limited 02 [2008] ATP 23, the Takeovers Panel considered
                                   that it was potentially misleading to quote the conclusions of a technical expert’s report
                                   in a target’s statement without giving shareholders a copy of the report or the
                                   underlying assumptions and qualifications.

              RG 112.64      Consequently, a commissioning party that releases the conclusions of an
                             expert report in advance of the final report risks regulatory action for
                             contravention of the misleading or deceptive conduct provisions or other
                             regulatory action. For example, if a report is provided in relation to a bid, the
                             commissioning party risks an application by us, or another party, to the
                             Takeovers Panel for a declaration of unacceptable circumstances.

              RG 112.65      There may be limited situations in which a commissioning party’s continuous
                             disclosure obligations will require disclosure of the conclusions of an expert
                             report in advance of the final report (e.g. if confidentiality has been lost before the
                             final report is ready for release to the market). Commissioning parties and experts
                             should put in place processes that minimise the risk that preliminary disclosure
                             will be required before the report has been finalised. If preliminary disclosure is
                             required, commissioning parties should ensure that this is done in a way that is not
                             misleading or confusing (e.g. by highlighting the limitations of the preliminary
                             disclosure and providing all available material information about the report).

                             Consent of expert
              RG 112.66      An expert report may only be incorporated or referred to in a bidder’s statement
                             or target statement if the expert has consented to the use of the report in the
                             form and context in which it appears: see s636(3) and 638(5). Before
                             consenting, the expert should consider whether the report has been accurately
                             reproduced and used for the purpose for which it was commissioned. The expert
                             should also consider the appropriateness, or otherwise, of express or implied
                             representations about its report, and the conclusions or recommendations: see
                             Regulatory Guide 55 Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                        Page 17
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




                             quote (RG 55), which also applies to the consent obligations in s636(3) and
                             638(5).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                         Page 18
                                                                     REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




E          Use of specialists

                               Key points

                               If an expert does not have the necessary specialist expertise on a matter
                               that must be determined for the purposes of the report, it should retain an
                               appropriate specialist for that matter who is independent of the
                               commissioning party: see RG 112.67–RG 112.70.

                               The specialist should report to the expert rather than the commissioning
                               party: see RG 112.71–RG 112.72.

                               The expert should ensure that the specialist has consented to the use of its
                               report: see RG 112.73–RG 112.77.


Engagement of specialists
              RG 112.67      It is the expert’s responsibility to:
                             (a)   determine that a specialist’s assistance is required on a matter that must
                                   be determined for the purposes of the report;
                             (b)   select the specialist and ensure that the specialist is competent in the
                                   field;
                             (c)   negotiate the scope and purpose of the specialist’s work and ensure that
                                   this is clearly documented in an agreement (though the agreement may
                                   be with the commissioning party or the expert); and
                             (d)   be satisfied that the specialist is independent of, and is perceived to be
                                   independent of, the commissioning party and any other interested party.

              RG 112.68      We consider best practice would be for the expert to pay the specialist its
                             fees and recover those fees from the commissioning party.

              RG 112.69      We would expect a specialist report to be specifically commissioned and
                             prepared for the transaction the subject of the expert report. We would also
                             expect the expert to make it clear to the specialist that the report is being
                             commissioned for inclusion in the expert report. If the specialist report is not
                             prepared specifically for the current transaction, this should be clearly explained
                             to security holders. The Takeovers Panel in Re Great Mines Limited [2004]
                             ATP 01 expressed the disclosure requirement in the following terms (at [56]):
                                   Wherever a report is re-used in this way, however, shareholders should be
                                   advised of the purpose for which the report was prepared. It would be
                                   inappropriate to re-use a report in this way to satisfy a requirement for an
                                   independent experts report and in general, it would be misleading to
                                   describe a report re-used in this way as independent.

              RG 112.70      While these comments were made in the context of an independent expert
                             report, we consider they are equally applicable to the use of a specialist report.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                              Page 19
                                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




Review of specialist report
              RG 112.71      The expert should:
                             (a)   critically review the specialist report, particularly to consider whether
                                   the specialist has used assumptions and methodologies which appear to
                                   be reasonable and has drawn on source data which appears to be
                                   appropriate in the circumstances;
                             (b)   have reasonable grounds for believing the specialist report is not false
                                   or misleading;
                             (c)   ensure the specialist signs its report and consents to its use in the form
                                   and context in which it will be published; and
                             (d)   ensure that the specialist report is used in a way that will not be
                                   misleading or deceptive.

              RG 112.72      A specialist report commissioned by the expert should be dated close enough
                             to the date of the expert report to ensure that assumptions applied have not
                             been overtaken by time or events.



Use of specialist report
              RG 112.73      The expert should ensure that the specialist consents to the use of its report in
                             the form and context in which it will be published. If a specialist does not take
                             responsibility for, or authorise the use of, its report and the expert considers
                             that material in the report needs to be included in the expert report, the expert
                             must accept entire responsibility for the statements as the expert’s own and, as
                             such, must have reasonable grounds for believing the statements not to be
                             misleading or deceptive. This is consistent with our approach to directors
                             assuming responsibility for statements in a prospectus or PDS that are not
                             attributed to another person: see Section B of RG 55.

              RG 112.74      The expert should exercise its judgment to determine whether to include the
                             specialist report in full or include a concise or short form version or cite or
                             extract the specialist report.

              RG 112.75      We encourage an expert to consider whether it is appropriate to have the
                             specialist prepare a concise or short form specialist report for inclusion in the
                             expert report with a longer specialist report available on request free of
                             charge or accessible online.

              RG 112.76      An expert should only quote or cite the specialist’s work in a way that is fair
                             and representative. Otherwise, the expert risks misleading security holders.
                             If the full specialist report contains any ‘surprises’ for the security holder
                             who only reads the short form or concise report, this would indicate the short
                             form specialist report was misleading.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                            Page 20
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




              RG 112.77      In the situation when an expert has obtained more than one specialist report
                             on the same matter, we consider that security holders will not be given all
                             material information if the expert merely supplies abridged results of those
                             reports, and states, without comment or analysis, the result is the sum of the
                             values given in each of the specialist reports.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                         Page 21
                                                                      REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




Key terms


                               Term                      Meaning in this document

                               AFS licence               An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                         the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                         on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                         services
                                                           Note: This is a definition in s9.

                               AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                         Corporations Act

                               ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               associate                 Has the meaning given in s12 of the Corporations Act

                               ASIC Act                  Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                         2001

                               bidder                    Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                         purposes of that Act

                               Corporations              Corporations Regulations 2001
                               Regulations

                               expert                    Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               FSG                       A Financial Services Guide—a document required by
                                                         s941A or 941B to be given in accordance with Div 2 of Pt
                                                         7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                           Note: This is a definition contained in s9.

                               PDS                       A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that must
                                                         be given to a retail client for the offer or issue of a
                                                         financial product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the
                                                         Corporations Act
                                                           Note: This is a definition in s9.

                               reg 5.1.01 (for           A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                               example)                  example numbered 5.1.01)

                               RG 181 (for example)      An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered
                                                         181)

                               s648A (for example)       A section of the Corporations Act (in this example,
                                                         numbered 648A), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                                    Page 22
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 112: Independence of experts




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             experts, expert fees, expert reports, independence, genuine opinion,
                             relationships or interests, declining the engagement, disclosing relationships
                             or interests, commissioning party, conduct of experts, use of specialists


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 55 Statements in disclosure documents and PDSs: Consent to quote

                             RG 111 Content of expert reports

                             RG 181 AFS Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest


                             Legislative instrument

                             ASIC Corporations (Financial Services Guide, General Advice Warning and
                             Advertising Related Relief) Instrument 2025/234


                             Legislation

                             Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001, s12DA

                             Corporations Act 2001, Chs 2E, 5, 6 and 6A; s412(8), 636(1)–(3), 638(5),
                             640, 648A(1)–(3), 663B, 664C, 665B, 667B, 670A(1)(h), 711, 766A,
                             766B(1), 911A(1), 912A(1)(aa), 923A, 1041E, 1041F, 1041H

                             Corporations Regulations 2001, regs 5.1.01, 7.6.01(u); Sch 8, cls 8303, 8306


                             Cases

                             ANZ Nominees v Wormald International Ltd (1988) 13 ACLR 698

                             Duke Group v Pilmer (1998) 27 ACSR 1

                             Re Great Mines Limited [2004] ATP 01

                             Re Matine (1998) 28 ACSR 268

                             MGICA v Kenny & Good (1996) 140 ALR 313

                             Re Origin Energy Limited 02 [2008] ATP 23

                             Phosphate Co-operative Co of Aust Ltd v Shears & Anor (No 3) (1988) 14
                             ACLR 323

                             Reiffel v ACN 075 839 226 (2003) 45 ACSR 67


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission March 2011                                         Page 23
