REGULATORY GUIDE 115

Audit relief for proprietary
companies

June 2020




About this guide
This guide is for certain proprietary companies and their auditors.

It explains:
    the relief that we give to proprietary companies under
     ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 from the
     requirement to have a financial report audited under the
     Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act); and
    the individual relief that we may give to proprietary companies on a
     case-by-case basis under s340 of the Corporations Act.

Note: From 27 July 2020, applications for relief should be submitted through
the ASIC Regulatory Portal. For more information, see how you apply for
relief.
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.



                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in June 2020 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue. The note on the front page was inserted
                             on 27 July 2020.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 115 Audit relief for proprietary
                                     companies, issued August 2010 and September 2016
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 115, issued September 1998, reissued
                                     November 1998, April 2000, October 2001, February 2002 and
                                     May 2003, rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.

                             Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                             are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 2
                                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




Contents
                             A     Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                   Reporting requirements for proprietary companies ........................... 4
                                   Relief from the reporting requirements .............................................. 4
                             B     Our approach to audit relief............................................................ 7
                                   Compliance with the audit requirements imposes an ‘unreasonable
                                   burden’ ............................................................................................... 7
                                   The matters we consider when determining ‘unreasonable burden’ . 8
                             C     ASIC audit relief ............................................................................. 11
                                   Relief from the reporting requirements ............................................ 11
                                   Resolutions that an audit is not required ......................................... 11
                                   A well-managed company in a sound financial condition ................ 15
                                   Financial report compiled by a prescribed accountant .................... 20
                                   Timely lodgement of financial report and directors’ report .............. 21
                                   No proposed modified auditor’s report or material disagreement ... 21
                                   Applying for an extension of time .................................................... 21
                             D     Individual relief .............................................................................. 23
                                   Applying for individual relief ............................................................. 23
                                   Companies that had an audit during 1993 or a later year ............... 24




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                                            Page 3
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               Certain proprietary companies and their auditors are eligible for audit relief,
                               under ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784, from the
                               requirement to have their financial reports audited.

                               This guide only concerns relief from the requirement for proprietary
                               companies to have an audit. It does not deal with relief from the obligation
                               to lodge a financial report and a directors’ report with ASIC.




Reporting requirements for proprietary companies
              RG 115.1       A large proprietary company or a small proprietary company that is
                             controlled by a foreign company must prepare and lodge with ASIC a
                             financial report, a directors’ report and an auditor’s report within
                             four months after the end of the company’s financial year: see s319(3)(b) of
                             the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act). The financial report,
                             directors’ report and auditor’s report must also be given to members within
                             these four months: see s315(4).

              RG 115.2       The auditor must form an opinion in relation to the company’s financial
                             report for the financial year as well as the company’s accounting records and
                             other records relating to that financial report: see s307. The auditor must also
                             report to members in accordance with s308.

              RG 115.3       The distinction between large and small proprietary companies is based on
                             consolidated revenue, consolidated assets and the number of employees: see
                             s45A(2) and (3).



Relief from the reporting requirements

                             Our approach to relief

              RG 115.4       We can grant relief from all or some of the requirements of Pt 2M.2
                             ‘Financial records’, Pt 2M.3 ‘Financial reporting’ or Pt 2M.4 ‘Appointment
                             and removal of auditors’ (other than Div 4) to:
                             (a)   a company, registered scheme or disclosing entity;
                             (b)   its directors; and/or
                             (c)   its auditor.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 4
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




              RG 115.5       We can only grant relief if we are satisfied that the applying entity meets at
                             least one of three statutory preconditions in s342(1) for relief—that is, that
                             requiring the entity to comply with the Corporations Act would:
                             (a)   render the financial report or other reports misleading (see s342(1)(a));
                             (b)   be inappropriate in the circumstances (see s342(1)(b)); or
                             (c)   impose unreasonable burdens (see s342(1)(c)).

              RG 115.6       This guide only deals with our policy for giving audit relief when
                             compliance with the requirements of Ch 2M (audit requirements) imposes an
                             unreasonable burden. Usually, we will only be satisfied that the audit
                             requirements impose an unreasonable burden when the directors and
                             members of a company have agreed to dispense with an audit, and the
                             company is well managed and in a sound financial condition: see Section B.

                                   Note: This guide does not deal with relief from the financial reporting and audit
                                   requirements of the Corporations Act other than audit relief for proprietary companies.
                                   For guidance on relief from other financial reporting requirements of the Corporations
                                   Act, see Regulatory Guide 43 Financial reports and audit relief (RG 43).


                             ASIC audit relief

              RG 115.7       ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 relieves certain
                             proprietary companies from the obligation to:
                             (a)   have the company’s financial report audited (see s301(1));
                             (b)   provide an auditor’s report to members (see s314(1)(a)(iii) and 316(2));
                                   and
                             (c)   provide a statement by the auditor in relation to any concise financial
                                   report (see s314(2)(c)).

              RG 115.8       The instrument also exempts the auditor of the company (if any) from the
                             obligation to report on any discussion and analysis included in a concise
                             financial report: see s314(3).

              RG 115.9       The instrument does not relieve the company from the requirement to lodge
                             its financial report with ASIC in accordance with s319(1) and (3)(b).

              RG 115.10      For a company to be eligible for relief under ASIC Corporations (Audit
                             Relief) Instrument 2016/784, the following conditions must be met:
                             (a)   the company’s directors and members must have passed unanimous
                                   resolutions dispensing with an audit and, where applicable, notice of
                                   these resolutions must have been lodged with ASIC during the first year
                                   of reliance or following a year of non-reliance;
                             (b)   the company must be well managed—having, at least, a system of
                                   quarterly management accounting in place—and must be in a sound
                                   financial condition;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                        Page 5
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             (c)   the company’s financial reports must be prepared by a prescribed
                                   accountant;
                             (d)   the company’s financial reports and directors’ reports must be lodged
                                   on time; and
                             (e)   there must be no proposed modified auditor’s report or material
                                   disagreement with any auditor.

              RG 115.11      Section C explains the conditions of our relief.


                             Who our relief applies to

              RG 115.12      ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 gives relief from the
                             audit requirements to proprietary companies that have not had their financial
                             report audited for any financial year ending during 1993 or since, and
                             are not:
                             (a)   ‘grandfathered’ large proprietary companies under s319(4) of the old
                                   Corporations Law (as taken to be included in the Corporations Act by
                                   s1408(2) of that Act);
                             (b)   disclosing entities (see s111AC);
                             (c)   borrowers in relation to a debenture (see s9);
                             (d)   the guarantors of such borrowers (see s9); or
                             (e)   Australian financial services (AFS) licensees (see s9).

              RG 115.13      A proprietary company and its auditor will qualify for the relief set out in the
                             instrument if it is not one of the companies described in RG 115.12(a)–(e),
                             has not had its financial report audited for any financial year ending during
                             1993 or since, and if all of the conditions of relief are satisfied.


                             Individual relief

              RG 115.14      A company that does not meet all of the conditions of the instrument can
                             apply to ASIC for individual audit relief. We may grant individual audit
                             relief to companies that do not meet these requirements but that meet our
                             policy in some other way: see Section D. It is unlikely that audit relief will
                             be given unless the company applying for the relief generally meets the
                             conditions of relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 6
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




B          Our approach to audit relief

                               Key points

                               This guide only deals with our policy for giving audit relief when compliance
                               with the audit requirements imposes an unreasonable burden.

                               Usually, we will only be satisfied that the audit requirements impose an
                               unreasonable burden when the directors and members of a company have
                               agreed to dispense with an audit, and the company is well managed and in
                               a sound financial condition.

                               We may grant individual audit relief to companies that do not meet these
                               requirements, but that meet our policy in some other way: see Section D.


Compliance with the audit requirements imposes an ‘unreasonable
burden’
              RG 115.15      Before we give audit relief, we must be satisfied that compliance with the
                             audit requirements would:
                             (a)   be misleading;
                             (b)   be inappropriate to the circumstances of the company; or
                             (c)   impose on the company, its officers or the auditor (if any) of the
                                   company, an unreasonable burden (see s342(1)).

                             This guide sets out our policy on the unreasonable burden criterion.

              RG 115.16      The objective of an audit of a financial report is to enable an auditor to
                             express an opinion as to whether the financial report is prepared, in all
                             material respects, according to an identified financial reporting framework:
                             see Auditing Standard ASA 200 Overall objectives of the independent
                             auditor and the conduct of an audit in accordance with Australian auditing
                             standards.

              RG 115.17      The people most likely to benefit from an audit include, but are not limited
                             to, members, directors, creditors and potential creditors. For these people an
                             audit enhances the credibility and reliability of a company’s financial report.

              RG 115.18      Compliance with the audit requirements imposes a burden on the company,
                             its officers and its auditors. Depending on the expected costs and benefits
                             that an audit provides, the burden may be unreasonable.

              RG 115.19      For this purpose, a burden is unreasonable if it goes beyond what is based on
                             reason or good sense and goes beyond what is equitable, or is excessive: see
                             Mazda Australia Pty Ltd v ASC (1992) 8 ACSR 613 and the discussion
                             in RG 43.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 7
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




The matters we consider when determining ‘unreasonable burden’
              RG 115.20      The matters we consider when deciding whether the audit requirements
                             impose an unreasonable burden on a proprietary company are set out in
                             s342(2) and (3). These matters are:
                             (a)   the expected costs of complying with the audit requirements
                                   (see s342(2)(a));
                             (b)   the expected benefits of complying with the audit requirements
                                   (see s342(2)(b))—taking into account:
                                   (i)     the number of creditors and potential creditors (see s342(3)(a));
                                   (ii)    the position of creditors and potential creditors (in particular, their
                                           ability to independently obtain financial information about the
                                           company or companies) (see s342(3)(b)); and
                                   (iii)   the nature and extent of the liabilities of the company or companies
                                           (see s342(3)(c));
                             (c)   any practical difficulties in complying effectively with these
                                   requirements (in particular, any difficulties that arise because a financial
                                   year is the first one for which the audit requirements apply or because
                                   the company or companies are likely to move frequently between the
                                   small and large categories from one financial year to another)
                                   (see s342(2)(c));
                             (d)   any unusual aspects of the operation of the company or companies
                                   during the financial year concerned (see s342(2)(d)); and
                             (e)   any other matters we consider relevant (see s342(2)(e)).


                             Expected costs of compliance: s342(2)(a)

              RG 115.21      The expected costs of complying with the audit requirements are an
                             unreasonable burden if these costs are out of all proportion to the expected
                             benefits resulting from an audit. The legislative policy is that, in general, for
                             large proprietary companies the expected costs of an audit are worth
                             incurring for the expected benefits that it brings.

              RG 115.22      This guide is principally about cases where the expected costs are out of all
                             proportion to the expected benefits because the benefits are expected to be
                             minimal. The additional costs and administrative burden of complying with
                             the audit requirements do not alone give rise to unreasonable burdens.

              RG 115.23      The fact that a company has had its financial report for a previous year
                             audited may indicate that there are in existence persons already using the
                             auditor’s report, that the costs of compliance are not excessive, or both.
                             Directors of a company who apply for audit relief should deal with these
                             matters in an application for individual relief in addition to the requirements
                             set out in Section C.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                   Page 8
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             Expected benefits of compliance: s342(2)(b)

              RG 115.24      When assessing the expected benefits of complying with the audit
                             requirements, we will consider the position of people most likely to benefit
                             from an audit. These include the company’s members, creditors and
                             potential creditors.

              RG 115.25      When considering the position of these people, our objective is to minimise
                             the potential for these people to be disadvantaged by audit relief. To achieve
                             this objective, we will not generally give audit relief unless:
                             (a)   the members and directors of the company agree that an audit of the
                                   company’s financial report is not required (see RG 115.26–RG 115.27);
                                   and
                             (b)   we are satisfied that the company is well managed and in a sound
                                   financial condition, in respects most directly relevant to the interests of
                                   creditors (see RG 115.28–RG 115.29).

                             Directors and members agree to dispense with an audit

              RG 115.26      Directors and members of a company can make informed decisions as to
                             whether or not it is in the interests of members and other users of the
                             financial report to dispense with the audit. We will, in general, require the
                             unanimous agreement of directors and members because any member may
                             be disadvantaged if an audit is dispensed with. Similarly, we will, in general,
                             require the unanimous agreement of directors who should consider the
                             information and assurance needs of the company’s members, creditors,
                             potential creditors and other users of the financial report.

              RG 115.27      Obtaining unanimous agreement may only be practicable in circumstances
                             when, for example, the number of members and directors is small or when
                             both groups have a reasonably direct involvement with the company.
                             However, it is outside these circumstances that the additional assurance
                             provided by an audit may be most needed.

                             The interests of creditors

              RG 115.28      We must also consider the interests of creditors and potential creditors: see
                             s342(3). In general, it will not be practicable to obtain the consent of a
                             company’s existing and prospective creditors to dispense with an audit.

              RG 115.29      In order that creditors and potential creditors are not disadvantaged if an
                             audit is dispensed with, we will only give audit relief to companies which we
                             are satisfied will be well managed and in a sound financial condition, in
                             respects most directly relevant to the interests of creditors. These
                             requirements are not a direct substitute for an audit. However, those
                             companies that meet them are the ones most able to give creditors and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 9
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             potential creditors the type and quality of financial information otherwise
                             required by the financial reporting framework.


                             Practical difficulties: s342(2)(c)

              RG 115.30      Practical difficulties in complying effectively with the audit requirements
                             may arise in the first year for which an audit is required. This is because a
                             proprietary company may not be able to determine that it will be ‘large’ until
                             late in its financial year: see s45A. This prevents the timely appointment of
                             an auditor. An appointment late in a financial year, or even after the financial
                             year end, may cause practical difficulties because this may not give an
                             auditor enough time to properly plan and carry out the audit. This may result
                             in additional costs and the auditor’s opinion being qualified.

              RG 115.31      We will not give audit relief simply because of the late appointment of the
                             auditor, unless the expected additional costs arising from the late
                             appointment of an auditor, or the expected diminished benefits arising from
                             any resulting audit qualifications, make the burden of the audit requirements
                             unreasonable. To the extent that the increase in burden is a result of
                             unnecessary delay in the appointment of the auditor by the company, we will
                             not take this increased burden into account when considering giving relief.


                             Unusual aspects: s342(2)(d)

              RG 115.32      Audit relief may also be appropriate when a proprietary company that is
                             usually ‘small’ (and is not controlled by a foreign company) becomes ‘large’
                             because of an unusual aspect in its operations during the relevant financial
                             year. This may occur, for example, when a company disposes of a major
                             asset and as a result becomes a large proprietary company for a year by
                             reaching $25 million (or $50 million for financial years commencing on or
                             after 1 July 2019) in consolidated revenue and is not expected to be large for
                             future financial years. In that situation, we might consider individual relief.

              RG 115.33      We will consider giving audit relief when the circumstances that result in the
                             proprietary company being classified as ‘large’ can reasonably be regarded
                             as ‘one off’ or unlikely to recur or unusual.

              RG 115.34      We will not generally give audit relief to a company that is expected to be a
                             large proprietary company on a regularly recurring basis, even though it may
                             be classified as a small proprietary company in other years.


                             Other matters: s342(2)(e)

              RG 115.35      We will also consider any other matters that do not fall within any of the
                             matters described in RG 115.20–RG 115.34 if they are relevant to giving
                             audit relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 10
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




C          ASIC audit relief

                               Key points

                               For a company to be eligible for relief under ASIC Corporations (Audit
                               Relief) Instrument 2016/784, the following conditions must be met:
                               • the company’s directors and members must have passed unanimous
                                 resolutions dispensing with an audit and, where applicable, notice of
                                 these resolutions must have been lodged with ASIC;
                               • the company must be well managed—having, at least, a system of
                                 quarterly management accounting in place—and must be in a sound
                                 financial condition;
                               • the company’s financial reports must be prepared by a prescribed
                                 accountant;
                               • the company’s financial reports and directors’ reports must be lodged on
                                 time; and
                               • there must be no proposed modified auditor’s report or material
                                 disagreement with any auditor.

                               A company that does not meet all the conditions of the instrument can
                               apply to ASIC for individual audit relief: see Section D.




Relief from the reporting requirements
              RG 115.36      ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 relieves certain
                             proprietary companies from the obligation to:
                             (a)   have the company’s financial report audited (see s301(1));
                             (b)   provide an auditor’s report to members (see s314(1)(a)(iii) and 316(2));
                                   and
                             (c)   provide a statement by the auditor about any concise financial report
                                   (see s314(2)(c)).

              RG 115.37      The instrument also exempts the auditor of the company from the obligation
                             to report on any discussion and analysis included in a concise financial
                             report: see s314(3).



Resolutions that an audit is not required
              RG 115.38      To be eligible for relief:
                             (a)   the company’s directors and members must have passed unanimous
                                   resolutions dispensing with an audit; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 11
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             (b)   where applicable, notice of these resolutions must have been lodged
                                   with ASIC during the first year of reliance or following a year of non-
                                   reliance.


                             Unanimous resolutions

              RG 115.39      Relief will be given only when the directors and members (whether holding
                             voting or non-voting shares) unanimously resolve that the company’s
                             financial report should not be audited for each financial year to which the
                             relief applies. These resolutions must be made within the period
                             commencing three months before the start of the financial year and ending
                             four months after the end of the financial year.

              RG 115.40      It may sometimes be practically difficult to obtain the unanimous resolutions
                             of members and directors. Such difficulties may arise when, for example,
                             directors or members cannot be contacted for a prolonged period.

              RG 115.41      We will consider giving individual relief to dispense with this requirement
                             where there is clear and documented evidence that:
                             (a)   reasonable attempts have been made to obtain the unanimous agreement
                                   of directors and members;
                             (b)   all remaining directors and members agree to dispense with the audit;
                                   and
                             (c)   those who have not been contacted represent a small minority of voting
                                   rights.

              RG 115.42      The agreement of directors and the agreement of members are to be given by
                             way of separate resolutions. The resolution of members can be passed at a
                             general meeting or by circulating the resolution for signing.

              RG 115.43      When the resolution of members is sought at a general meeting, the members
                             must receive a notice of meeting. In the notice of meeting the directors must
                             state whether, in their opinion, the expected costs of having the financial
                             statements of the company audited outweigh the expected benefits of the
                             audit. The reasons for the directors’ opinion must also be included. When the
                             resolution of members is sought by way of a circulating resolution, this
                             circulating resolution must be accompanied by the same information
                             required for the notice of meeting.


                             Lodgement of notice of resolutions with ASIC

              RG 115.44      A notice of the resolutions must be lodged with us, using Form 382
                             Notification of resolutions for audit relief: Proprietary companies, after the
                             resolutions of directors and members are obtained for:
                             (a)   the first financial year relief under the instrument is to be applied; or




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 12
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             (b)   the first financial year relief is to be applied following a financial year
                                   in which it did not apply (if any).

                             The notice must be lodged during the period commencing three months
                             before the start and ending four months after the end of the first financial
                             year in which relief is to be applied or reapplied.

              RG 115.45      If a company ceases to rely on our relief under ASIC Corporations (Audit
                             Relief) Instrument 2016/784, after having previously lodged a Form 382, a
                             notice of cessation of relief should be lodged with us, using Form 396 Notice
                             of cessation of reliance on ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief)
                             Instrument 2016/784. The notice should be lodged during the period
                             commencing three months before the start and ending four months after the
                             end of the first financial year in which relief will cease to apply. A company
                             that does not lodge Form 396 will not be able to reapply the relief for a
                             future financial year.


                             Failure to make resolutions or lodge notice on time

              RG 115.46      We are of the view that we cannot grant extensions of time to lodge
                             Form 382 or to pass the resolutions of directors and members referred to in
                             RG 115.39. If a company fails to lodge Form 382 on time for the first
                             financial year that it intends to apply or reapply relief under the instrument,
                             or fails to obtain the resolutions of directors and members for each financial
                             year relief is intended to be applied, the company will not be able to apply
                             the relief for the financial year in question.

              RG 115.47      As a result, the company will have a continuing obligation under the
                             Corporations Act to prepare and lodge, and therefore should prepare and
                             lodge, an audited financial report for the financial year in question. Further,
                             once a company has lodged an audited financial report, it will be unable to
                             rely on the relief for a subsequent financial year because of the condition at
                             paragraph 6(d) of the instrument.

              RG 115.48      We will be very unlikely to grant individual relief to take away the
                             continuing obligation to lodge an audited financial report. This is because, in
                             such circumstances, we think the criteria in Regulatory Guide 51
                             Applications for relief (RG 51) are very unlikely to be met. We would also
                             be concerned about the effect of such relief on the rights of third parties. We
                             will also be unlikely to grant a formal no-action letter in circumstances
                             where the outstanding audited financial report has not been lodged, because
                             the criteria in Regulatory Guide 108 No-action letters (RG 108) are unlikely
                             to be met.

                                   Note: See RG 51.67–RG 51.75 and RG 108.29–RG 108.30 for further details.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                  Page 13
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             Purpose of the condition

              RG 115.49      The Corporations Act requires all proprietary companies that are required to
                             prepare financial statements under Ch 2M to have those financial statements
                             audited. Audit relief is a privilege rather than a right. The requirements for
                             relief under ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 were
                             developed as part of an extensive consultation process with creditor groups,
                             companies, accountants and others. We will carefully consider the impact of
                             any requested relief on these parties where these conditions are not met. It
                             would be inappropriate to penalise creditors or others who deal with the
                             company for a failure by the company.

              RG 115.50      The conditions in the instrument were each developed to meet specific
                             objectives and the conditions are not interchangeable. All of the conditions
                             must be satisfied. It is not sufficient for the company to meet all but one of
                             the conditions of the instrument to obtain relief. For example, the fact that a
                             company meets the financial requirements for relief does not mean that the
                             notice that the members and directors have resolved to take advantage of
                             audit relief (using Form 382) can be lodged late. Timely lodgement of the
                             notice is intended to provide information to creditors and others who access
                             the public records.

              RG 115.51      Many companies engage accountants, lawyers or other advisers to prepare
                             draft resolutions and forms. In some cases, these advisers may fail to prepare
                             draft resolutions or forms, or to lodge forms, within the times required by the
                             instrument. The fact that a company has chosen to outsource certain
                             functions rather than those functions being performed by the directors or an
                             employee does not absolve the company of its responsibilities.

              RG 115.52      Timely completion of the resolutions and the evidencing of those resolutions
                             by the lodgement of Form 382 serve other objectives, such as ensuring that
                             members and directors are not pressured to agree to audit relief at a point in
                             the financial year when it is no longer possible to obtain an unqualified audit
                             opinion. Where the obligations are not completed on time, this may cast
                             doubt as to whether the company is well managed and is meeting the other
                             requirements for audit relief on time (e.g. the requirements for quarterly
                             management accounts).

              RG 115.53      Lodging a Form 382 and the processing of that form on the ASIC database,
                             does not indicate that we have given any form of approval, nor does it alone
                             enable a company to take advantage of relief under ASIC Corporations
                             (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784. A company will only have the benefit
                             of relief if it meets all the conditions of the instrument.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 14
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             Notice on the company to require an audit

              RG 115.54      Even after the directors and members have resolved to dispense with an
                             audit, any director and any member can, in certain circumstances, require the
                             company’s financial report to be audited. Similarly, holders of certain types
                             of subordinated debt who have agreed that an audit is not required may
                             request an audit.

              RG 115.55      This request can be made by any director at any time up until the date the
                             directors’ declaration is signed for the relevant year-end financial report.
                             Any member, or a group of members, who individually or together control at
                             least 5% of the voting rights can also make this request, at any time until
                             one month before the end of the relevant financial year, or within such other
                             time as approved, in writing, by an ASIC officer. The percentage of votes
                             required by a member or members requesting the audit is calculated as at the
                             close of business on the day before the notice is served on the company. The
                             request must be in the form of a written notice served on the company: see
                             s220 and 109Y.



A well-managed company in a sound financial condition
              RG 115.56      Audit relief under ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784
                             will only be available to those proprietary companies that are well managed
                             and in a sound financial condition. Paragraphs 6(k)–(q) of the instrument set
                             out the requirements and procedures to be applied by a company in this
                             regard.


                             The company must be well managed

              RG 115.57      Directors must have appropriate internal management systems and
                             procedures that allow them to assess the financial condition and the solvency
                             of the company. The nature of these systems and the frequency of these
                             procedures must be adequate for this purpose and appropriate to the
                             company’s business and financial circumstances.

              RG 115.58      As a minimum, however, the assessment by directors must include a
                             quarterly assessment of a profit and loss statement, balance sheet and cash
                             flow statement of the company prepared for management purposes. This
                             assessment should not be taken to define or limit in any way the directors’
                             duty to prevent the company from trading while insolvent under s588G.

              RG 115.59      When making this resolution, the directors must take into account material
                             information (if any) about the company’s affairs that has become available
                             since the end of the quarter and/or financial year.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 15
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




              RG 115.60      A copy of the management accounts used to make this resolution and a copy
                             of the resolution itself must be given to a member of the company or a
                             person who is owed approved subordinated debt, if a request for these
                             documents is received in writing.

              RG 115.61      The management accounts required by paragraph 6(k) of ASIC Corporations
                             (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 are not statutory accounts and the
                             instrument does not require that they be prepared in compliance with the
                             disclosure requirements of accounting standards. The onus is on directors to
                             satisfy themselves that management accounts prepared under paragraph 6(k)
                             enable them to resolve that the company has satisfied the criteria in
                             paragraphs 6(l)–(n) of the instrument.


                             The company must be in a sound financial condition

              RG 115.62      To rely on ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784, a
                             company must:
                             (a)   have total liabilities not exceeding 70% of its total assets, excluding
                                   intangible assets (this ratio must be satisfied at the end of each quarter
                                   during the relevant financial year, at the end of the relevant financial
                                   year and at the time the resolution is made);
                             (b)   make a profit after related income tax expense for either the relevant
                                   financial year or the immediately preceding financial year; and
                             (c)   be able to pay all its debts as and when they become due and payable
                                   each quarter during the relevant financial year.

                             Exclusion of intangible assets

              RG 115.63      Intangible assets are excluded in the ratio in RG 115.62(a) because we will
                             generally only give relief to companies that maintain a surplus of the type of
                             assets that:
                             (a)   are less subjective in nature;
                             (b)   can be recognised and traded separately;
                             (c)   can be reliably measured; and
                             (d)   can be realised quickly to enable timely payment of creditors.

              RG 115.64      If a company fails to meet the ratio in RG 115.62(a) but there are
                             compensating factors, such as the existence of deeds of cross-guarantee with
                             a financially sound holding entity (i.e. such that the combined ratio of
                             liabilities to tangible assets of the companies is less than 70%), we may
                             consider giving individual relief. Relief will only be given in very limited
                             circumstances.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 16
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             Consolidated basis

              RG 115.65      The financial conditions in RG 115.62(a)–RG 115.62(b) must be met on a
                             consolidated basis for the company and its controlled entities where the
                             company prepares consolidated financial information. At year end, at the
                             date the directors’ declaration is signed, the conditions must also be met on a
                             consolidated basis for the company and its wholly owned entities where the
                             companies are parties to deeds of cross-guarantee for the purposes of
                             ASIC Corporations (Wholly-owned Companies) Instrument 2016/785.

                             Accounting standards

              RG 115.66      For the purposes of the financial conditions in RG 115.62 and RG 115.65,
                             liabilities and assets must be determined in accordance with accounting
                             standards (whether or not they are otherwise applicable to the company or its
                             controlled entities), subject to any adjustments in relation to subordinated
                             debt outlined in RG 115.67. In particular, companies should refer to the
                             requirements of Australian Accounting Standard AASB 132 Financial
                             instruments: Presentation for the classification of items such as redeemable
                             preference shares as liabilities or equity.

                             Inclusion of subordinated debt

              RG 115.67      For the purposes of the financial conditions in RG 115.62 and RG 115.65,
                             subordinated debt must be included as a liability unless:
                             (a)   the subordination agreement is substantially in the form specified in
                                   Pro Forma 183 Deed of subordination (PF 183);
                             (b)   the subordination agreement has been executed and lodged with us
                                   before the commencement of the financial year and has been approved
                                   by us in writing; and
                             (c)   the debt is not provided by a controlled entity of the company and is not
                                   funded directly or indirectly by the company or one of its controlled
                                   entities.

              RG 115.68      The condition that the subordinated debt is not funded directly or indirectly
                             by the company or one of its controlled entities has broad application and,
                             for example, applies:
                             (a)   even if the funding was already in place when the subordinated debt
                                   was provided to the company;
                             (b)   even if the funding has not been specifically designated as relating to
                                   the subordinated debt;
                             (c)   irrespective of the form of the funding (i.e. the funding may have been
                                   provided by way of equity, loans, a combination of equity and loans,
                                   trade payables, or by any other means); and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 17
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             (d)   even if the funding is made to a third party that provides funding to a
                                   subordinated debt holder.

              RG 115.69      A subordination agreement will not be approved by ASIC unless:
                             (a)   it is substantially in the form specified in PF 183. This pro forma
                                   requires ASIC to be a party to the agreement and prevents the company
                                   from repaying the debt without ASIC’s prior written consent; and
                             (b)   before the commencement of the relevant financial year, three copies of
                                   the agreement have been provided to the ASIC office in the state or
                                   territory in which the company’s registered office is located. All copies
                                   must have already been executed by the company (under seal) and the
                                   relevant subordinated debt holder (under seal if it is a company) before
                                   they are lodged with ASIC.

              RG 115.70      If the agreement is acceptable to ASIC, we will execute the agreement and
                             return two copies to the company. If a subordination agreement does not
                             meet our requirements and is rejected, there may be insufficient time for the
                             deed to be redrafted and re-executed before the commencement of the
                             financial year. In these circumstances, relief will not be available to the
                             company. Accordingly, companies are advised to lodge agreements with
                             ASIC well before the commencement of the financial year.

              RG 115.71      If a subordination agreement is received by ASIC close to commencement of
                             the financial year and is not approved by ASIC, it may not be possible for
                             the company to provide an amended agreement before the commencement of
                             the financial year. In such circumstances, the debt must be included as a
                             liability for the purposes of the financial conditions of the instrument.

                             Profitability

              RG 115.72      If a company makes a loss after tax for two years in a row, it must have an
                             audit in the second year. The company must have made a profit after tax for
                             either the financial year for which the company will rely on the instrument or
                             the financial year immediately preceding that financial year.

              RG 115.73      For example, if a company intends to rely on the instrument for the 2016–17
                             financial year, but has made a loss after tax for the 2015–16 financial year,
                             the directors should have a reasonable basis for believing that the company
                             will make a profit after tax for the year that relief is sought. If a loss after tax
                             is also made for the 2016–17 financial year, the company will not qualify for
                             relief under the instrument and must have its financial report audited for that
                             year.

              RG 115.74      Once a company has lodged an audited financial report, it will be unable to
                             rely on the relief for a subsequent financial year because of the condition at
                             paragraph 6(d) of the instrument. The company will need to apply for
                             individual relief: see Section D.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 18
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




              RG 115.75      If a company is required to prepare consolidated financial statements at year
                             end under the Corporations Act or for the purposes of an ASIC instrument
                             (e.g. as the holding entity in a closed group for the purposes of
                             ASIC Corporations (Wholly-owned Companies) Instrument 2016/785), this
                             test must also be satisfied on a consolidated basis for the same financial year.
                             If the company is a party to a deed of cross-guarantee for the purposes of
                             relief for its wholly owned companies under ASIC Corporations (Wholly-
                             owned Companies) Instrument 2016/785 it must also satisfy the test on a
                             consolidated basis for the closed group (as defined in ASIC Corporations
                             (Wholly-owned Companies) Instrument 2016/785) and for the parties to the
                             deed.

              RG 115.76      The compilation report (see RG 115.80) must be distributed to members
                             with the financial report of the company and lodged with ASIC with the
                             financial report.

                             Unqualified solvency statement

              RG 115.77      The ability of the company to pay its debts as and when they fall due should
                             also be evidenced by the directors making an unqualified solvency statement
                             in the directors’ declaration (lodged with ASIC as part of the company’s
                             financial report).

              RG 115.78      A statement is not an unqualified solvency statement if the solvency of the
                             company is expressed to be dependent on the financial support of a
                             third party or is otherwise conditional or subject to provisos. For example, a
                             statement that states that a company will be able to pay its debts as and when
                             they become due and payable subject to the continuing financial support of
                             the company’s bankers or other entities is not an unqualified solvency
                             statement.


                             Other requirements

              RG 115.79      Companies that take the benefit of this audit relief must also comply with
                             paragraphs 6(t)–(v) and paragraph 7(3) of ASIC Corporations (Wholly-
                             owned Companies) Instrument 2016/785. These paragraphs deal with
                             lodgements of reports, disclosure that the financial report has not been
                             audited, proposed modifications to the auditor’s report and making copies of
                             the management accounts available to members or subordinated debt
                             providers.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 19
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




Financial report compiled by a prescribed accountant
              RG 115.80      In order that professional competence and due care are used in compiling the
                             year-end financial report, it must be:
                             (a)   compiled by a prescribed accountant (see RG 115.81 and the definition
                                   in s4 of ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784); and
                             (b)   compiled in accordance with the Accounting Professional and Ethical
                                   Standard APES 315 Compilation of financial information (APES 315)
                                   (or some corresponding compilation rules or guidelines approved by
                                   ASIC).

              RG 115.81      A prescribed accountant is:
                             (a)   a member of CPA Australia (CPAA), who is entitled to use the post-
                                   nominals CPA or FCPA, and at or about the time of the member’s most
                                   recent renewal of membership has confirmed in writing to CPAA that
                                   they comply with CPAA’s continuing professional education
                                   requirements;
                             (b)   a member of Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand
                                   (CA ANZ), who is entitled to use the post-nominals CA, ACA or
                                   FACA, and at or about the time of the member’s most recent renewal of
                                   membership has confirmed in writing to CA ANZ that they comply
                                   with CA ANZ’s continuing professional education requirements;
                             (c)   a member of the Institute of Public Accountants (IPA), who is entitled
                                   to use the post-nominals AIPA, MIPA or FIPA, and at or about the time
                                   of the member’s most recent renewal of membership has confirmed in
                                   writing to the IPA that they comply with the IPA’s continuing
                                   professional education requirements; or
                             (d)   another accountant approved by us for the purpose of compiling
                                   financial reports under this guide and who reasonably believes they
                                   comply with such requirements as may be specified by us.

                             A prescribed accountant may be an employee of the company. APES 315
                             also applies to employees engaged in compiling financial reports for their
                             employers.

              RG 115.82      When considering an application for another accountant to be approved
                             under RG 115.81, we will consider all relevant matters, including:
                             (a)   the rules of ethical conduct of any relevant professional body;
                             (b)   the disciplinary procedures of that body with respect to its members;
                             (c)   the academic qualifications required to become a member of that body;
                             (d)   the type and amount of experience required to become a member of that
                                   body;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 20
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             (e)   the continuing professional development/education requirements
                                   applied by that body to its members; and
                             (f)   whether members of that body are required to comply with APES 315
                                   (or some equivalent rules or guidelines approved by us).



Timely lodgement of financial report and directors’ report
              RG 115.83      Relief from the audit requirements is only available if a company lodges its
                             financial report and directors’ report for the relevant financial year and the
                             immediately preceding financial year within the deadlines in the
                             Corporations Act or within such additional time as is approved in writing by
                             an ASIC officer. We regard timely lodgement of the company’s unaudited
                             financial report and its directors’ report as an essential requirement for audit
                             relief. Failure to lodge the financial report on time will mean that the
                             company cannot rely on this relief in a subsequent financial year.

              RG 115.84      If the company takes advantage of audit relief, its directors must state in the
                             directors’ report for the relevant financial year that they have:
                             (a)   relied on audit relief given by us; and
                             (b)   complied with all the requirements of this relief.



No proposed modified auditor’s report or material disagreement
              RG 115.85      To mitigate any risk directors and members of a company might be
                             pressured to take advantage of relief because a modified audit opinion is
                             expected, relief from the audit requirements is only available if there:
                             (a)   is no proposed modified auditor’s report; and
                             (b)   there are no disagreements or unresolved issues with any auditor over
                                   accounting treatments or amounts in the company’s financial report for
                                   the relevant financial year.



Applying for an extension of time
              RG 115.86      Extensions of time may be approved in writing by an ASIC officer: see
                             paragraphs 6(g), 6(k)–(l) and 7(3) of ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief)
                             Instrument 2016/784.

              RG 115.87      An application for an extension of time must:
                             (a)   be made to the ASIC office in the state or territory in which the
                                   company’s registered office is located, or by email to
                                   applications@asic.gov.au;



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 21
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             (b)   confirm that the company and its directors have complied with all of the
                                   other conditions of ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief)
                                   Instrument 2016/784 within the required time; and
                             (c)   be made in writing and be signed by a director or by the company
                                   secretary.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 22
                                                          REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




D          Individual relief

                               Key points

                               A proprietary company that is not eligible for relief under ASIC Corporations
                               (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 may apply for individual relief in certain
                               circumstances.




Applying for individual relief
              RG 115.88      A proprietary company that is not eligible for relief under
                             ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784 may apply for
                             individual relief with supporting documentation covering the matters set out
                             in this guide. Applications should be made in writing in accordance with a
                             resolution of directors and a statement of the reasons for seeking relief
                             (see s340) and accompanied by ASIC’s prescribed fee.

                                   Note: A proprietary company may also propose further relief if there are a number of
                                   companies in a similar position.

              RG 115.89      The requirements of ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784
                             indicate when relief may be given to a proprietary company. Any individual
                             exemptions will generally contain most of the requirements set out in the
                             instrument. When companies do not comply with the requirements of the
                             instrument but meet our policy as set out in this guide in some other way,
                             relief may be given on the basis of analogous requirements. Companies
                             should state in their applications for individual relief the requirements of the
                             instrument that they do not satisfy and the proposed analogous requirements.

              RG 115.90      When making an application for individual relief, an applicant should ensure
                             that there will be sufficient time for us to consider the application and serve
                             notice of any order on the company before the s319(3) lodgement deadline
                             for the financial year has expired. Section 340 applications should normally
                             be lodged no later than one month before the end of the financial year for
                             which the relief is being sought. Additional time should be allowed for
                             applications that are novel or outside the scope of existing policy.

              RG 115.91      In assessing applications, we may request additional information from the
                             company. A company that does not comply with the requirements of the
                             instrument (including paragraphs 6(e)–(f) and 6(k)–(n)) pending a response
                             from ASIC will not be eligible for relief even if we grant the application.

              RG 115.92      In granting individual relief, we may impose conditions. For example, a
                             company may have been unable to obtain relief under the instrument because
                             the required resolutions of members and directors were not passed on time or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                      Page 23
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             the company did not lodge notification of those resolutions on time. We
                             could require such a company to submit copies of management accounts for
                             two quarters within one month of the end of the quarters to which they
                             relate.



Companies that had an audit during 1993 or a later year
              RG 115.93      Subject to the exemption provided in paragraph 6(d) of the instrument for
                             certain small proprietary companies, relief under the instrument is only
                             available to companies that have not had an audit in 1993 or a later year.
                             This may include companies that have been registered or incorporated since
                             1993 and that have not had an audit since registration or incorporation.

              RG 115.94      A company that has been audited during 1993 or a later year may apply to
                             ASIC for individual relief in relation to that year. An application to ASIC for
                             such relief must consider RG 43 and RG 51 and must:
                             (a)   be signed by a director of the company;
                             (b)   state that it is made in accordance with the authorisation of directors;
                             (c)   be received by the ASIC office in the state or territory in which the
                                   company’s registered office is located before the commencement of the
                                   financial year;
                             (d)   confirm that the directors reasonably expect that all of the requirements
                                   of the instrument will be complied with for the financial year;
                             (e)   state the reasons why the company did not obtain relief under the
                                   instrument (or a corresponding previous instrument or class order),
                                   where applicable;
                             (f)   if the company had not met a requirement of the instrument (or a
                                   corresponding previous instrument or class order) in a previous year,
                                   state the reasons why it did not previously meet the requirement but is
                                   now expected to meet that requirement;
                             (g)   state the reasons why the company believes that an audit would impose
                                   unreasonable burdens, considering s342;
                             (h)   where applicable, explain why changes in the company’s circumstances
                                   mean that an audit will impose unreasonable burdens in the financial
                                   year but did not impose unreasonable burdens in the year an audit was
                                   conducted;
                             (i)   detail any other matters that the applicant believes may be relevant to
                                   our assessment of the application; and
                             (j)   be accompanied by the prescribed fee.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 24
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




Key terms

                                Term                      Meaning in this document

                                AASB                      Australian Accounting Standards Board

                                accounting standards      Standards issued by the AASB under s334 of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                                AFS licensee              A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                                APES 315 (for             A standard issued by the Accounting Professional and
                                example)                  Ethical Standards Board (in this example numbered 315)

                                ASA 202 (for              An auditing standard issued by the Auditing and
                                example)                  Assurance Standards Board (in this example numbered
                                                          202)

                                ASIC                      Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                                ASIC officer              Officers of ASIC to whom ASIC’s powers and functions
                                                          under s340 of the Corporations Act have been delegated

                                audit relief              Relief from the audit requirements of Ch 2M of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                                audit requirements        The audit obligations described in Ch 2M of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                                auditing standards        Standards issued by the Auditing and Assurance
                                                          Standards Board under s336 of the Corporations Act

                                CA ANZ                    Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand

                                Ch 2M (for example)       A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 2M), unless otherwise specified

                                Corporations Act          Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                          purposes of that Act

                                CPAA                      CPA Australia

                                Div 4 (for example)       A division of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 4), unless otherwise specified

                                financial report          A full-year or half-year financial report required under
                                                          Pt 2M.3 of the Corporations Act

                                IPA                       Institute of Public Accountants




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                    Page 25
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                                Term                      Meaning in this document

                                large proprietary         A large proprietary company that is not:
                                company                    a large ‘grandfathered’ proprietary company under
                                                            s319(4) of the old Corporations Law (as taken to be
                                                            included in the Corporations Act by s1408(2));
                                                           a disclosing entity;
                                                           a borrowing corporation;
                                                           a guarantor of a borrowing corporation; or
                                                           a licensed securities dealer or futures broker

                                old Corporations Law      Has the meaning given in s1371 of the Corporations Act

                                paragraph 6(d) (for       A paragraph of ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief)
                                example)                  Instrument 2016/784 (in this example numbered 6(d)),
                                                          unless otherwise specified

                                Pt 2M.2 (for example)     A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                          2M.2), unless otherwise specified

                                RG 43 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 43)

                                s340 (for example)        A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 340), unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                   Page 26
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




Related information
                             Headnotes

                             audit relief, audit requirements, auditor’s report, directors’ report, financial
                             report, individual relief, proprietary companies, relief from audit
                             requirements, reporting requirements, solvency statement, subordinated debt,
                             unreasonable burden


                             Legislative instruments and pro formas

                             ASIC Corporations (Audit Relief) Instrument 2016/784

                             ASIC Corporations (Wholly-owned Companies) Instrument 2016/785

                             PF 183 Deed of subordination


                             Regulatory guides

                             RG 43 Financial reports and audit relief

                             RG 51 Applications for relief

                             RG 108 No-action letters


                             Legislation

                             Corporations Act, Ch 2M, Div 4, Pts 2M.2, 2M.3 and 2M.4, s9, 45A,
                             45A(2), 45A(3), 109Y, 111AC, 220, 301(1), 307, 308, 314(1)(a)(iii),
                             314(2)(c), 314(3), 315(4), 316(2), 319(1), 319(3), 319(3)(b), 340, 342,
                             342(1), 342(1)(a), 342(1)(b), 342(1)(c), 342(2), 342(2)(a), 342(2)(b),
                             342(2)(c), 342(2)(d), 342(2)(e), 342(3), 342(3)(a), 342(3)(b), 342(3)(c),
                             588G, 1408(2)

                             Old Corporations Law, s319(4)


                             Cases

                             Mazda Australia Pty Ltd v ASC (1992) 8 ACSR 613


                             ASIC forms

                             Form 382 Notification of resolutions for audit relief: Proprietary companies

                             Form 396 Notice of cessation of reliance on ASIC Corporations (Audit
                             Relief) Instrument 2016/784




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 27
                                                         REGULATORY GUIDE 115: Audit relief for proprietary companies




                             Standards

                             AASB 132 Financial instruments: Presentation

                             APES 315 Compilation of financial information

                             ASA 200 Overall objectives of the independent auditor and the conduct of
                             an audit in accordance with Australian auditing standards




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2020                                                 Page 28
