REGULATORY GUIDE 132

Funds management:
Compliance and oversight

June 2025




About this guide
This guide is for:
    responsible entities of registered managed investment schemes;
    corporate directors of retail corporate collective investment vehicles
     (retail CCIVs); and
    Australian passport fund operators.

Parts of this guide are also relevant for:
    wholesale scheme operators;
    corporate directors of wholesale corporate collective investment
     vehicles (wholesale CCIVs);
    investor directed portfolio service (IDPS) operators; and
    managed discretionary account (MDA) providers.

Aspects of this guide are also relevant to those with oversight
responsibilities, including compliance committees, independent oversight
entities, compliance plan auditors and annual implementation reviewers.

It gives guidance on the compliance and oversight obligations these entities
must meet under the Corporations Act and other legal obligations.
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                                 About ASIC regulatory documents

                                 In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                 documents.
                                 Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                 is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                 Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                     explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                      legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                     explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                     describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                     giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                      as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                      regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                 Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                 compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                 Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                 research project.


                             Document history
                             This guide was issued in June 2025 and is based on legislation and
                             regulations as at the date of issue.

                             Previous versions:
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guide 132, issued July 2018, updated
                                     July 2022
                                    Superseded Policy Statement 132, issued August 1998, updated
                                     November 1998, rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007
                                    Superseded Regulatory Guides 116, 117, 118, 119 and 120, issued
                                     April 2004, replaced by Regulatory Guide 132 July 2018 and withdrawn


                             Disclaimer
                             This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                             own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                             applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                             obligations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                              Page 2
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




Contents
                             A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                    Who this guide applies to................................................................... 4
                                    Compliance management systems ................................................... 7
                                    Compliance plans .............................................................................. 8
                                    Oversight.......................................................................................... 10
                                    Australian passport funds ................................................................ 12
                                    Other relevant obligations ................................................................ 13
                             B      Compliance management systems .............................................. 16
                                    What is a compliance management system? .................................. 16
                                    Key features of a compliance management system ........................ 18
                             C      Compliance plans .......................................................................... 30
                                    Content of compliance plan ............................................................. 30
                                    Establishing adequate compliance controls in the compliance
                                    plan .................................................................................................. 31
                                    Group compliance risks and controls .............................................. 39
                                    Registered scheme and retail CCIV level compliance risks and
                                    controls ............................................................................................ 48
                                    Additional compliance risks and controls for Australian passport
                                    funds ................................................................................................ 60
                             D      Oversight ........................................................................................ 63
                                    Compliance committee .................................................................... 63
                                    Compliance plan auditor .................................................................. 66
                                    Oversight of Australian passport funds ............................................ 69
                             Key terms ............................................................................................... 72
                             Related information ............................................................................... 76




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                                              Page 3
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               An effective and responsive compliance management system that is
                               planned, implemented, evaluated and improved (as needed) will allow an
                               Australian financial services (AFS) licensee to demonstrate its commitment
                               to complying with its obligations under the Corporations Act 2001
                               (Corporations Act) and Australian Securities and Investments Commission
                               Act 2001 (ASIC Act).

                               Further, compliance plans are required for registered managed investment
                               schemes (registered schemes) and retail corporate collective investment
                               vehicles (retail CCIVs) (‘investment funds’). Compliance plans must meet the
                               requirements of the Corporations Act. This is one part of a fund operator’s
                               compliance management system.

                               Oversight of the fund’s operation is as follows:
                               • for registered schemes—the compliance committee or the external
                                 directors of the responsible entity and compliance plan audit;
                               • for CCIVs—the external directors of the corporate director and
                                 compliance plan audit; and
                               • for Australian passport funds—additionally, the independent oversight
                                 entity and annual implementation review.

                               The compliance and oversight arrangements should reflect the values,
                               objectives and strategy of the responsible entity, corporate director,
                               wholesale scheme operator, investor directed portfolio service (IDPS)
                               operator or managed discretionary account (MDA) provider.




Who this guide applies to
              RG 132.1       This guide is for:
                             (a)   responsible entities of registered schemes;
                             (b)   corporate directors of retail CCIVs; and

                                   Note: This guide applies to all types of registered schemes and retail CCIVs, even if we
                                   have given other guidance on specific compliance obligations for that type of
                                   investment fund.

                             (c)   Australian passport fund operators.

              RG 132.2       Parts of this guide are also relevant to:
                             (a)   operators of managed investment schemes that are unregistered because
                                   of s601ED(2), who hold an AFS licence in relation to the issue of
                                   interests or other financial services provided in the operation of the
                                   scheme (‘wholesale scheme operators’) (see Section B);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                        Page 4
                                                    REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                                (b)    corporate directors of wholesale corporate collective investment
                                       vehicles (wholesale CCIVs) (see Section B);
                                (c)    IDPS operators (see Section B); and

                                       Note: For more information for IDPS operators, see Regulatory Guide 148 Platforms
                                       that are managed investment schemes and nominee and custody services (RG 148).

                                (d)    MDA providers (see Section B).

                                       Note: For more information for MDA providers, see Regulatory Guide 179 Managed
                                       discretionary accounts (RG 179).

                RG 132.3        In this guide, as illustrated in Figure 1:
                                (a)    ‘investment funds’ refers to registered schemes and retail CCIVs;
                                (b)    ‘investment fund operators’ refers to responsible entities of registered
                                       schemes and corporate directors of retail CCIVs;
                                (c)    ‘Australian passport fund’ refers to a registered scheme or sub-fund of a
                                       retail CCIV that is also registered as a passport fund under the Asia
                                       Region Funds Passport;
                                (d)    ‘wholesale CCIVs’ and ‘wholesale unregistered schemes’ refer to funds
                                       that are operated by corporate directors and wholesale scheme
                                       operators, respectively, and have wholesale members only; and

                                       Note: See the key terms for the definitions of ‘wholesale scheme operator’ and
                                       ‘wholesale unregistered scheme’.

                                (e)    ‘IDPSs’ and ‘MDAs’ refer to funds that are operated by IDPS operators
                                       and MDA providers, respectively.

Figure 1: Who this guide applies to

      Investment fund operators

                                                                      Wholesale
     Responsible           Corporate             Corporate                                  IDPS                MDA
                                                                       scheme
       entities             directors             directors                               operators           providers
                                                                      operators



            Investment funds

                                                                       Wholesale
      Registered              Retail             Wholesale
                                                                      unregistered           IDPSs               MDAs
       schemes                CCIVs               CCIVs
                                                                       schemes




     Eligible to be registered as an             Sub-funds are eligible to be
    Australian passport fund under               registered as an Australian
    the Asia Region Funds Passport                      passport fund


Note: See RG 132.3 for the information in this figure (accessible version).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                            Page 5
                                                                                                       REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




               RG 132.4      Table 1 sets out the topics covered in this guide, and which entities the guidance applies to.

Table 1:     Who this guide applies to

 Guidance in this guide             Registered                 Wholesale unregistered   Retail CCIVs        Wholesale    IDPSs     MDAs      Australian passport
                                    schemes                    schemes                                      CCIVs                            funds

 Compliance management              Yes                        Yes                      Yes                 Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
 systems

 (Section B)

 Compliance plans                   Yes                        No                       Yes                 No           No        No        Yes

 (Section C)

 Compliance committees              Yes—if less than           No                       No                  No           No        No        Yes—if the Australian
                                    half the responsible                                                                                     passport fund is a
 (Section D: RG 132.185–
                                    entity’s directors are                                                                                   registered scheme that
 RG 132.197)
                                    external directors                                                                                       is required to have a
                                                                                                                                             compliance committee

 Compliance plan audits             Yes                        No                       Yes                 No           No        No        Yes—if the registered
                                                                                                                                             scheme or retail CCIV
 (Section D: RG 132.198–
                                                                                                                                             has a passport fund as
 RG 132.214)
                                                                                                                                             a sub-fund

 Annual implementation              No—unless the              No                       No—unless a sub-    No           No        No        Yes
 reviews and independent            registered scheme                                   fund of the CCIV
 oversight entities                 is an Australian                                    is an Australian
                                    passport fund                                       passport fund
 (Section D: RG 132.215–
 RG 132.228)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                                                                     Page 6
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.5       Aspects of this guide are also relevant to those with oversight
                             responsibilities, such as:
                             (a)   directors of the responsible entity of a registered scheme, and the
                                   corporate director of a retail CCIV (see Sections B, C and D);
                             (b)   staff involved in undertaking or monitoring compliance activities (see
                                   Sections B and C);
                             (c)   members of compliance committees (compliance committee members)
                                   and independent oversight entities (see Sections B, C and D);
                             (d)   compliance plan auditors (see Sections C and D); and
                             (e)   annual implementation reviewers (see Sections C and D).



Compliance management systems
              RG 132.6       An AFS licensee has an obligation to:
                             (a)   do all things necessary to ensure its financial services are provided
                                   efficiently, honestly and fairly (see s912A(1)(a) of the Corporations Act);
                             (b)   comply with the financial services laws (see s912A(1)(c)); and
                             (c)   comply with the conditions on its AFS licence (see s912A(1)(b)).

                                   Note: In this guide, references to sections (s), chapters (Chs) and parts (Pts) are to the
                                   Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified.

              RG 132.7       In Regulatory Guide 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general obligations
                             (RG 104), we set out our general guidance for AFS licensees on what is
                             required to meet the broad compliance obligations under s912A.

              RG 132.8       This guide contains additional tailored guidance to help responsible entities,
                             corporate directors, wholesale scheme operators, IDPS operators and MDA
                             providers meet their broad compliance obligations.

              RG 132.9       We have also provided guidance for fund operators on their requirement to
                             have adequate risk management systems under s912A(h): see Regulatory
                             Guide 259 Risk management systems of responsible entities (RG 259).
                             Importantly, compliance and risk management obligations are not mutually
                             exclusive. Therefore, this guide should be read together with RG 259.

              RG 132.10      A responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider must have measures in place for ensuring it
                             complies with its obligations as an AFS licensee, including the broad
                             compliance obligations, on an ongoing basis: see condition 4 of the standard
                             licence conditions in Pro Forma 209 Australian financial services licence
                             conditions (PF 209).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                            Page 7
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.11      An effective and responsive compliance management system that is planned,
                             implemented, evaluated and improved (as needed) will allow a responsible
                             entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or
                             MDA provider to demonstrate its commitment to complying with its
                             obligations under the Corporations Act and ASIC Act.

              RG 132.12      Australian Standard AS ISO 37301:2023 Compliance management
                             systems—Requirements with guidance for use provides guidance for an
                             effective compliance management system within an organisation. Based on
                             this guidance, we consider that the key features of an effective compliance
                             management system include:
                             (a)   an understanding of the context in which the managed investment
                                   scheme, CCIV, IDPS or MDA operates;
                             (b)   clear articulation of the values, objectives and strategy of the responsible
                                   entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or
                                   MDA provider. The compliance management system must reflect the
                                   values, objectives and strategy of the responsible entity, corporate
                                   director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider;
                             (c)   identification of compliance obligations, risks and objectives;
                             (d)   clarity about the roles and responsibilities of those people involved in
                                   the compliance management system;
                             (e)   organisational support for the compliance management system;
                             (f)   compliance controls that respond to the identified compliance
                                   obligations, risks and objectives;
                             (g)   appropriate documentation and record keeping;
                             (h)   monitoring and review of the compliance management system for
                                   continual improvement; and
                             (i)   procedures where non-compliance occurs.

              RG 132.13      Compliance and risk management are not mutually exclusive, but operate
                             together. A responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme
                             operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider can choose to implement:
                             (a)   integrated compliance and risk management systems; or
                             (b)   a compliance management system and distinct risk management systems.

                                   Note: For our detailed guidance on compliance management systems, see Section B.



Compliance plans
              RG 132.14      In addition to its broad compliance obligation as an AFS licensee, an
                             investment fund operator has a duty to:
                             (a)   ensure that the investment fund’s compliance plan meets the
                                   requirements of the Corporations Act; and



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 8
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (b)   comply with the compliance plan (see s601FC and 1224D(2)(g)).

              RG 132.15      The compliance plan must set out adequate measures that the investment
                             fund operator will apply when fulfilling its responsibilities in relation to the
                             investment fund to ensure compliance with the Corporations Act and the
                             fund’s constitution: see s601HA and 1226A.

              RG 132.16      The Corporations Act does not specify what constitutes adequate measures
                             (although for a registered scheme s601HA provides a non-exhaustive list of
                             matters for which there must be adequate arrangements—an approach
                             intended to provide flexibility for responsible entities to create compliance
                             controls that are tailored for the particular scheme). An investment fund
                             operator will therefore need to develop and implement an appropriate set of
                             compliance controls to address the compliance risks faced in operating the
                             investment fund.

                                   Note: In this guide, we use the term ‘compliance controls’ instead of ‘compliance
                                   measures’, as this reflects AS ISO 37301:2023. Compliance controls may be in the form
                                   of a process, activity or measure.

              RG 132.17      Compliance plans and the compliance controls set out in them are an integral
                             component of effective compliance management systems, and play a key
                             role in protecting investors and promoting investors’ interests.

              RG 132.18      When we look at compliance plans, we look at whether:
                             (a)   the compliance controls in the compliance plan are aligned with the
                                   responsible entity’s values, objectives and strategy, taking into account
                                   the nature, scale and complexity of the particular investment fund;
                             (b)   the compliance controls reflect the actual procedures, processes and
                                   practices of the investment fund operator and the investment fund;
                             (c)   there is a clear and demonstrated nexus between the compliance
                                   obligations and compliance controls;
                             (d)   the compliance controls are set out with enough certainty to allow the
                                   investment fund operator, ASIC and the auditor of the compliance plan
                                   to assess whether the operator has complied with the compliance plan;
                             (e)   the compliance plan is written in a clear manner so that it is usable by
                                   its target audience;
                             (f)   the compliance plan provides for identified functional roles for carrying
                                   out a particular compliance control and the monitoring of that
                                   compliance control;
                             (g)   the frequency and quantity of compliance controls, and their
                                   monitoring, are sufficient to effectively manage the compliance risks;
                             (h)   compliance with the compliance controls is monitored, the processes for
                                   monitoring performance of the compliance controls are described with
                                   sufficient details and certainty to ensure whether they will be or have



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                     Page 9
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                                   been complied with, and any non-compliance is reported to the
                                   compliance committee, the board or ASIC as required; and
                             (i)   the compliance plan is maintained so that the compliance controls, and
                                   the performance of those compliance controls, are adequate in light of
                                   any changes to the investment fund, the investment fund operator or the
                                   environment in which they both operate.

              RG 132.19      Compliance risks may apply across all of the investment funds operated by
                             the investment fund operator. We refer to these types of risks as group
                             compliance risks. Group compliance risks to be addressed in a compliance
                             plan generally arise from issues relating to:
                             (a)   requirements that apply because the investment fund operator is an AFS
                                   licensee, including requirements in relation to financial resources,
                                   conflicts of interest, complaints handling, breach reporting and
                                   competency; or
                             (b)   management of staff, finances and other processes at the investment
                                   fund operator level, such as meetings of directors, training, recruitment
                                   and experience, cyber resilience, accounts and record keeping, and
                                   disclosure and reporting.

              RG 132.20      For different types of investment funds, there will also be compliance risks
                             driven by the nature, diversity and structure of assets invested in. When we
                             look at a compliance plan, we will look for these to be addressed.

                                   Note: For the matters that we consider when we look at compliance plans, see
                                   Section C. The particular compliance controls adopted will depend on the specific
                                   nature of the investment fund and its business.




Oversight
              RG 132.21      The directors of the fund operator are ultimately responsible for ensuring that
                             the operator complies with its obligations. However, in addition to the
                             directors, oversight and assurance of the operator’s compliance occurs
                             through:
                             (a)   the compliance committee (required for registered schemes where less
                                   than half of the directors of the responsible entity are external
                                   directors). The compliance committee is responsible for assessing
                                   whether the compliance plan is adequate, monitoring the responsible
                                   entity’s compliance with the compliance plan, reporting breaches to the
                                   responsible entity and, if the responsible entity is not taking action to
                                   adequately deal with a reported breach, reporting the matter to ASIC;
                                   and
                             (b)   the compliance plan auditor. The compliance plan auditor conducts an
                                   annual audit to assess whether the investment fund operator has




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                      Page 10
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                                   complied with the compliance plan and whether the compliance plan
                                   continues to meet the requirements of the Corporations Act.

              RG 132.22      Australian passport funds are also required to have an independent oversight
                             entity and annual implementation review: see RG 132.31–RG 132.32.

                                   Note: For more information on oversight of investment funds and Australian passport
                                   funds, see Section D.


                             Compliance plan audit

              RG 132.23      An investment fund operator must ensure that at all times a registered
                             company auditor, an audit firm or an authorised audit company is engaged to
                             audit compliance with the investment fund’s compliance plan: see s601HG(1)
                             and 1226F(1).

              RG 132.24      Under s601HG(3) and 1226G, the auditor of a compliance plan must:
                             (a)   examine the compliance plan;
                             (b)   carry out an audit of the investment fund operator’s compliance with the
                                   compliance plan during the financial year; and
                             (c)   give the investment fund operator a report that states the auditor’s
                                   opinion on whether:
                                   (i)    the investment fund operator has complied with the compliance
                                          plan during the financial year; and
                                   (ii)   the plan continues to meet the requirements of the Corporations Act.

              RG 132.25      The appointment of a compliance plan auditor, who audits the compliance
                             plan annually, serves as an independent external oversight of the investment
                             fund operator’s compliance arrangements to ensure the compliance plan
                             continues to meet the requirements of the Corporations Act.

                                   Note: For our expectations about audits of an investment fund’s compliance plan, see
                                   Section D.


                             Compliance committee

              RG 132.26      A responsible entity of a registered scheme must establish a compliance
                             committee if less than half of its directors are external directors: see s601JA.
                             The compliance committee must have at least three members, and the
                             majority must be external members: see s601JB.

                                   Note: At least half of the directors of the corporate director of a retail CCIV must be
                                   external directors: see s1224G. This means that a retail CCIV is not required to establish
                                   a compliance committee.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                        Page 11
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.27      Section 601JC provides that the compliance committee must:
                             (a)   monitor to what extent the responsible entity complies with the
                                   compliance plan, and report on its findings to the responsible entity;
                             (b)   report to the responsible entity any breaches of the Corporations Act or
                                   the constitution that the compliance committee becomes aware of or
                                   suspects;
                             (c)   report to ASIC if the committee is of the view that the responsible entity
                                   has not taken, or does not propose to take, appropriate action to deal
                                   with a reported breach of the Corporations Act or the constitution; and
                             (d)   assess at regular intervals whether the compliance plan is adequate,
                                   report to the responsible entity on that assessment, and make
                                   recommendations to the responsible entity about any changes that it
                                   considers should be made to the compliance plan.

              RG 132.28      Regardless of whether there is a compliance committee, the board of
                             directors remains ultimately responsible for ensuring that the responsible
                             entity complies with its obligations. The compliance committee assists the
                             board by operating, in part, as an intermediary between the responsible
                             entity’s compliance function and the board in relation to compliance
                             monitoring, assessment and reporting. However, it is important that the
                             compliance function has a direct reporting line to the board to ensure that the
                             board is made fully aware of any compliance issues, so that the board can
                             effectively carry out its governance responsibilities.

              RG 132.29      If a registered scheme does not have a compliance committee, we will look
                             for the external directors to be particularly vigilant and actively engaged
                             with compliance issues.

                                   Note: For information on the appointment and conduct of compliance committees, see
                                   Section D.




Australian passport funds
              RG 132.30      For Australian passport funds, in addition to the compliance plan
                             requirements under the Corporations Act, the Australian Passport Rules
                             require the operator of the fund to have a compliance framework that ensures
                             adequate compliance with relevant laws and regulations: see section 8(2)(d)
                             of the Australian Passport Rules.

                                   Note 1: The Australian Passport Rules are the Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018
                                   made under s1211 and 1211A by the Australian Minister responsible for the Asia
                                   Region Funds Passport. Under s1211(2), the Australian Passport Rules must be
                                   substantially the same as the Passport Rules set out in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of
                                   Cooperation on the Establishment and Implementation of the Asia Region Funds
                                   Passport (Memorandum of Cooperation).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 12
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                                   Note 2: For the matters that we will look to be addressed in an Australian passport
                                   fund’s compliance plan, see Section C.

              RG 132.31      An Australian passport fund is also subject to oversight by an independent
                             oversight entity: see section 14 of the Australian Passport Rules. For
                             Australian passport funds, the independent oversight entity is each of the
                             external directors of the Australian passport fund operator or, if there is a
                             compliance committee, the compliance committee.

              RG 132.32      In addition to the compliance plan audit requirements under the Corporations
                             Act, an Australian passport fund is subject to an annual implementation
                             review: see section 15 of the Australian Passport Rules.

                                   Note: For information on our expectations for the conduct of the annual implementation
                                   review and the oversight functions of the independent oversight entity, see Section D.




Other relevant obligations
              RG 132.33      The compliance and oversight obligations set out in this guide interact with
                             other obligations under the Corporations Act for a responsible entity,
                             corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA
                             provider. This guide should be read in conjunction with those other
                             regulatory guides. Table 2 identifies related guidance that may be relevant.

Table 2:     Other relevant obligations

 Obligation and                    Further guidance                   Explanation
 Corporations Act reference

 Establishing and registering      Regulatory Guide 131 Funds         RG 131 sets out how we assess whether the
 an investment fund: s601EA        management: Establishing           compliance plan meets the requirements of the
 and 1222A                         and registering a fund             Corporations Act when deciding whether we
                                   (RG 131)                           will register a managed investment scheme or
                                                                      Australian passport fund.
                                   Information Sheet 272 How
                                   to register a corporate            INFO 172 provides guidance on how to
                                   collective investment vehicle      establish and register a CCIV and sub-funds of
                                   and sub-fund (INFO 272)            a CCIV.

 Constitutions: s601GA,            Regulatory Guide 134 Funds         The constitution of a registered scheme or
 601GB, 1223B, 1223G and           management: Constitutions          retail CCIV sets out some or all of the rights,
 1223H                             (RG 134)                           duties and liabilities of the investment fund
                                                                      operator in its operation of the fund.

                                                                      The investment fund operator must ensure that
                                                                      the fund’s compliance and oversight
                                                                      arrangements are sufficient to ensure
                                                                      compliance with the fund’s constitution.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                       Page 13
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




 Obligation and                    Further guidance               Explanation
 Corporations Act reference

 General obligations as an         Regulatory Guide 104 AFS       Responsible entities, corporate directors,
 AFS licensee: s912A               licensing: Meeting the         wholesale scheme operators, IDPS operators
                                   general obligations (RG 104)   and MDA providers have an obligation as an
                                                                  AFS licensee to comply with the financial
                                                                  services laws and the conditions of their
                                                                  licence.

                                                                  RG 104 describes how we assess compliance
                                                                  with most of the general obligations under
                                                                  s912A.

                                                                  This guide expands on our general guidance
                                                                  for AFS licensees in RG 104 to cover the
                                                                  specific compliance and oversight obligations
                                                                  for responsible entities, corporate directors,
                                                                  wholesale scheme operators, IDPS operators
                                                                  and MDA providers.

 Adequate risk management          Regulatory Guide 259 Risk      Responsible entities, corporate directors,
 systems: s912A(1)(h)              management systems of          wholesale scheme operators, IDPS operators
                                   fund operators (RG 259)        and MDA providers have an obligation to have
                                                                  adequate risk management systems.

                                                                  RG 259 outlines our expectations of
                                                                  responsible entities and corporate directors
                                                                  when complying with the risk management
                                                                  obligation.

                                                                  Where business risks may affect compliance
                                                                  with compliance obligations, we will look for
                                                                  them to be addressed as part of the
                                                                  compliance management system.

 Adequate financial                Regulatory Guide 166 AFS       Responsible entities, corporate directors,
 resources: s912A(1)(d)            licensing: Financial           wholesale scheme operators, IDPS operators
                                   requirements (RG 166)          and MDA providers have an obligation to have
                                                                  adequate financial resources to provide the
                                                                  financial services covered by their AFS
                                                                  licence.

                                                                  RG 166 sets out the financial requirements
                                                                  that must be met by AFS licensees.

 Organisational competence:        Regulatory Guide 105 AFS       Responsible entities, corporate directors,
 s912A(1)(e)                       licensing: Organisational      wholesale scheme operators, IDPS operators
                                   competence (RG 105)            and MDA providers have an obligation to
                                                                  maintain competence to provide the financial
                                                                  services covered by the licence.

                                                                  RG 105 describes how we assess compliance
                                                                  with the organisational competence obligation.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                               Page 14
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




 Obligation and                    Further guidance                 Explanation
 Corporations Act reference

 Managing conflicts of             Regulatory Guide 181             Responsible entities, corporate directors,
 interest: s912A(1)(aa)            Licensing: Managing              wholesale scheme operators, IDPS operators
                                   conflicts of interest (RG 181)   and MDA providers are required to have in
                                                                    place adequate arrangements for managing
                                                                    conflicts of interest.

                                                                    RG 181 supplements the guidance in this
                                                                    guide by setting out:
                                                                     our general approach to compliance with the
                                                                      statutory obligation in s912A to manage
                                                                      conflicts of interest;
                                                                     guidance for licensees generally on controlling
                                                                      and avoiding conflicts of interest; and
                                                                     guidance for licensees generally on
                                                                      disclosing conflicts of interest.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                 Page 15
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




B          Compliance management systems

                               Key points

                               An effective and responsive compliance management system that is
                               planned, implemented, evaluated and improved (as needed) will allow a
                               responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                               operator or MDA provider to demonstrate its commitment to complying with
                               its obligations under the Corporations Act and ASIC Act: see RG 132.34–
                               RG 132.44.

                               AS ISO 37301:2023 provides guidance for an effective compliance
                               management system within an organisation. Based on this guidance, we
                               consider that the key features of an effective compliance management
                               system include:
                               • an understanding of the context in which the managed investment
                                 scheme, CCIV (and each sub-fund of the CCIV), IDPS or MDA operates
                                 (see RG 132.45–RG 132.48);
                               • clear articulation and reflection of the values, objectives and strategy of
                                 the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator,
                                 IDPS operator or MDA provider (see RG 132.49–RG 132.51);
                               • identification of compliance obligations, risks and objectives (see
                                 RG 132.52–RG 132.58);
                               • clarity about the roles and responsibilities of those people involved in the
                                 compliance management system (see RG 132.59–RG 132.70);
                               • organisational support for the compliance management system (see
                                 RG 132.71);
                               • compliance controls that respond to the identified compliance obligations,
                                 risks and objectives (see RG 132.72–RG 132.74);
                               • appropriate documentation and record keeping (see RG 132.75–
                                 RG 132.77);
                               • monitoring and review of the compliance management system for
                                 continual improvement (see RG 132.78–RG 132.80); and
                               • procedures where non-compliance occurs (see RG 132.81).

                               Compliance management and risk management are not mutually exclusive,
                               but operate together.




What is a compliance management system?
              RG 132.34      A compliance management system is an integrated system comprised of
                             written documents, functions, processes, controls and tools that help an
                             organisation comply with its legislative requirements, industry codes,
                             standards of good corporate governance, best practices, ethics and
                             community expectations.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 16
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.35      An effective and responsive compliance management system that is planned,
                             implemented, evaluated and improved (as needed) will allow a responsible
                             entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or
                             MDA provider to demonstrate its commitment to complying with its
                             obligations under the Corporations Act and ASIC Act. This includes the
                             broad compliance obligation applicable to all AFS licensees, as well as
                             compliance obligations specific to the fund operator and the particular AFS
                             licence they hold.

              RG 132.36      The international standard for compliance management systems regards
                             ‘compliance’ as ‘an outcome of an organisation meeting its obligations’: see
                             AS ISO 37301:2023. This standard is based on the principles of good
                             governance, proportionality, integrity, transparency, accountability and
                             sustainability. The standard does not prescribe the particular arrangements
                             that must be established, but rather provides guidance on the key
                             considerations that should be addressed in developing a compliance
                             management system.


                             Interaction between compliance and risk management
                             systems

              RG 132.37      A risk management system is a system involving coordinated activities to
                             direct and control an organisation with regard to risk: see Australian
                             Standard AS ISO 31000:2018 Risk management—Guidelines. Risk
                             management systems include all structures, systems and subsystems,
                             policies, procedures and staff that an organisation uses to identify, assess and
                             treat risks or to monitor and review the relevant controls or measures.

              RG 132.38      Compliance risk is the potential for losses and legal penalties due to failure
                             of the organisation to meet its obligations, including legislative
                             requirements, industry codes, standards of good corporate governance, best
                             practices, ethics and community expectations.

              RG 132.39      An effective compliance management system enables an organisation to
                             demonstrate its commitment to meeting its compliance obligations.
                             Compliance and risk management are not mutually exclusive, but operate
                             together.

              RG 132.40      RG 259 provides guidance on how responsible entities may comply with
                             their obligation under the Corporations Act to maintain adequate risk
                             management systems. It provides examples of the risks that we consider
                             most relevant to responsible entities and the schemes they manage. These
                             include strategic risk, governance risk, operational risk, market and
                             investment risk, and liquidity risk. This guide should be read in conjunction
                             with RG 259.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 17
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.41      Compliance risk may be thought of as a subset of operational risk—that is,
                             the risk that a responsible entity may not comply with financial services laws
                             in conducting its financial services business: see RG 259.118. The
                             compliance function may be more effective where the risk is specific and
                             can be managed through a set of controls. However, the compliance function
                             also has a broader role in focusing on the question of whether an activity
                             should be undertaken, not just whether it is allowed by law.

              RG 132.42      Our intention with this guide is to expand on the good practice guidance for
                             identifying, assessing and managing risks we outlined in RG 259 by setting
                             out the key features that we look for a responsible entity, wholesale scheme
                             operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider to build into their system,
                             processes and procedures for managing compliance risk.

              RG 132.43      In building its compliance management system, we will look for an entity to
                             consider if the compliance function is given sufficient recognition, stature
                             and authority as a separate risk discipline. A responsible entity, corporate
                             director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider can do
                             this by implementing:
                             (a)   integrated compliance and risk management systems; or
                             (b)   a compliance management system and distinct risk management systems.

                                   Note: AS ISO 37301:2023 states that ‘while maintaining its independence, it is
                                   preferable that compliance management is integrated with the organization’s other
                                   managements processes and its operational requirements and procedures’.




Key features of a compliance management system
              RG 132.44      Developing a compliance management system that reflects AS ISO
                             37301:2023, as a standalone system or one that is integrated with risk
                             management systems, involves consideration of issues such as:
                             (a)   the context in which the managed investment scheme, CCIV (and each
                                   sub-fund of the CCIV), IDPS or MDA operates (see RG 132.45–
                                   RG 132.48);
                             (b)   the values, objectives and strategy of the responsible entity, corporate
                                   director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider
                                   (see RG 132.49–RG 132.51);
                             (c)   what compliance obligations, risks and objectives exist (see
                                   RG 132.52–RG 132.58);
                             (d)   the roles and responsibilities of those people involved in the compliance
                                   management system (see RG 132.59–RG 132.70);
                             (e)   the organisational support required for the compliance management
                                   system (see RG 132.71);




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                     Page 18
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (f)   compliance controls that will respond to the identified compliance
                                   obligations, risks and objectives (see RG 132.72–RG 132.74);
                             (g)   appropriate documentation and record keeping (see RG 132.75–
                                   RG 132.77);
                             (h)   monitoring and review of the compliance management system for
                                   continual improvement (see RG 132.78–RG 132.80); and
                             (i)   procedures where non-compliance occurs (see RG 132.81).


                             Operational context

              RG 132.45      AS ISO 37301:2023 outlines the broad range of external and internal issues
                             that affect the organisation’s ability to achieve its intended compliance
                             outcomes. Accordingly, we do not take a ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach to what is
                             required for a compliance management system. We acknowledge that what a
                             responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider should do to comply with its compliance and
                             oversight obligations will vary according to the nature, scale and complexity
                             of its organisation and activities.

              RG 132.46      In assessing that nature, scale and complexity, we will look for the
                             responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider to at least consider:
                             (a)   the number of managed investment schemes, CCIVs (and sub-funds of
                                   CCIVs), IDPSs or MDAs managed and the size of their funds under
                                   management;
                             (b)   whether the fund is a managed investment scheme, CCIV, IDPS or
                                   MDA, whether it is a registered scheme or a retail CCIV and whether it
                                   (or, for a CCIV, a sub-fund) is also registered as an Australian passport
                                   fund;
                             (c)   the investment strategies and business activities of the managed
                                   investment scheme, CCIV or MDA, and the investment choices
                                   available through an IDPS, including the extent to which it will use
                                   leverage;
                             (d)   whether the fund is, or will be, listed or traded on a financial market;
                             (e)   the types of investments and investment location;
                             (f)   the distribution model and investor base;
                             (g)   the activities—including the investment approach—the managed
                                   investment scheme, CCIV, IDPS or MDA engages in;
                             (h)   the extent to which the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale
                                   scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider delegates material
                                   operational activities, and the level of supervision of their delegates;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 19
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (i)   the diversity and structure of the operations (including the geographical
                                   spread of operations and the extent to which the responsible entity,
                                   corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA
                                   provider outsources any of its functions);
                             (j)   the volume and size of the transactions the responsible entity, corporate
                                   director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider is
                                   responsible for;
                             (k)   whether the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme
                                   operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider’s main business is
                                   undertaking funds management; and
                             (l)   the number of people in the responsible entity, corporate director,
                                   wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider’s
                                   organisation.

              RG 132.47      We will look for the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme
                             operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider to also consider the external
                             environment in which the business and the fund operate, including:
                             (a)   the business, financial, competitive, political, economic, social, cultural,
                                   technological and environmental factors that the business faces;
                             (b)   expectations of external stakeholders (including members) about the
                                   operation of the business;
                             (c)   legal and regulatory changes that affect the operation of the business
                                   and the fund; and
                             (d)   new product offerings in the market that compel a responsible entity,
                                   corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA
                                   provider to compete more effectively.

              RG 132.48      In developing its compliance management system, we will look for the
                             responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider to also consider the extent to which compliance
                             will be integrated with other functions, such as governance, risk, audit and
                             legal.


                             Values, objectives and strategy

              RG 132.49      As noted in AS ISO 37301:2023, a compliance management system should
                             reflect the organisation’s values, objectives and strategy. Those values,
                             objectives and strategy should be documented and implemented in the
                             compliance management system in practice, so that the compliance
                             management system is in alignment with the articulated values, objectives
                             and strategy.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                             Page 20
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.50      Implementing the values, objectives and strategy into the compliance
                             management system may involve:
                             (a)   fostering an awareness of, and organisational response to, compliance
                                   issues, so that compliance requirements are ‘front of mind’ for directors
                                   and all employees, and are included in decision making across the
                                   organisation;
                             (b)   tailoring compliance processes and structures to the managed
                                   investment scheme, CCIV, IDPS or MDA and its operator, rather than
                                   generic policies designed merely to satisfy a regulatory requirement;
                             (c)   training staff to understand the responsible entity, corporate director,
                                   wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider’s
                                   compliance framework, supporting, recognising and/or rewarding staff
                                   who demonstrate their commitment to compliance, and encouraging
                                   reporting of non-compliance and errors more broadly; and
                             (d)   providing adequate resources for the compliance management system.

              RG 132.51      The responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider can outsource certain compliance activities, but
                             cannot outsource responsibility for compliance.


                             Identifying compliance obligations, risks and objectives

              RG 132.52      In planning its compliance management system in accordance with AS ISO
                             37301:2023, a responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme
                             operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider should:
                             (a)   undertake a structured and systematic process to consider its
                                   compliance obligations;
                             (b)   identify and assess the risks of not meeting compliance obligations; and

                                   Note: For information on identifying and assessing risks, see Section C of RG 259.

                             (c)   establish compliance controls designed to meet these risks.

              RG 132.53      This will likely involve considering the following general questions:
                             (a)   What are the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme
                                   operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider’s obligations under the
                                   Corporations Act, the constitution and any Product Disclosure
                                   Statement (PDS), IDPS Guide, MDA contract or Financial Services
                                   Guide (FSG)? What outcomes are the Corporations Act and constitution
                                   designed to deliver?
                             (b)   What risks to ongoing compliance are posed by the operations of this
                                   particular managed investment scheme, CCIV and sub-fund of a CCIV,
                                   IDPS or MDA, given its nature, environment, size, members (or
                                   clients), asset types and investment strategy?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                      Page 21
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (c)   What is the likelihood and impact of failing to deliver a particular
                                   compliance outcome against other outcomes? How should compliance
                                   efforts be focused?
                             (d)   What compliance controls will deliver the intended outcome?
                             (e)   How will the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme
                                   operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider ensure any service provider
                                   meets its compliance objectives, compliance standards and commitment
                                   to compliance?
                             (f)   How will the compliance controls and outcomes be assessed? What
                                   does success look like?

              RG 132.54      We do not consider that any one particular approach for identifying and
                             assessing compliance risks will be the most appropriate and applicable to the
                             operation of all managed investment schemes, CCIVs, IDPSs and MDAs.

              RG 132.55      Compliance risks can be identified through, for example, evidence-based
                             methods that rely on reviewing audit reports, post-event reports, historical
                             data or risk registers to identify existing and emerging compliance risks that
                             the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider may face. A systematic team approach may be
                             used, involving focus groups and brainstorming, to identify compliance
                             risks.

              RG 132.56      It is important that compliance controls to address compliance risks are
                             tailored for, and embedded into every aspect of, the business of the
                             responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider. Operating systems and processes should be
                             designed with compliance in mind. This is more than just a ‘tick the box’
                             exercise.

              RG 132.57      It would be prudent for the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale
                             scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider to document its risk
                             assessment process. Documenting the reasons for assessments, including the
                             thinking that leads to decisions about identified risks, provides a useful
                             context for future risk assessment. This can also assist in reviewing and
                             evaluating whether the compliance controls implemented in response to
                             those risks are adequate.

              RG 132.58      As the business evolves over time, it may face a range of new or changed
                             compliance obligations and risks. The previous compliance management
                             system may no longer remain appropriate, and we will look for it to be
                             updated to address the new obligations or risks faced by the managed
                             investment scheme, CCIV, IDPS or MDA. For example, adding sub-funds to
                             a CCIV may mean there is a need to update the compliance management
                             system of the corporate director.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 22
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Roles and responsibilities for compliance management
                             systems

              RG 132.59      A common model of compliance is the ‘three lines of defence’ model, which
                             involves:
                             (a)   responsibility at the operational level for carrying out appropriate
                                   compliance controls to ensure compliance with the law, the compliance
                                   plan and the constitution;
                             (b)   an independent compliance function within the organisation having
                                   oversight of compliance throughout the organisation; and
                             (c)   independent oversight, including internal and external audit functions,
                                   providing independent assurance over the compliance framework.

              RG 132.60      AS ISO 37301:2023 suggests that responsibilities and authorities for relevant
                             roles should be assigned and communicated within the organisation. The
                             compliance management system should include details of the functions,
                             roles and responsibilities of persons involved in planning, implementing and
                             overseeing the compliance management system. It should articulate how the
                             various oversight bodies interact.

              RG 132.61      When we look at a compliance management system, we will look at whether
                             it provides for:
                             (a)   staff who perform compliance management functions to have the
                                   appropriate knowledge and skills;
                             (b)   decision making that takes into account the compliance management
                                   system;
                             (c)   key staff to take responsibility for compliance risks and developing
                                   controls and processes to manage them;
                             (d)   regular reviews;
                             (e)   regular monitoring and reporting on compliance risks by the staff
                                   responsible for those risks; and
                             (f)   regular testing and reporting on compliance controls by the staff
                                   responsible for those controls.

                             The directors

              RG 132.62      The active involvement of, and supervision by, the directors of the
                             responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider in the compliance management system is
                             important to the system being effective and responsive. In setting out the role
                             and responsibilities of the directors in the compliance management system,




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 23
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             we will look for the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme
                             operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider to consider issues such as:
                             (a)   How will the directors be involved in planning and approving the
                                   compliance management system? What periodic reporting will the
                                   directors receive on the performance of the compliance management
                                   system?
                             (b)   Are the resources allocated to implement, evaluate and improve the
                                   compliance management system adequate and appropriate?
                             (c)   How are expectations around compliance communicated clearly,
                                   proactively and regularly across all levels to ensure that they are ‘front
                                   of mind’? How is the performance of senior management and relevant
                                   staff against compliance obligations measured and rewarded? How is an
                                   environment where staff feel safe to report non-compliance or raise
                                   weak compliance issues promoted?
                             (d)   How do the directors ensure that non-compliance is dealt with
                                   appropriately?
                             (e)   How do the directors ensure that roles in relation to the compliance
                                   management system have clearly defined responsibilities and authority?
                             (f)   Are the reporting procedures clear, timely, effective and regularly
                                   reviewed?

                             Compliance committee

              RG 132.63      Where a compliance committee exists, we will look for its functions and
                             responsibilities as part of the compliance management system to be clearly
                             explained and documented.

                                   Note: For more information on the role of the compliance committee, see Section D.


                             Compliance and assurance staff

              RG 132.64      Many responsible entities, corporate directors, wholesale scheme operators,
                             IDPS operators and MDA providers have a discrete compliance function,
                             such as a compliance officer or manager, with responsibility for reporting
                             and monitoring on obligations. We do not necessarily expect all operators to
                             have a discrete compliance function, but we will look for sufficient resources
                             to be dedicated to compliance activity and for accountability for compliance
                             functions to be clear. This will allow operators flexibility as to how
                             resources are organised internally to achieve compliance objectives.

              RG 132.65      The responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider’s compliance and assurance staff may be
                             responsible for:
                             (a)   identifying compliance obligations;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 24
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (b)   integrating compliance obligations and relevant compliance controls
                                   into processes and procedures;
                             (c)   maintaining compliance obligations and relevant compliance controls in
                                   response to changes in circumstances;
                             (d)   providing training and guidance on compliance obligations and the
                                   compliance management system for other staff;
                             (e)   assisting to embed the compliance management system into the
                                   responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                                   operator or MDA provider’s operations;
                             (f)   responding to non-performance, including escalating to senior
                                   management, the compliance committee and the directors, where
                                   appropriate;
                             (g)   analysing compliance performance indicators and identifying
                                   compliance trends; and
                             (h)   providing advice and guidance on compliance.

              RG 132.66      Where there is a discrete compliance function, a robust conflicts
                             management process and demonstrated competence, integrity and
                             commitment to compliance are needed to ensure this role is performed to a
                             high standard. We will generally look for the discrete compliance function to
                             have direct access to the board and, where one exists, the compliance
                             committee to ensure it has enough authority within the rest of the
                             organisation.

              RG 132.67      The internal compliance function will generally be responsible for day-to-
                             day monitoring of the compliance management system and checking
                             adherence to the compliance management system. Because of this, there is
                             substantial risk if the same person carries out a specific compliance function
                             and is also responsible for auditing, reviewing or monitoring adherence to
                             that compliance function. Generally, we will look for a clear separation
                             between these roles and for this be documented in the compliance
                             management system.

              RG 132.68      Many responsible entities, corporate directors, wholesale scheme operators,
                             IDPS operators and MDA providers will have an internal audit, review or
                             monitoring role in their compliance management system. Both the
                             compliance and audit roles play valuable and distinct roles in ensuring that
                             the compliance management system is effective and responsive.

                             Responsibility for outsourced operations

              RG 132.69      Many responsible entities, corporate directors, wholesale scheme operators,
                             IDPS operators and MDA providers outsource some part of their operations.
                             Where this occurs, the operator remains responsible for meeting its
                             compliance obligations. If any operations are outsourced, effective due



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 25
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             diligence is important to ensure that compliance objectives, compliance
                             standards and commitment to compliance will be achieved.

              RG 132.70      We encourage all responsible entities, corporate directors, wholesale scheme
                             operators, IDPS operators and MDA providers to include provisions in their
                             service agreements to ensure their compliance objectives, compliance
                             standards and commitment to compliance will be met.


                             Organisational support for the compliance management
                             system

              RG 132.71      AS ISO 37301:2023 discusses appropriate organisational support for the
                             establishment, implementation, maintenance and continual improvement of
                             the compliance management system. In ensuring the compliance
                             management system provides for adequate organisational support, the
                             responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider could consider various types of support—
                             including resources, training, mentoring, communication and guidance. The
                             level of support required will depend on the nature, scale and complexity of
                             the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider, the relevant managed investment schemes,
                             CCIVs, IDPSs or MDAs and its compliance management system.


                             Compliance controls

              RG 132.72      As noted in AS ISO 37301:2023, the compliance management system should
                             include compliance controls that respond to the identified compliance
                             obligations, risks and objectives.

              RG 132.73      Compliance controls could include:
                             (a)   avoiding the compliance risk by not undertaking the relevant activities
                                   that give rise to the risk;
                             (b)   preventing the eventuation of the risk through specific actions, such as
                                   developing rules and documented policies and procedures; and/or
                             (c)   reducing or mitigating the consequences or impact of realised risks (e.g.
                                   through contingency, emergency or business continuity plans).

              RG 132.74      In deciding what compliance controls to adopt, we will look for the
                             responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS
                             operator or MDA provider to consider whether:
                             (a)   the compliance controls are aligned with its values, objectives and
                                   strategy, taking into account the nature, scale and complexity of the
                                   particular managed investment scheme, CCIV (and each sub-fund of the
                                   CCIV), IDPS or MDA;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 26
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (b)   the compliance controls reflect the actual procedures, processes and
                                   practices of the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme
                                   operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider and the managed investment
                                   scheme, CCIV, IDPS or MDA;
                             (c)   there is a clear and demonstrated nexus between the compliance
                                   obligations and compliance controls;
                             (d)   the compliance controls are set out with enough certainty to assess
                                   whether the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme
                                   operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider has performed the
                                   compliance controls;
                             (e)   the compliance controls are written in a clear manner so that they are
                                   usable by the target audience;
                             (f)   the compliance controls establish identified functional roles responsible
                                   for carrying out a particular compliance control and the monitoring of
                                   that compliance control;
                             (g)   the frequency and quantity of compliance controls, and their
                                   monitoring, are sufficient to effectively manage the compliance risks;
                             (h)   performance of the compliance controls is monitored, the processes for
                                   monitoring performance of the compliance controls are described with
                                   enough details and certainty to assess whether they will be or have been
                                   performed, and any non-compliance is reported to the compliance
                                   committee, the directors or ASIC as required; and
                             (i)   the compliance controls are regularly reviewed so that they are up to
                                   date at all times.

                                   Note: For more information on the compliance controls to be addressed in a compliance
                                   plan for a registered scheme, see Section C.


                             Documentation and record keeping

              RG 132.75      AS ISO 37301:2023 suggests appropriate documentation of a compliance
                             management system. Documenting the compliance management system and
                             responsibilities, and ensuring that that documentation is easily accessible by
                             staff and management, should help embed the compliance management
                             system within the organisation and give it the best chance of being effective.

              RG 132.76      When creating and updating the documented compliance management
                             system, the responsible entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator,
                             IDPS operator or MDA provider should put in place appropriate procedures
                             and processes for version control, review, approval and protection from
                             corruption or unauthorised amendment.

              RG 132.77      The compliance management system should ensure that the responsible
                             entity, corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 27
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             MDA provider maintains up-to-date records of its compliance activities, as
                             this will assist in the evaluation of the compliance management system.


                             Monitoring, review and continual improvement

              RG 132.78      AS ISO 37301:2023 suggests that a responsible entity, corporate director,
                             wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA provider should
                             regularly monitor and evaluate the performance and effectiveness of its
                             compliance management system to ensure its compliance objectives are
                             achieved.

              RG 132.79      In developing procedures for monitoring the performance and effectiveness
                             of the compliance management system, we will look for a responsible entity,
                             corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA
                             provider to generally:
                             (a)   determine what information it will need in order to measure and
                                   evaluate the performance of the compliance management system in
                                   achieving its compliance objectives, and the best method, including
                                   timing, for obtaining that information;
                             (b)   analyse information to determine the root causes of any non-compliance;
                             (c)   ensure the compliance management system is up to date, working
                                   effectively to meet compliance objectives, and addresses previously
                                   identified issues or actions;
                             (d)   determine whether responsibilities of employees involved in the
                                   compliance management system are appropriate and are being carried
                                   out appropriately;
                             (e)   determine whether the resources deployed in the compliance
                                   management system are adequate;
                             (f)   identify opportunities to improve the performance of the compliance
                                   management system;
                             (g)   determine what reporting arrangements are necessary to ensure that
                                   senior management and the directors are adequately informed about the
                                   performance of the compliance management system; and
                             (h)   consider whether any additional mechanisms, such as audits, are
                                   required to monitor the performance of the compliance management
                                   system.

              RG 132.80      The development of compliance management systems should not be a ‘set
                             and forget’ or one-off process. The systems need to be able to adapt and
                             evolve to take into account internal changes within the responsible entity,
                             corporate director, wholesale scheme operator, IDPS operator or MDA
                             provider’s business and within the relevant funds, as well as changes in the
                             external environment. We will look for the operator to use the information




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 28
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             that is gathered and evaluated to identify opportunities for improvement. We
                             encourage operators to benchmark their compliance management system
                             against industry best practice.


                             Non-compliance

              RG 132.81      AS ISO 37301:2023 suggests that an organisation should have a clear
                             procedure and process to follow where non-compliance occurs.
                             Non-compliance procedures and processes could include:
                             (a)   requiring timely escalation where non-compliance is identified;
                             (b)   considering whether the non-compliance needs to be reported to ASIC;
                             (c)   requiring the operator to take action to control and rectify any non-
                                   compliance issues, and manage the consequences;
                             (d)   identifying the root cause and assess whether similar non-compliance
                                   could occur; and
                             (e)   reviewing the effectiveness of the action taken and, if necessary,
                                   making changes to the compliance management system.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 29
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




C          Compliance plans

                               Key points

                               A compliance plan is one part of an investment fund operator’s overall
                               compliance management system.

                               The compliance plan for an investment fund must set out adequate
                               measures to ensure compliance with the Corporations Act and the
                               investment fund’s constitution. In considering whether adequate
                               compliance controls have been established, we will look at whether the
                               investment fund operator ensures the compliance plan addresses certain
                               issues: see RG 132.84–RG 132.118.

                               We will look for group compliance risks, which apply across all of the
                               investment funds operated by the investment fund operator, to be
                               addressed in the compliance plan: see RG 132.119–RG 132.145.

                               We will also look for registered scheme or CCIV level compliance risks to
                               be addressed in the compliance plan. These are the different types of
                               compliance risks that exist for different types of registered schemes or retail
                               CCIVs, largely driven by the nature, diversity and structure of assets that
                               are investments of the registered scheme or CCIV: see RG 132.146–
                               RG 132.179.

                               For registered schemes or sub-funds that are also registered as Australian
                               passport funds, there are specific compliance risks that we will look to be
                               addressed in the compliance plan: see RG 132.180–RG 132.184.




Content of compliance plan
              RG 132.82      A compliance plan is one part of an investment fund operator’s overall
                             compliance management system.

              RG 132.83      The level of detail in a compliance plan may vary depending on the nature,
                             scale and complexity of the investment fund and its operator. However, at a
                             minimum, when we look at compliance plans we look for adequate detail
                             about:
                             (a)   the scope of the compliance plan;
                             (b)   the application and context of the compliance plan in relation to the
                                   nature, scale and complexity of the investment fund operator and
                                   investment fund—we will look for this to include a description of the
                                   investment fund operator and its operations and the investment fund,
                                   and the investment strategy of the registered scheme;
                             (c)   the specific compliance obligations that apply to the investment fund
                                   operator and the investment fund;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 30
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (d)   the identified compliance risks—including compliance risks applying to
                                   the investment fund operator at the group level, as well as those that
                                   apply because of the particular type of registered scheme;

                                   Note: Where the registered scheme is, or a CCIV includes a sub-fund that is, an
                                   Australian passport fund, additional compliance obligations and compliance risks may
                                   exist that should also be addressed.

                             (e)   compliance controls that are in place to satisfy the compliance
                                   obligations and address the compliance risks, including:
                                   (i)     who is responsible for performing each compliance control;
                                   (ii)    how frequently each compliance control must be performed;
                                   (iii)   how compliance with each compliance control is monitored;
                                   (iv)    who carries out that monitoring;
                                   (v)     who is responsible for reporting on whether or not each compliance
                                           control has been followed; and
                                   (vi)    when and how reporting takes place;
                             (f)   when the compliance plan will be reviewed and how it will remain fit
                                   for purpose; and
                             (g)   how the investment fund operator will ensure that necessary changes
                                   are identified and that the compliance plan is updated.



Establishing adequate compliance controls in the compliance
plan
              RG 132.84      As part of the overall compliance management system, the compliance plan
                             must set out adequate measures that the investment fund operator will apply
                             to ensure compliance with the Corporations Act and constitution: see
                             s601HA and 1226A. When we consider whether the measures in the
                             compliance plan are adequate, we will take into account the purpose behind
                             a compliance plan and the needs of its users.

              RG 132.85      When we look at compliance plans, we look at whether:
                             (a)   the compliance controls in the compliance plan are aligned with the
                                   investment fund operator’s values, objectives and strategy, taking into
                                   account the nature, scale and complexity of the particular investment
                                   fund;
                             (b)   the compliance controls reflect the actual procedures, processes and
                                   practices of the investment fund operator and the investment fund;
                             (c)   there is a clear and demonstrated nexus between the compliance
                                   obligations and the compliance controls;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                     Page 31
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (d)   the compliance controls are set out with enough certainty to allow the
                                   investment fund operator, ASIC and the auditor of the compliance plan to
                                   assess whether the investment fund operator has complied with the
                                   compliance plan;
                             (e)   the compliance plan is written in a clear manner so that it is usable by
                                   its target audience;
                             (f)   the compliance plan provides for identified functional roles responsible
                                   for carrying out a particular compliance control and the monitoring of
                                   that compliance control;
                             (g)   the frequency and quantity of compliance controls, and their
                                   monitoring, are sufficient to effectively manage the compliance risks;
                             (h)   compliance with the compliance controls is monitored, the processes for
                                   monitoring performance of the compliance controls are described with
                                   sufficient detail and certainty to assess whether they will be or have
                                   been complied with, and any non-compliance is reported to the
                                   compliance committee, the board or ASIC (as required); and
                             (i)   the compliance plan is maintained so that the compliance controls, and
                                   the performance of those compliance controls, are adequate in light of
                                   any changes to the investment fund, the investment fund operator or the
                                   environment in which they both operate.


                             Alignment with the investment fund operator’s values,
                             objectives and strategy

              RG 132.86      We look at whether the compliance plan aligns with the investment fund
                             operator’s identified values, objectives and strategy. In our view, including a
                             statement of the investment fund operator’s overarching compliance
                             principles and commitment to compliance may help it comply with its
                             compliance obligations.


                             Reflecting the actual procedures, processes and practices

              RG 132.87      We look at whether the compliance controls are implemented in the actual
                             procedures, processes and practices of the investment fund operator and the
                             investment fund. The fund operator should ensure that compliance is more
                             than a ‘box ticking’ exercise across the organisation. We will look at
                             whether the investment fund operator ensures that staff understand their
                             compliance obligations and compliance controls. We will also look at
                             whether the investment fund operator ensures that staff have adequate
                             training, are sufficiently resourced to perform and monitor their compliance
                             roles, and are encouraged to report non-compliance and weaknesses in
                             compliance.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 32
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Nexus to the compliance obligation

              RG 132.88      We look at whether there is a clear and demonstrated nexus between the
                             compliance obligations, the compliance risks and the compliance controls so
                             that the compliance plan can meet the investment fund operator’s
                             compliance objectives.

                             Incorporating parts of other compliance plans

              RG 132.89      A compliance plan can incorporate parts of a previously lodged compliance
                             plan as that previous plan is amended from time to time: see s601HB and
                             1226B and ASIC Corporations (Chapter 5C—Miscellaneous Provisions)
                             Instrument 2017/125. For a retail CCIV, a compliance plan of another CCIV
                             may only be incorporated by reference if the retail CCIV and the other CCIV
                             have the same corporate director: s1226B.

              RG 132.90      However, the compliance controls in a compliance plan should be prepared
                             specifically by reference to the type of investment fund. We consider that the
                             compliance controls in a compliance plan that is a standard or model plan
                             (e.g. an ‘off-the-shelf plan’) or primarily based on an off-the-shelf plan are
                             less likely to adequately target the risks of the specific investment fund.

              RG 132.91      Where a compliance plan incorporates parts of another plan, we will look at
                             whether the compliance controls that make up that part of the incorporated
                             plan are appropriate compliance controls for the investment fund. Because
                             group compliance risks apply across all investment funds the investment
                             fund operator operates, we consider group compliance controls are generally
                             appropriate to be incorporated into all compliance plans for those funds.
                             Given the fundamental differences between a managed investment scheme
                             and a CCIV, a retail CCIV cannot incorporate by reference the compliance
                             plan of a registered scheme or vice versa.

              RG 132.92      We will look for registered scheme or CCIV level compliance controls to
                             only be incorporated where they are appropriate to the investment strategy
                             and the nature, scale and complexity of the particular scheme or CCIV. For
                             example, incorporating parts of a compliance plan that address compliance
                             risks associated with the investment strategy of a mortgage fund into an
                             agribusiness fund plan will not be appropriate to address the specific risks of
                             the second fund.


                             Certainty of compliance controls and monitoring processes

              RG 132.93      We look at whether a compliance plan describes compliance controls and the
                             processes for monitoring them with enough detail and certainty for the
                             investment fund operator, auditor and ASIC to assess, at the point of
                             assessment or a later time, whether or not the plan will be or has been
                             complied with.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 33
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.94      This does not necessarily mean that a compliance plan should detail each
                             and every step, check, detailed procedure or action. However, when we look
                             at a compliance plan, we will look for compliance controls, and processes to
                             monitor them, to be specific and measurable to identify an output or
                             outcome. They should be described in a way that represents more than mere
                             platitudes or broad ambitions of compliance. This means that compliance
                             with the compliance plan can be assessed by us and audited against these
                             measurable standards.

              RG 132.95      Timeframes should also be set out with enough certainty for the investment
                             fund operator, auditor and ASIC to understand how frequently a compliance
                             control, or monitoring of compliance with it, will be carried out. In our view,
                             this means that an auditor or ASIC should be able to ascertain when
                             something will be done on face value, and without needing further details.

              RG 132.96      Example 1–Example 3 set out situations where we consider the compliance
                             control or processes for monitoring them have not been set out with enough
                             certainty or detail, and our suggestions for how they could be improved.

                               Example 1: Using vague words

                               A compliance plan contains a compliance control that says: ‘Each Product
                               Disclosure Statement is subjected to an appropriate due diligence
                               procedure before release.’

                               We do not consider that this compliance control has enough certainty or
                               detail. Vague terms such as ‘appropriate’, ‘adequate’ or ‘sufficient’ mean
                               that compliance with the plan cannot be audited against measurable
                               standards. We consider that better compliance plans use meaningful words
                               to describe what is actually done as the compliance control and to monitor
                               compliance with it.

                               This example could be improved by including meaningful words describing
                               how and when the due diligence process is to be carried out and recorded.


                               Example 2: Non-specific timeframes

                               A compliance plan contains a compliance control that says: ‘Regular
                               reports on all medium-risk and high-risk breaches are provided to the
                               board.’

                               We do not consider that this compliance control has enough certainty or
                               detail. This example uses non-specific words, which means it is difficult to
                               measure whether the compliance control is being performed. We consider
                               that better compliance plans describe the timeframes attached to a
                               compliance control and monitoring activities with enough certainty in
                               terminology to enable an assessment of whether it has occurred within that
                               specified timeframe.

                               The compliance control could use a specific timeframe, such as ‘monthly’
                               or ‘no less than quarterly’, for it to be more specific and measurable. We




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 34
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                               recognise that some compliance controls are driven by an event on an ad-
                               hoc basis. In our view, the language for these compliance controls will be
                               specific and measurable where the trigger for the compliance control is
                               clear and certain.


                               Example 3: Unclear responsibility for performing a control

                               A compliance plan contains a compliance control that says: ‘The conflicts of
                               interest policy is reviewed on an annual basis.’

                               We do not consider that this compliance control has enough certainty or
                               detail. We consider that better compliance plans allow a user to easily find
                               out who performs a compliance control, when or how often that compliance
                               control must be performed, who monitors compliance with the compliance
                               control, when or how often that monitoring must be performed, and what
                               records are required to be kept.

                               While this example has a specific timeframe for performing the control, it
                               could be improved by including details of who is responsible for performing,
                               and monitoring performance of, the control.


                             Clear and easy to understand

              RG 132.97      We look at whether a compliance plan is written so that it is clear and easy
                             to understand for the end users of the document. Users could include
                             compliance and operational staff, internal audit and review, any compliance
                             committee, senior management, directors, the compliance plan auditor, and
                             ASIC. Each of these end users may have similar or different requirements
                             and needs that should be considered when preparing a compliance plan.

              RG 132.98      A compliance plan may be easier to understand if it:
                             (a)   uses plain English and avoids legal or industry jargon. This will assist staff,
                                   particularly those who do not have a legal or compliance background, to
                                   understand their responsibilities and what is expected of them;
                             (b)   adopts a simple structure, including a contents list and clear headings;
                             (c)   includes an overview about the compliance plan, its scope and aims,
                                   and how it forms part of the investment fund operator’s compliance
                                   management system and risk management framework. This could also
                                   include a flowchart of the compliance reporting structure to provide a
                                   clear picture of the compliance process and allow staff to quickly
                                   identify where they fit into the overall framework;
                             (d)   includes a section explaining ‘how to use’ the compliance plan; and
                             (e)   presents details of compliance controls in a table format, including
                                   details of the function, the compliance obligation it is intended to
                                   address, the risks of non-compliance, the relevant policies and the
                                   compliance measures and controls. It could also be useful to group
                                   together tables covering compliance procedures that are overseen by the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                             Page 35
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                                   same officer, to allow staff to quickly locate information on all areas of
                                   compliance they are responsible for.

              RG 132.99      Regardless of how the compliance plan is presented, we expect the content
                             to reflect the actual procedures, processes and practices of the investment
                             fund operator and the investment fund. We will look at whether those who
                             are monitoring the compliance plan ensure that the content is actually carried
                             out in practice, and that any breaches in implementation of the plan are
                             reported to any compliance committee, the board or ASIC as required.

                                   Note: We will not assess this as part of considering the compliance plan when we
                                   register an investment fund. However, if we undertake a surveillance, we may test
                                   whether the compliance plan does reflect the actual procedures, processes and practice
                                   of the investment fund operator and the investment fund.


                             Roles and responsibilities for carrying out and monitoring
                             compliance controls

              RG 132.100     Along with certainty in how the compliance control is described, we also
                             look at whether the compliance plan clearly identifies the person responsible
                             for a compliance control or monitoring process so that there is enough
                             accountability for actions under the compliance plan.

              RG 132.101     We consider that stating in a compliance plan who (or what position) is
                             responsible for certain compliance controls or monitoring processes creates a
                             sense of ownership of these compliance controls and processes. This also
                             makes it easier to monitor the compliance plan. It may be helpful for
                             responsibilities to be described in a compliance plan in terms of position title
                             or description, rather than the name of a specific individual, so that the plan
                             does not need to be updated when organisational changes occur.

              RG 132.102     Where a compliance control is automated, it is important that this is set out
                             in the compliance plan.

              RG 132.103     We will look at whether responsibility for monitoring compliance with a
                             compliance control is allocated to one or more persons who have adequate
                             time and experience to carry out the monitoring task. There may be
                             situations where the person performing a monitoring role becomes too
                             stretched to adequately perform that role; for example, if the person is
                             required to monitor compliance with too many compliance controls or has
                             other significant obligations. We will look at whether the person responsible
                             for monitoring compliance has enough authority within the organisation to
                             call on additional resources if a significant issue emerges.

              RG 132.104     Where an external service provider has frontline responsibility for
                             monitoring a compliance control, we will look at whether the compliance
                             plan provides for the investment fund operator to have a process for
                             monitoring and responding to any reports by the external service provider.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                      Page 36
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             However, the investment fund operator remains ultimately responsible for
                             ensuring that the compliance control is performed properly and that
                             performance is adequately monitored.

              RG 132.105     It is important that the interests, duties or obligations of the person who
                             monitors compliance with a compliance control do not conflict with that role.

              RG 132.106     When we look at a compliance plan, we will generally look for separate
                             people to be allocated responsibility for carrying out compliance controls
                             and the monitoring of the same compliance controls. Having the same
                             person carry out a compliance control and monitor their performance of it
                             would compromise the effectiveness of the compliance plan in addressing
                             compliance obligations and compliance risks.


                             Frequency and quantity of compliance controls and
                             monitoring

              RG 132.107     We will look at whether the frequency with which compliance controls are
                             performed is appropriate to the nature of the compliance control, the
                             compliance risk and the compliance objectives of the investment fund
                             operator. The compliance plan is unlikely to be effective if the frequency of
                             the compliance control compromises the compliance objective being met or
                             is insufficient to prevent, detect or correct non-compliance.

              RG 132.108     Similarly, the frequency of the processes for monitoring performance of a
                             compliance control should be appropriate to the compliance control.

              RG 132.109     We would generally expect that there is more than one compliance control in
                             place to address a compliance risk. We consider this will create a robust
                             compliance plan that is better able to withstand non-compliance with an
                             individual compliance control.


                             Monitoring

              RG 132.110     We will look at whether the compliance plan provides for a process of
                             monitoring performance of compliance controls that allows the investment
                             fund operator to gather information for the purposes of evaluating the
                             effectiveness of the compliance plan and performance against its compliance
                             objectives. Because of this, when we look at a compliance plan we will look
                             for it to include appropriate procedures to monitor performance of the
                             compliance controls, including to:
                             (a)   evaluate the effectiveness of compliance controls;
                             (b)   ensure that the allocation of roles is appropriate for meeting compliance
                                   obligations;
                             (c)   ensure the compliance obligations are accurate and up to date;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 37
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (d)   ensure that previously identified compliance failures are addressed
                                   effectively;
                             (e)   identify and address instances where compliance controls were not
                                   complied with or there were ‘near misses’;
                             (f)   note attitudes and behaviours in relation to compliance and the
                                   perceived competence of employees when dealing with issues that arise;
                             (g)   assess performance against the compliance controls; and
                             (h)   keep records of the compliance controls, results of testing and
                                   remediation undertaken.

              RG 132.111     The types of processes an investment fund operator may use to monitor
                             performance of compliance controls will vary depending on the nature, scale
                             and complexity of the investment fund and the investment fund operator. We
                             understand some commonly used processes include sample testing, reports
                             (including exception reports), reviewing activity records, internal review,
                             interview or discussion, direct observation, surveys, and training.


                             Maintained up to date

              RG 132.112     We will look at whether the compliance plan is maintained so that the
                             compliance controls, and the performance of those controls, are adequate in
                             light of any changes to the investment fund, the investment fund operator or
                             the environment in which they both operate.

              RG 132.113     We will look for the compliance risks to be reassessed periodically and
                             whenever there are:
                             (a)   new or changed activities, products or services;
                             (b)   changes to the structure or strategy of the investment fund operator or
                                   establishment of new sub-funds with a different investment strategy;
                             (c)   significant external changes, such as financial–economic circumstances,
                                   market conditions, liabilities and client relationships;
                             (d)   changes to compliance obligations; or
                             (e)   examples of material or repeated non-compliance.

              RG 132.114     We consider that a compliance plan should state how and when the plan will
                             be reviewed so that it continues to have adequate controls to ensure
                             compliance with the Corporations Act and the constitution.

              RG 132.115     When we look at a compliance plan, we will look for it to set out that the
                             investment fund operator will review the adequacy of the plan at least
                             annually and after any significant event that it is aware would impact the
                             plan. As part of this review, the investment fund operator should consider
                             the reasons for any breaches and how any compliance issues raised will
                             affect the compliance plan.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 38
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.116     Where the investment fund operator modifies the compliance plan, or repeals
                             it and replaces with a new compliance plan, the investment fund operator
                             must lodge a copy of the modification or new compliance plan with ASIC
                             within 14 days: see s601HE and 1226D.

              RG 132.117     ASIC has the power to direct the investment fund operator to modify the
                             compliance plan or to lodge a consolidated copy of the compliance plan: see
                             s601HD, 601HF, 1226D and 1226E. We will generally only exercise this
                             power if the investment fund operator has failed to make appropriate
                             changes to its compliance plan or implement appropriate procedures to
                             respond to issues identified during registration or following breach reports,
                             adverse audits or adverse surveillance findings.

              RG 132.118     Ensuring that a compliance plan remains adequate is an ongoing obligation.
                             We expect that, where a compliance plan incorporates parts of another
                             compliance plan, the investment fund operator will regularly review whether
                             the incorporated provisions of the other compliance plan remain adequate for
                             the investment fund for which they have been incorporated.



Group compliance risks and controls
              RG 132.119     We recognise that some compliance risks exist irrespective of the nature and
                             characteristics of the investment fund. They can apply across all of the
                             investment funds the investment fund operator operates. We refer to these
                             types of risks as ‘group compliance risks’.

              RG 132.120     Group compliance risks generally arise from issues related to:
                             (a)   requirements that apply because the investment fund operator is an AFS
                                   licensee, including financial resource requirements, conflicts of interest,
                                   complaints handling, breach reporting and competency requirements;
                                   and
                             (b)   management of staff, finances and other processes at the group level,
                                   such as directors or the compliance committee, if the same committee
                                   members and processes are used across different registered schemes,
                                   training, recruitment and experience, cyber resilience, accounts and
                                   record keeping, or disclosure and reporting.

              RG 132.121     Where group compliance risks exist, we consider that compliance controls
                             can apply across the investment funds operated by the investment fund
                             operator. It is not necessary for these compliance controls to be tailored and
                             individualised to each specific registered scheme or sub-fund operated by the
                             investment fund operator. However, the compliance controls must be
                             appropriate for the operator and investment fund, rather than generic.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 39
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.122     We do not intend to provide a checklist of compliance controls for
                             investment fund operators. However, this section provides some illustrative
                             guidance to help investment fund operators prepare and establish their
                             compliance plans.


                             Management and oversight

              RG 132.123     In establishing compliance controls that address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of management and oversight failures, the
                             investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that directors or the compliance committee (as
                                   appropriate) are appropriately skilled and have access to all the
                                   information, reports and resources necessary for them to fulfil their
                                   responsibilities?
                             (b)   If a compliance committee is required, what arrangements (such as for
                                   remuneration, tenure and frequency of meetings) ensure that the
                                   committee functions as required by s601HA(1)(b)?
                             (c)   If a compliance officer is appointed, what arrangements ensure that that
                                   person has adequate authority to escalate matters if necessary? What
                                   arrangements ensure that compliance staff are adequately trained and
                                   independent?
                             (d)   What procedures are in place for monitoring employee conduct?
                             (e)   What role will internal audit have in the compliance process?


                             Training, recruitment and experience

              RG 132.124     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of lack of staff competence, the investment
                             fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that staff, including operational, management
                                   and compliance staff, have appropriate experience and adequate
                                   resources?
                             (b)   What training is performed to ensure that existing and new staff have
                                   the familiarity they need with compliance controls and continue to
                                   remain competent to perform their roles?
                             (c)   What procedures are in place to ensure that only appropriate personnel
                                   hold positions of trust and that key staff are competent to perform their
                                   relevant roles?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 40
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Accounts and record keeping

              RG 132.125     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of a failure to keep appropriate accounts and
                             records, the investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What arrangements ensure that accounting records and other evidence
                                   about the investment fund operator’s operation of the investment fund
                                   will be adequate to allow the operator and ASIC to conduct reviews of
                                   the fund’s activities? What procedures ensure that appropriate
                                   accounting and taxation requirements are adhered to? What procedures
                                   ensure that all statutory deadlines for reporting are adhered to?
                             (b)   For a retail CCIV with multiple sub-funds, what arrangements ensure
                                   that all assets and liabilities of the CCIV are promptly and properly
                                   allocated to the appropriate sub-fund?
                             (c)   What arrangements ensure that IT and accounting systems used by the
                                   investment fund operator are secure and meet the operational
                                   requirements of the investment fund?
                             (d)   For an investment fund operator that undertakes self-custody, what
                                   arrangements ensure that the IT systems used for identifying and
                                   recording fund property are secure and meet ASIC’s standards?
                             (e)   What arrangements ensure that the investment fund operator meets
                                   obligations for the conduct of any omnibus accounts?

                                   Note: For guidance on ASIC relief for omnibus accounts, see Regulatory Guide 133
                                   Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets (RG 133).

                             (f)   Where the investment fund operator undertakes self-custody, are
                                   sufficient procedures in place in the compliance plan for record keeping
                                   and other arrangements relating to the self-custody to ensure robust
                                   verification of compliance with the obligations in relation to self-
                                   custody (including addressing operational risks and any particular risks
                                   from self-custody) by the directors or compliance committee, as well as
                                   independent verification?
                             (g)   What are the investment fund operator’s plans for ensuring its ability to
                                   resume operations if a disaster occurs (e.g. a computer systems failure)?
                             (h)   What are the procedures to ensure that records are maintained for the
                                   statutory period? What procedures ensure that records are kept of all
                                   compliance monitoring?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                   Page 41
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Use of external service providers

              RG 132.126     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of a failure by an external service provider,
                             the investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What due diligence processes does the investment fund operator use for
                                   choosing suitable service providers? What are the procedures to ensure
                                   that the use of third parties will be appropriately evaluated?
                             (b)   What are the procedures to ensure that contracts with external service
                                   providers are appropriate, including service level agreements? What are
                                   the policies and processes for ensuring that agreements are always
                                   formalised and documented?
                             (c)   What procedures ensure that external service providers are meeting the
                                   terms of the contractual arrangements?
                             (d)   What arrangements are in place to ensure that any external custodian
                                   used meets ASIC’s applicable standards and, in the case of a retail
                                   CCIV, any other regulatory requirements under Pt 8B.5 of the
                                   Corporations Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations)?
                             (e)   What procedures will the investment fund operator use to monitor the
                                   activities of external service providers to ensure that the service
                                   provider is complying with the constitution, the Corporations Act and
                                   any other regulatory requirements? How does the investment fund
                                   operator maintain adequate staff and skill sets in-house to effectively
                                   monitor external service providers?
                             (f)   What procedures ensure completeness and timeliness of income and
                                   that expenditure is appropriately authorised and in accordance with the
                                   constitution?
                             (g)   How does the investment fund operator ensure that the service provider
                                   employs an appropriate standard of care when performing the delegated
                                   function?
                             (h)   How does the investment fund operator monitor the activities of the
                                   service provider and evaluate the performance of the delegate in relation
                                   to the delegated function?


                             Related party issues

              RG 132.127     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of failure by related parties, the investment
                             fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What are the arrangements to ensure that information flows between
                                   companies within a group are appropriately protected?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 42
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (b)   What are the arrangements to ensure that the decision to use a related
                                   party service provider is in the best interests of members of the
                                   investment fund?
                             (c)   What are the arrangements to ensure that if the investment fund
                                   operator or a related party underwrites the issue of interests or shares,
                                   any allocation to an investment fund is in the best interests of the
                                   members of the investment fund, particularly in relation to the
                                   allocation of shortfalls?
                             (d)   What are the arrangements to ensure that information obtained about
                                   the investment fund operator’s intentions to trade in specific securities
                                   is not used by employees for their own benefit?
                             (e)   What arrangements ensure that dealings by the investment fund
                                   operator or its employees do not disadvantage the investment fund or
                                   ‘free ride’ on it in any way?
                             (f)   What arrangements ensure that any potential conflicts of interest caused
                                   by the investment fund operator, its associates, or directors owning
                                   interests in the investment fund are appropriately managed?


                             Cyber resilience and business continuity

              RG 132.128     Cyber resilience is the ability to prepare for, respond to and recover from a
                             cyber attack. Resilience is more than just preventing or responding to an
                             attack—it also takes into account the ability to adapt and recover from such
                             an event.

              RG 132.129     Organisations have customarily focused on protection against cyber attacks.
                             However, a resilience-based approach to cyber attacks is vital for
                             organisations to better adapt to change, reduce exposure to risk and learn
                             from incidents when they occur.

              RG 132.130     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of cyber attacks or IT systems issues, the
                             investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures are in place to provide for regular cyber resilience
                                   health checks?
                             (b)   What procedures are in place to monitor current industry and
                                   international guidance and update policies and procedures to reflect any
                                   changes?
                             (c)   What procedures ensure that IT systems are regularly tested?
                             (d)   What procedures are in place for disaster recovery and business
                                   continuity?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 43
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (e)   What arrangements are in place to manage any risks arising from, or
                                   posed to, other entities as a result of technology interdependencies?

                                   Note: For more information on cyber resilience among ASIC’s regulated population,
                                   see Report 429 Cyber resilience: Health check (REP 429) and Report 555 Cyber
                                   resilience of firms in Australia’s financial markets (REP 555).


                             Applications, redemptions and distributions

              RG 132.131     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of incorrect processing of applications,
                             redemptions and distributions, the investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that applications are processed in a timely
                                   manner and are invested in the correct registered scheme or allocated to
                                   the appropriate sub-fund at the correct price? What arrangements
                                   protect application money before it becomes fund property?

                                   Note: See the definition of ‘fund property’ in the key terms section of this guide.

                             (b)   What are the arrangements to ensure that withdrawal prices are set so as
                                   not to disadvantage remaining or outgoing members and that
                                   application and withdrawal prices are calculated appropriately and
                                   accurately?
                             (c)   What procedures ensure that distributions to members are calculated
                                   correctly and made in a timely manner?
                             (d)   What procedures ensure that the investment fund has enough liquidity
                                   to meet redemptions that should occur?


                             Disclosure and reporting

              RG 132.132     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of defective disclosure and reporting, the
                             investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that publicity (including advertising and media
                                   releases) that includes performance information is not misleading?
                             (b)   What procedures ensure that the PDS contains all relevant information
                                   and is not misleading? What due diligence is carried out in preparation
                                   and review of PDSs? In particular, what procedures ensure that
                                   forecasts in a PDS have a reasonable basis and that the disclosure of
                                   fees and expenses is compliant? What are the procedures to ensure that
                                   representations made in the offer document are carried out?
                             (c)   What are the procedures to ensure that the financial statements are true
                                   and fair and, when relevant, appropriate continuous disclosure is made?
                             (d)   What procedures ensure that disclosure and reporting to investment
                                   fund members is not misleading?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                         Page 44
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.133     Where ASIC has established disclosure benchmarks for certain types of
                             investment funds, we will look at whether those compliance plans contain
                             compliance controls to ensure that responsible entities comply with their
                             upfront and ongoing disclosure obligations. For example, we will check
                             whether the compliance plan includes procedures to assess the investment
                             fund’s performance against ‘if not, why not’ benchmarks before issuing a
                             PDS, as well as compliance controls for regularly monitoring the
                             benchmarks and updating the PDS when required.

              RG 132.134     For more information on disclosure benchmarks for certain types of
                             investment funds, see:
                             (a)   Regulatory Guide 45 Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for
                                   retail investors (RG 45);
                             (b)   Regulatory Guide 46 Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure
                                   for retail investors (RG 46);
                             (c)   Regulatory Guide 231 Infrastructure entities: Improving disclosure for
                                   retail investors (RG 231);
                             (d)   Regulatory Guide 232 Agribusiness managed investment schemes:
                                   Improving disclosure for retail investors (RG 232); and
                             (e)   Regulatory Guide 240 Hedge funds: Improving disclosure (RG 240).


                             Distribution channels

              RG 132.135     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of a failure to supervise distributors of an
                             investment fund where applicable, the investment fund operator could
                             consider:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that sales and distribution staff comply with
                                   ‘know your client’ and ‘know your product’ rules?
                             (b)   What due diligence is conducted before the appointment or engagement
                                   of distributors?
                             (c)   What procedures are in place to monitor the activities of distributors for
                                   compliance with the Corporations Act and any distribution agreement?


                             Identifying, recording, rectifying and reporting of breaches

              RG 132.136     Fund operators are subject to breach reporting requirements as both an AFS
                             licensee and as a fund operator: see s912D and 912DAA.

              RG 132.137     As an AFS licensee, a fund operator must give ASIC a written report of all
                             ‘reportable situations’ within 30 days after it first knows that, or is reckless
                             with respect to whether, there are reasonable grounds to believe a reportable
                             situation has arisen: see s912DAA(3). A reportable situation includes any




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 45
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             significant breach (or likely significant breach) of an AFS licensee’s ‘core
                             obligations’ as defined in s912D(3), including:
                             (a)   its duties as an AFS licensee;
                             (b)   its duties as a fund operator, including the duty to comply with the
                                   compliance plan; or
                             (c)   its obligations under the Corporations Act or the consumer protection
                                   provisions of the ASIC Act.

                                   Note: For more information on when a person must report a breach and how ASIC deals
                                   with breach notifications, see Regulatory Guide 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees
                                   and credit licensees (RG 78).

              RG 132.138     Although the requirements under the Corporations Act are to report to ASIC
                             breaches of core obligations that are significant, we expect that more
                             information on breaches will be reported internally to the board of directors
                             and/or the compliance committee. We will look at whether the compliance
                             plan includes procedures for checking that breaches of the plan are reported
                             by the investment fund operator. We expect that this would include, for
                             example, maintaining a breach register.

              RG 132.139     Aggregated breaches should be internally reported, even if they have been
                             rectified during the period. This enables the directors and compliance
                             committee to have a full picture of the level of breaches that are taking place.

              RG 132.140     Internal reports should contain enough information to allow understanding of
                             the significance of the breaches—this may include such information as
                             impact on investors, remediation, whether there is a systemic issue and the
                             source of breaches. This will allow the directors and, if applicable, the
                             compliance committee to have oversight of how the fund operator assesses
                             ‘significance’ for the purposes of reporting to ASIC, and enables a focus on
                             higher risk breaches.

              RG 132.141     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of failing to meet
                             breach reporting obligations, the investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   How are breaches identified and rated, and by whom?
                             (b)   What are the procedures to ensure that all breaches are reported to the
                                   appropriate level of management, any compliance committee and the
                                   directors?
                             (c)   What are the procedures to ensure that all breaches are appropriately
                                   rectified?

                             Breach reporting by the compliance committee

              RG 132.142     The compliance committee of a registered scheme has a responsibility to
                             report to ASIC if it considers that the responsible entity is not taking
                             adequate action to deal with a breach. We will look at whether the




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                   Page 46
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             compliance plan includes compliance controls to ensure that these breaches
                             are reported to ASIC as required.

                             Breach reporting by Australian passport funds

              RG 132.143     In addition to the obligations of an AFS licensee and a fund operator to
                             report breaches to ASIC, an Australian passport fund operator has extra
                             breach reporting obligations under section 12 of the Australian Passport
                             Rules. This includes a requirement to report to ASIC within seven days after
                             becoming aware of a breach of the Australian Passport Rules that might be
                             reasonably regarded as significant. We expect an Australian passport fund
                             operator to have compliance controls that ensure it meets its breach reporting
                             obligations under both the Corporations Act and the Australian Passport
                             Rules.


                             Complaints handling

              RG 132.144     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations about complaints handling, the investment fund
                             operator could consider:
                             (a)   What internal and external dispute resolution procedures are in place?
                                   Do they comply with the standards and requirements made or approved
                                   by ASIC? Do they cover complaints made by retail clients?
                             (b)   What procedures ensure that complaints are accurately recorded?
                             (c)   Who is responsible for taking, recording and responding to complaints?
                                   What procedures are in place for escalating complaints to senior
                                   management and/or the directors where appropriate?
                             (d)   What procedures ensure that any rectification as a result of a complaint
                                   is carried out?

                                   Note: For more information on what AFS licensees and other entities must do to have a
                                   dispute resolution system in place that meets ASIC’s requirements, see Regulatory
                                   Guide 271 Internal dispute resolution (RG 271) and Regulatory Guide 267 Oversight of
                                   the Australian Financial Complaints Authority (RG 267).


                             AFS licence and ASIC instruments

              RG 132.145     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of failing to hold an
                             appropriate AFS licence authorisation and not meeting compliance
                             obligations under AFS licence conditions or ASIC instruments, the
                             investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures are in place to ensure relevant staff are aware of the
                                   investment fund operator’s AFS licence conditions?
                             (b)   What procedures are in place to ensure the investment fund operator
                                   complies with applicable requirements under ASIC instruments,




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                    Page 47
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                                   including in relation to financial resources? What procedures are in
                                   place for monitoring changes to relevant ASIC instruments and
                                   ensuring relevant staff are aware of any changes?
                             (c)   What procedures are in place to ensure that the investment fund
                                   operator has and maintains the correct AFS licence authorisations for its
                                   activities?



Registered scheme and retail CCIV level compliance risks and
controls
              RG 132.146     When we consider whether the compliance plan contains measures that are
                             adequate, we will look at whether the compliance plan identifies compliance
                             controls that are tailored to the nature, scale and complexity of the registered
                             scheme or retail CCIV where applicable, taking into account the assets invested
                             and the fund’s investment strategy.

              RG 132.147     We recognise that, for different types of registered schemes, there will be
                             different areas of focus in the development and implementation of appropriate
                             compliance controls. These differences are largely driven by the nature,
                             diversity and structure of assets invested in by the registered scheme and the
                             investment strategy the responsible entity uses. We refer to these as ‘registered
                             scheme level compliance risks’.

              RG 132.148     For retail CCIVs, the compliance plan is prepared for the CCIV and is
                             required to take into account ‘CCIV level compliance risks’. We do not expect
                             the compliance plan to be individualised for each specific sub-fund operated.
                             However, we consider the implementation of compliance controls must be
                             appropriate for the particular CCIV operated, taking into account differences
                             in its sub-funds. For example, there may be differences in the pricing, fees,
                             liquidity and redemption rights or risks relating to a sub-fund that require
                             tailoring of the compliance controls in the compliance plan for the CCIV.

                                   Note: We encourage a corporate director to review the compliance plan before
                                   registering a new sub-fund to ensure ongoing compliance with s1226A.

              RG 132.149     We expect the compliance plan to address compliance risks relevant to all
                             assets invested in by the registered scheme or retail CCIV.

              RG 132.150     Table 3 and Table 4 identify the key compliance areas that we will typically
                             focus on for different types of registered schemes, depending on the asset
                             kinds and investment strategy of the scheme. When we look at a compliance
                             plan, we will look at whether it addresses the risks of not meeting
                             compliance obligations in these areas. When we focus on these areas, we
                             will take into account the nature of the asset kinds held and how the area is
                             affected by the structure of the scheme.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                      Page 48
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




               RG 132.151     We also encourage corporate directors to consider the compliance areas in
                              Table 3 and Table 4 when preparing the compliance plan for the retail CCIV,
                              and to take into account the asset kinds and investment strategy of the
                              sub-funds.

Table 3:      Areas of focus by asset kind

 Asset kind       Sub-asset kind              Typical areas of ASIC focus

 Cash/cash         Short-term money          Business, liquidity, market, expertise, investment strategy (approval
 equivalent         market fund               and monitoring), valuation, outsourcing, financial, custodial
                   Term deposits             arrangements, jurisdictional

                   Treasury notes            Other areas of focus may be relevant (e.g. foreign exchange,
                   Short-term debt           interest rate)
                    securities
                   Certificates of deposit
                   At-call bank deposits
                   At-call non-bank
                    financial institutions
                    deposits
                   Bank-backed
                    securities
                   Other

 Fixed             Government                Liquidity, credit, market, expertise, investment strategy (approval
 income            Corporate                 and monitoring), valuation, outsourcing, financial, custodial
                                              arrangements, jurisdictional
                   Certificates of deposit
                   Preferred stock           Other areas of focus may be relevant (e.g. foreign exchange,
                                              interest rate)
                   Debentures
                   Other

 Equities          Ethical                   Business, market, investment strategy (approval and monitoring),
                   Franked                   valuation, outsourcing, financial, custodial arrangements,
                                              jurisdictional, foreign exchange, liquidity
                   Value
                   Concentrated
                   Other

 Equities         Indexed                     Tracking error, operational, expertise, valuation, financial,
                                              investment strategy (approval and monitoring), efficacy of
                                              authorised participants and market makers

                                              Risk is dependent on the underlying asset type

 Equities          Small-cap                 Business, market, investment strategy (approval and monitoring),
                   Mid-cap                   valuation, outsourcing, financial, custodial arrangements,
                                              jurisdictional, foreign exchange, liquidity
                   Large-cap
                                              Other areas of focus may be relevant (e.g. expertise in the specific
                                              sector, related party arrangements, leverage)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                  Page 49
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




 Asset kind       Sub-asset kind              Typical areas of ASIC focus

 Equities         Emerging markets            Business, market, expertise, investment strategy (approval and
                                              monitoring), valuation, outsourcing, financial, custodial
                                              arrangements, jurisdictional, foreign exchange, liquidity

 Equities         Property                    Performance, financial, business, liquidity, expertise, valuation,
                                              outsourcing, investment strategy (approval and monitoring),
                                              leverage, related party arrangements

 Alternatives     Property                    Performance, financial, business, liquidity, expertise, valuation,
                   Residential property      outsourcing, investment strategy (approval and monitoring),
                                              leverage, related party arrangements
                   Commercial property
                   Industrial property
                   Retail property
                   Rural property

 Alternatives     Mortgages                   Credit, market, liquidity, expertise, valuation, withdrawal, investment
                                              strategy (approval and monitoring), security

 Alternatives     Land ownership              Performance, financial, business, liquidity, expertise, valuation,
                                              outsourcing, investment strategy (approval and monitoring),
                                              leverage, related party arrangements

 Alternatives     Agriculture                 Production, environmental (weather, fire, floods), gestation,
                   Forestry                  financial, liquidity, expertise, ownership structure, valuation, related
                                              party arrangements, medical
                   Horticulture
                   Viticulture
                   Aquaculture
                   Livestock

 Alternatives     Horse breeding              Production, environmental (weather, fire, floods), gestation,
                                              financial, liquidity, expertise, ownership structure, valuation, related
                                              party arrangements, medical

 Alternatives     Horse racing syndicate      Production, environmental (weather, fire, floods), financial, liquidity,
                                              expertise, ownership structure, valuation, related party
                                              arrangements, medical

 Alternatives     Serviced strata             Operational, financial, market, liquidity, expertise, contractual,
                                              valuation, occupancy

 Alternatives     Timeshare                   Contractual, legal, market, liquidity, expertise, sales practices,
                                              disclosure, financial

 Alternatives     Film                        (High) performance, business, market, expertise, consumer tastes,
                                              contractual, intellectual property rights

 Alternatives     Private equity              (High) performance, leverage, capital loss, expertise, valuation,
                                              liquidity, investment strategy (approval and monitoring), financial,
                                              custodial arrangements, jurisdictional




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                       Page 50
                                                   REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




 Asset kind        Sub-asset kind                Typical areas of ASIC focus

 Alternatives      Hedge funds                   (High) performance, leverage, capital loss, expertise, valuation,
                                                 liquidity, investment strategy (approval and monitoring), financial,
                                                 custodial arrangements, jurisdictional

 Alternatives      Managed futures               Trading, collateralisation, leverage, risks of the underlying asset,
                                                 expertise, investment strategy (approval and monitoring),
                                                 outsourcing, financial, custodial arrangements, jurisdictional

 Alternatives      Commodities                   Trading, collateralisation, leverage, risks of the underlying asset,
                                                 expertise, investment strategy (approval and monitoring),
                                                 outsourcing, financial, custodial arrangements, jurisdictional

 Alternatives      Derivatives (contracts)       Trading, collateralisation, leverage, risks of the underlying asset,
                                                 expertise, investment strategy (approval and monitoring),
                                                 outsourcing, financial, custodial arrangements, jurisdictional

 Alternatives      Infrastructure                Maturity, operational, legal, contractual, sovereign, liquidity,
                                                 expertise, valuation, outsourcing, leverage, usage, financial

                                                 Additional for environmental infrastructure—production,
                                                 environmental, gestation

 Alternatives      Finance                       Trading, collateralisation, leverage, risks of the underlying asset,
                                                 expertise, investment strategy (approval and monitoring),
                                                 outsourcing, financial, custodial arrangements, jurisdictional

 Alternatives      Other                         Dependent on asset kinds and investment strategy

Note: We have generally aligned the equity sub-asset kinds with those provided by APIR Systems Limited (APIR). APIR
provides the industry standard identification regime in Australia for collective investment schemes, including managed funds,
superannuation products and separately managed accounts.


Table 4:      Areas of focus by investment strategy

 Investment strategy                             Typical areas of ASIC focus

 Foreign exchange                                Trading, foreign exchange rate, macroeconomic, expertise,
                                                 investment strategy (approval and monitoring), valuation,
                                                 outsourcing, financial, custodial arrangements

 Sectoral focus                                  Dependent on sectoral investment strategy
  Consumer discretionary                           Note: We have generally aligned these sectors with those in the Global
                                                    Industry Classification Standard System (GICS), developed jointly by
  Consumer staples                                 Standard and Poor’s and Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI).
  Communication services                           GICS is used by the MSCI indexes, which include domestic and
                                                    international stocks, as well as by a large portion of the professional
  Energy
                                                    investment management community. We consider this to be an
  Financials                                       appropriate, widely recognised framework aimed at standardising industry
  Health care                                      definitions.

  Industrials
  Information technology
  Materials
  Mixed
  Real estate
  Utilities




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                            Page 51
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




 Investment strategy                          Typical areas of ASIC focus

 Fractional investment property platform      Market and economic risk, limited history, leverage, reliability of the
                                              platform technology, liquidity

 IDPS-like scheme                             Structure, risks of the underlying assets, operational, investment
                                              strategy (approval and monitoring), expertise, financial

 Marketplace lending                          Credit risk, market and economic risk, limited history, leverage,
                                              reliability of the platform technology, liquidity

 Other                                        Dependent on asset kinds and investment strategy


              RG 132.152     We recognise there may be situations where the types of registered scheme
                             or CCIV level compliance risks are similar across some or all of the
                             investment funds operated by an investment fund operator. If so, there may
                             be some benefits for the investment fund operator in having compliance
                             controls, and processes to monitor performance of compliance controls, that
                             are standardised across these investment funds.

              RG 132.153     In considering whether the compliance risks are sufficiently similar to
                             warrant the same compliance controls, we will pay particular attention to:
                             (a)   the nature, scale and complexity of each registered scheme or CCIV;
                             (b)   the similarity of the compliance obligations; and
                             (c)   the compliance objectives of the compliance controls, and whether they
                                   will be met to the same level for each registered scheme.

              RG 132.154     We do not intend to provide a checklist of compliance controls for different
                             types of registered scheme or CCIV level compliance risks. However, this
                             section provides some illustrative guidance to assist investment fund
                             operators prepare and establish their compliance plans.

                             Investment strategy

              RG 132.155     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of failings involving the investment strategy
                             of the registered scheme or sub-fund of the retail CCIV, the investment fund
                             operator could consider:
                             (a)   What are the investment strategy, investment mandate and investment
                                   restrictions of the registered scheme or sub-fund? How will the
                                   investment fund operator ensure compliance with the investment
                                   strategy, mandate or restrictions?
                             (b)   What procedures ensure that the PDS is prepared so that it accurately
                                   reflects the investment strategy and that any performance forecasts
                                   included in the PDS have a reasonable basis?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                   Page 52
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (c)   Where the constitution, the PDS or the law restricts the type of assets
                                   the registered scheme or sub-fund may invest in (including any limits
                                   on investment), what procedures are in place to ensure that the
                                   investment fund operator only acquires permitted investments? How is
                                   compliance with the investment fund’s acquisition and disposal policy
                                   to be monitored?
                             (d)   Where the investment strategy depends on the specialised expertise of
                                   the investment fund operator and/or investment manager, what
                                   arrangements are in place to ensure that persons responsible for
                                   investment decisions have the necessary expertise?

                             Technology dependence

              RG 132.156     Where the investment strategy of an investment fund is dependent on a
                             particular technology, in establishing compliance controls to address the risk
                             of not meeting compliance obligations because of that technology the
                             investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that the technology adopted complies with any
                                   legal requirements?
                             (b)   What procedures ensure that the investment fund operator holds any
                                   licences or permissions necessary to use the technology?

                             Agricultural and environmental risks

              RG 132.157     Where the investment strategy of a registered scheme or sub-fund of a retail
                             CCIV may be affected by risks associated with agricultural production or the
                             environment, the investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   Where agricultural business management functions are outsourced,
                                   what procedures ensure that the investment fund operator monitors the
                                   performance of the outsourced service provider?
                             (b)   What procedures ensure that production and cash flow forecasts in the
                                   PDS have a reasonable basis? What procedures are in place for
                                   monitoring production and cash flow to ensure that the forecasts remain
                                   reasonable and are updated as necessary?
                             (c)   What procedures are in place to ensure that agricultural activities are
                                   carried out in accordance with legal requirements and permits? What
                                   procedures ensure that land used by the investment fund is properly
                                   identified and disclosed in the PDS, is not affected by any
                                   encumbrances that will adversely affect the investment fund, and will
                                   not be subject to any consents or approvals that the investment fund
                                   operator cannot satisfy by the date of commencement of the investment
                                   fund?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 53
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Fees and costs

              RG 132.158     In establishing compliance controls to address risks associated with fees and
                             costs, the investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What are the procedures to ensure that only authorised fees and costs
                                   are charged to the registered scheme or sub-fund, and that fees are
                                   calculated in accordance with the constitution and deducted correctly?
                             (b)   How does the investment fund operator ensure that reasonable steps are
                                   taken to estimate amounts required to be included in fee and cost
                                   disclosures in PDSs and periodic statements?
                             (c)   What are the procedures in place to ensure that fees and costs are
                                   disclosed in compliance with the Corporations Act?
                             (d)   What are the procedures in place to ensure that any management or
                                   transaction costs charged by the investment fund operator are not
                                   inflated by bundling them with fees for other services provided?


                             Custodial arrangements

              RG 132.159     In establishing compliance controls to address risks associated with custodial
                             arrangements (including the risk of not meeting compliance obligations for
                             the segregation and safeguarding of fund property), the investment fund
                             operator could consider:
                             (a)   What arrangements ensure that assets are identified appropriately?
                             (b)   What arrangements ensure that assets are separated, as required under
                                   the Corporations Act, from those of the investment fund operator and
                                   other investment funds and any other sub-funds of a retail CCIV?
                             (c)   What arrangements are in place to ensure that any person holding assets
                                   or property of the registered scheme or retail CCIV meets the relevant
                                   regulatory requirements?

                                   Note: For information on the AFS licence obligations that apply to responsible entities,
                                   licensed providers of custodial services, MDA providers and IDPS operators in relation
                                   to holding assets and minimum standards for asset holders, see RG 133. A corporate
                                   director may also wish to consider the guidance in RG 133.

                             (d)   What procedures ensure that the investment fund operator has
                                   appropriate insurance in place for identifiable risks relevant to the
                                   nature of the assets)?

              RG 132.160     All assets of a CCIV must be allocated to a sub-fund: see s1234. The assets
                             of a sub-fund must be held separately from assets of other sub-funds of the
                             CCIV: see s1234J. A corporate director of a CCIV must set up and maintain
                             a register of assets and liabilities of the CCIV’s sub-funds: see s1233C. We
                             will look for the compliance plan of a retail CCIV to include compliance




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                       Page 54
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             controls that ensure the corporate director complies with these obligations,
                             including to identify, monitor and keep records of:
                             (a)   details of any unallocated assets or liabilities of the CCIV; and
                             (b)   for each allocated asset and liability of the CCIV, the sub-fund to which
                                   the asset or liability has been allocated.

              RG 132.161     There will be different risks to members arising out of the different ways that
                             the registered scheme or sub-fund assets are held, including whether the
                             investment fund operator has engaged a custodian to hold some or all of the
                             assets.

              RG 132.162     The appropriate compliance controls will also depend on the nature and
                             amount of assets held. For example, more sophisticated compliance controls,
                             processes and procedures may be required for a custody business that
                             provides services for a full range of financial products, compared to an AFS
                             licensee that holds only a limited range and value of assets.

                             Compliance controls where the responsible entity undertakes self-
                             custody or the retail CCIV holds the assets

              RG 132.163     Where the responsible entity holds the assets (i.e. undertakes self-custody) or
                             the retail CCIV holds the assets, we expect that in preparing its compliance
                             plan the investment fund operator will address risks to members that might
                             arise from non-compliance related to not engaging an external person to hold
                             the assets

              RG 132.164     We expect the compliance plan to include details about:
                             (a)   the procedures to ensure independent verification of the robustness of
                                   the custodial arrangements in relation to material compliance risks,
                                   particularly any risks that apply more specifically to the holding of the
                                   assets; and
                             (b)   the procedures to ensure that the investment fund operator’s risk
                                   management arrangements adequately address operational risks arising
                                   in relation to holding of the assets.

              RG 132.165     In the case of a registered scheme, we expect the compliance plan of the
                             registered scheme to include consideration of issues such as:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that all record keeping for client assets is
                                   carried out in a timely and accurate manner and that records are kept as
                                   required by RG 133 and the relevant regulatory requirements?
                             (b)   What procedures ensure that the minimum standards for asset holders
                                   under RG 133 and the relevant regulatory requirements are met?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 55
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (c)   What procedures ensure that the responsible entity is complying with its
                                   asset-holding obligations?

                                   Note 1: For information on minimum standards and related requirements for asset
                                   holders—including organisational structure, staffing capabilities, capacity and
                                   resources, holding assets on trust, keeping compliance records, and making compliance
                                   inquiries—see Section B of RG 133 and Pt 8B.5 of the Corporations Regulations.

                                   Note 2: Where the assets of a CCIV are held by the CCIV, the corporate director may
                                   wish to consider the guidance in RG 133 and RG 132.165.

              RG 132.166     Where the responsible entity holds assets and it may not be practicable to
                             identify publicly that they are held on trust, we expect the compliance plan
                             would generally include specific compliance controls to ensure the
                             responsible entity complies with its obligations to members for those assets.
                             The plan might, for example, include special authorisation procedures.

                             Compliance controls for the investment fund operator where it engages
                             a custodian

              RG 132.167     If the investment fund operator engages another person as a custodian, we
                             expect it to ensure that clients are protected from the possible compliance
                             risks arising from this arrangement.

              RG 132.168     We will look at whether the compliance plan sets out the compliance
                             controls that the investment fund operator will use to minimise these risks.

              RG 132.169     For registered schemes, this would include consideration of issues such as:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that there is a reasonable documented process
                                   for selecting an appropriate custodian or sub-custodian, and that any
                                   custodian engaged meets the minimum standards for asset holders under
                                   RG 133?
                             (b)   What procedures are in place to monitor the activities of the custodian
                                   and deal with any deficiencies that arise?
                             (c)   What procedures ensure that there is a legally enforceable agreement
                                   with the custodian and that the agreement addresses the issues in
                                   RG 133?

                                   Note 1: For information on requirements when engaging another custodian—including
                                   selecting an custodian, monitoring ongoing compliance, and requirements for the
                                   content of custody agreements—see Section C of RG 133.

                                   Note 2: Where the assets of CCIV are held by a person other than CCIV, the corporate
                                   director may wish to consider the guidance in RG 133 and RG 132.169.

              RG 132.170     For retail CCIVs, the corporate director should consider what compliance
                             controls are required to ensure that the custodian complies with the
                             minimum standards in reg 8B.5.10(2) of the Corporations Regulations.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                     Page 56
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.171     Where the investment fund operator has engaged a custodian that is a related
                             body corporate or other associate, we expect that the compliance plan would
                             include the same types of compliance controls that the investment fund
                             operator would use if the custodian were not related or associated.


                             Valuation

              RG 132.172     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of a valuation failure, the investment fund
                             operator could consider:
                             (a)   What are the procedures to ensure that the systems used to determine unit
                                   price are functioning consistently with the PDS and the constitution, that
                                   the PDS is consistent with the constitution, and that supporting systems
                                   (e.g. the system for processing interest or share buying and selling
                                   activities) are adequately operated? What procedures are in place to
                                   correct pricing errors?
                             (b)   How does the investment fund operator ensure that the assets and
                                   property of the investment fund are valued at regular intervals appropriate
                                   to their nature? How does the investment fund operator ensure that the
                                   assets and property of the investment fund are valued in a manner
                                   appropriate to the nature of the property?
                             (c)   What procedures ensure that income earned by assets is collected and
                                   recorded in a way that is timely, accurate and complete?
                             (d)   What arrangements ensure that the investment fund operator becomes
                                   aware of changes in security values or positions due to corporate actions
                                   on a timely basis so that changes in valuations, income accruals and
                                   positions can be evaluated?
                             (e)   What procedures ensure that the valuer has appropriate qualifications
                                   and experience? Is the valuer a member of an appropriate professional
                                   body and the valuation conducted in accordance with the standards of
                                   that body?
                             (f)   What arrangements ensure that external valuations are prepared on the
                                   basis of appropriate and reasonable instructions for the purpose of
                                   determining the market value of an asset?
                             (g)   What arrangements ensure that an external valuer is independent from
                                   the investment fund operator and free of any conflict of interest?
                             (h)   What arrangements ensure that valuers rotate at regular intervals?
                             (i)   What procedures are in place for the frequency and practice of external
                                   valuation, taking into account the nature of the asset, the market
                                   circumstances and the timetable for issue and redemption of interests or
                                   shares?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 57
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Pricing of interests and shares

              RG 132.173     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting compliance
                             obligations because of a pricing failure, the investment fund operator could
                             consider:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that prices of interests and shares are calculated
                                   in accordance with the constitution and the Corporations Act? What
                                   procedures ensure that exceptional movements in prices of interests and
                                   shares are noted and investigated? What procedures ensure that errors in
                                   pricing are identified and dealt with?
                             (b)   What procedures ensure that all income due to the registered scheme or
                                   sub-fund is collected and calculated correctly?


                             Securities trading

              RG 132.174     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because a trade in securities is not in the best
                             interests of members, the investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What are the procedures to ensure that trades executed on behalf of the
                                   investment fund are performed on a timely basis (in real terms and in
                                   relation to other client accounts of the operator), and at the best price
                                   available?
                             (b)   What are the procedures to ensure that trades on behalf of the registered
                                   scheme or sub-fund receive fair allocations when block trades are
                                   made? How does the investment fund operator ensure that allocations
                                   are completed without bias toward or against any particular client or
                                   fund on the basis of predetermined algorithms or decisions?
                             (c)   What procedures ensure that the investment fund operator’s levels of
                                   securities trading on behalf of the fund are appropriate and that assets
                                   are not wasted on brokerage?
                             (d)   What arrangements are in place to ensure that the investment fund
                                   operator does not make use of information acquired through being the
                                   investment fund operator to gain an improper advantage (such as
                                   receiving the benefit of research used for other clients at the cost of
                                   higher brokerage) or cause detriment to members?
                             (e)   What procedures ensure that the investment fund operator does not
                                   create a false or misleading appearance of active trading in securities, or
                                   a false or misleading appearance in the market for, or the price of,
                                   securities?
                             (f)   What procedures ensure that the investment fund operator does not buy
                                   or sell securities that do not involve any change in beneficial ownership
                                   of shares or by any fictitious transaction maintain, increase, reduce or
                                   cause fluctuations in the market price of any securities?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 58
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Securities lending by the investment fund operator

              RG 132.175     An investment fund operator may decide to lend the assets of the registered
                             scheme or a retail CCIV under a securities lending program using a
                             custodian. A securities lending program could expose members to additional
                             risk, including the credit risk associated with borrowers and the operational
                             risks associated with the program. The investment fund operator should
                             ensure that members are not exposed to unnecessary risks and are
                             appropriately compensated for any additional risks.

              RG 132.176     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because a securities lending arrangement is not in the
                             best interests of members, the investment fund operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that participation in securities lending is in the
                                   best interests of members? This could include setting the parameters of
                                   the securities lending program, including relevant provisions in a
                                   custody agreement, to ensure that members are not exposed to unnecessary
                                   risks and are appropriately compensated for any additional risks.
                             (b)   How will the investment fund operator document:
                                   (i)    the reasons why it would be in the best interests of members to
                                          lend the assets; and
                                   (ii)   how any conflicts of interest arising from the securities lending
                                          program will be managed?


                             Leverage

              RG 132.177     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations because of the use of leverage, the investment fund
                             operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that appropriate disclosure is made to investors
                                   about the risks associated with leverage?
                             (b)   Where the registered scheme or sub-fund borrows for investment, what
                                   procedures are in place to ensure that borrowings are within defined
                                   limits as set out in the constitution?
                             (c)   What procedures are in place to ensure that the registered scheme or
                                   sub-fund will not lose assets provided as collateral as a borrower under
                                   any securities lending arrangements?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 59
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Credit

              RG 132.178     In establishing compliance controls to address the risk of not meeting
                             compliance obligations associated with providing credit, the investment fund
                             operator could consider:
                             (a)   What procedures are in place to ensure that credit assessment
                                   procedures are followed?
                             (b)   What procedures are in place to ensure loans are only made in
                                   accordance with lending policies? What arrangements ensure mortgage
                                   investment securities are fully enforceable at all times and loan
                                   covenants are complied with?
                             (c)   What procedures are in place to monitor loan repayments and ensure all
                                   income due to the registered scheme or retail CCIV is received? Are
                                   there consistent and fair procedures in place in the event of default in
                                   payment by a borrower?


                             Other business risks

              RG 132.179     The guidance in this guide is not intended to be an exhaustive list of all
                             compliance risks that might be faced by every registered scheme or retail
                             CCIV. As part of the structured and systematic assessment of its compliance
                             obligations and the risks of not meeting those obligations, the investment
                             fund operator should establish compliance controls to address any additional
                             compliance risks.



Additional compliance risks and controls for Australian passport
funds
              RG 132.180     Under the Australian Passport Rules, the Australian passport fund operator
                             of an Australian passport fund is required to have a compliance framework
                             that ensures ongoing compliance with relevant laws and regulations: see
                             section 8(2)(d) of the Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 132.181     We consider an Australian passport fund will satisfy this requirement
                             through complying with the relevant Corporations Act requirements and this
                             guide (e.g. by having a compliance plan, compliance plan audit, and, if
                             required, a compliance committee).

              RG 132.182     Where the Australian Passport Rules impose obligations beyond those
                             required of investment funds under the Corporations Act, we expect the
                             compliance plan for an Australian passport fund to address those additional
                             requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 60
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.183     We note that the particular requirements for Australian passport funds in the
                             Australian Passport Rules mean that there will be some areas where we
                             apply greater scrutiny to Australian passport funds. We will closely
                             scrutinise the compliance controls in these areas before registering a
                             registered scheme or sub-fund as an Australian passport fund. These include:
                             (a)   the ‘eligible entity’ requirements in section 3 of Annex 2 to the
                                   Memorandum of Cooperation;
                             (b)   requirements for delegation and the appointment of external service
                                   providers in sections 11, 13 and 15 of the Australian Passport Rules;
                             (c)   breach reporting obligations in section 12 of the Australian Passport
                                   Rules;
                             (d)   requirements for the independent oversight entity in section 14 of the
                                   Australian Passport Rules;
                             (e)   permitted assets and portfolio allocation limits and exposures in
                                   Divisions 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4 of the Australian Passport Rules;
                             (f)   other restrictions in Division 6.5 of the Australian Passport Rules,
                                   including prohibition on the provision of loans, guarantees and
                                   underwriting, borrowing restrictions, prohibition of short selling,
                                   restrictions on the liability of members, and performance fee
                                   restrictions;
                             (g)   withdrawal and valuation requirements in Part 7 of the Australian
                                   Passport Rules.

              RG 132.184     In establishing compliance controls to address specific risks of compliance
                             with the Australian Passport Rules, the Australian passport fund operator
                             should consider all of its compliance obligations under the Australian
                             Passport Rules and identify whether any compliance obligations require
                             specific compliance controls that are not part of its other controls. We
                             consider the types of questions the operator might need to consider include:
                             (a)   What procedures ensure that the operator appoints persons with the
                                   necessary qualifications to certain positions (e.g. résumé checking and
                                   due diligence)?
                             (b)   Where the operator has delegated some of its functions, what
                                   arrangements are in place to:
                                   (i)    ensure that ASIC is at all times able to access information on the
                                          delegated functions from the operator, directly from a delegate or
                                          from any person who was a delegate for a reasonable time after
                                          they have ceased to be a delegate;
                                   (ii)   ensure that the performance of the function by the delegate and any
                                          sub-delegate can be effectively monitored and reviewed to ensure
                                          compliance with the Australian Passport Rules as if done by the
                                          operator; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 61
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                                   (iii)   ensure that investment management delegates are qualified where
                                           required under the Australian Passport Rules, including (where
                                           applicable) meeting the requirements that the delegate is regulated
                                           in a participating economy under the Asia Region Funds Passport,
                                           or an equivalent jurisdiction approved by ASIC where required,
                                           and that officers or employees of the delegate have enough training
                                           and experience?
                             (c)   What procedures are in place to ensure that the operator only acquires
                                   assets of a type permitted under the Australian Passport Rules?
                             (d)   What procedures ensure that there is no acquisition of assets by the
                                   Australian passport fund or entering into derivatives or securities
                                   lending agreements that cause the Australian passport fund to exceed
                                   any limits or restrictions on portfolio allocation as prescribed under the
                                   Australian Passport Rules?
                             (e)   Where the Australian passport fund has exceeded a limit, what
                                   procedures are in place to bring the fund back within the limit as soon as
                                   practicable?
                             (f)   What procedures ensure that the basis for calculating any performance
                                   fee is aligned to the Australian passport fund’s investment strategy, and
                                   set out in disclosure to members?
                             (g)   What arrangements, including monitoring, ensure that any performance
                                   fee does not create a misalignment of incentives between the operator,
                                   staff of the operator and the members of the Australian passport fund,
                                   including by encouraging excessive risk or non-compliance with the
                                   investment strategy?
                             (h)   What procedures does the operator have in place to ensure that the
                                   independent oversight entity has access to accurate and timely
                                   information to allow it to carry out any required verification before
                                   payment of a performance fee?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                             Page 62
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




D          Oversight

                               Key points

                               In addition to the directors of a responsible entity or a corporate director of
                               a retail CCIV—who are ultimately responsible for ensuring that the
                               investment fund operator complies with its obligations—oversight and
                               assurance of the operator’s compliance is primarily through:
                               • for registered schemes—the compliance committee (where less than
                                 half the directors of the responsible entity are external directors). The
                                 compliance committee assesses whether the compliance plan is
                                 adequate, monitors the responsible entity’s compliance with the
                                 compliance plan, reports breaches to the responsible entity and, if the
                                 responsible entity does not take action to adequately deal with a
                                 reported breach, reports the matter to ASIC (see RG 132.185–
                                 RG 132.197); and
                               • for registered schemes and retail CCIVs—the compliance plan auditor,
                                 who conducts an annual audit to assess whether the investment fund
                                 operator has complied with the compliance plan and whether the
                                 compliance plan continues to meet the requirements of the Corporations
                                 Act (see RG 132.198–RG 132.214).

                               Registered schemes and sub-funds that are also registered as Australian
                               passport funds are required to have an independent oversight entity and
                               annual implementation review. The functions of the oversight entity can
                               overlap those of the fund operator’s external directors (or compliance
                               committee), while the functions of the implementation review can overlap
                               those of the compliance plan audit: see RG 132.215–RG 132.228.




Compliance committee
              RG 132.185     The responsible entity of a registered scheme must establish a compliance
                             committee if less than half of its directors are external directors: see s601JA.
                             The compliance committee must have at least three members, the majority of
                             whom must be ‘external members’: see s601JB.

                                   Note: At least half of the directors of the corporate director of a CCIV must be external
                                   directors—see s1238H. This means that a CCIV is not required to establish a
                                   compliance committee.

              RG 132.186     Regardless of whether the responsible entity has a compliance committee,
                             the board remains ultimately responsible for ensuring that the responsible
                             entity complies with its obligations. The compliance committee can operate,
                             in part, as an intermediary between the operational compliance unit and
                             board of directors in relation to compliance monitoring, assessment and
                             reporting. However, it is also important that the compliance function has a
                             direct reporting line to the board to ensure that the board is made fully aware



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                        Page 63
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             of any compliance issues, so that the board can effectively carry out its
                             governance responsibilities.

              RG 132.187     If the registered scheme is not required to have a compliance committee, we
                             will look for the external directors to be particularly vigilant and actively
                             engaged with compliance issues.


                             Functions and duties

              RG 132.188     Under s601JC, the compliance committee’s functions are to:
                             (a)   monitor to what extent the responsible entity complies with the
                                   compliance plan and report on its findings to the responsible entity;
                             (b)   report to the responsible entity any breaches of the Corporations Act or
                                   the constitution that the committee becomes aware of or suspects;
                             (c)   report to ASIC if the committee is of the view that the responsible entity
                                   has not taken, or does not propose to take, appropriate action to deal
                                   with a reported breach of the Corporations Act or the constitution; and
                             (d)   assess at regular intervals whether the compliance plan is adequate,
                                   report to the responsible entity on that assessment and make
                                   recommendations to the responsible entity about any changes that it
                                   considers should be made to the compliance plan.


                             Experience, qualifications and competence

              RG 132.189     Given the important role that the compliance committee plays as a
                             gatekeeper in monitoring the responsible entity’s compliance with its
                             obligations, we consider it is important that compliance committee members
                             have enough experience, qualifications and competence to carry out their
                             duties and functions.

              RG 132.190     We consider that a responsible entity aiming for an effective compliance
                             management system should engage compliance committee members who have:
                             (a)   relevant tertiary qualifications (e.g. in law, business, commerce or finance);
                             (b)   current work experience over a number of years in undertaking
                                   compliance activities and investigations; and
                             (c)   an understanding of regulatory requirements and how they apply.

              RG 132.191     We will look for the responsible entity to consider the experience,
                             qualifications and skills that each compliance committee member brings, to
                             ensure that the compliance committee as a whole can adequately perform its
                             role.

              RG 132.192     Where the responsible entity requires minimum standards of experience,
                             qualifications and competence of its compliance committee members, we




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                              Page 64
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             will look for the responsible entity to have procedures in place to conduct
                             checks to confirm that these requirements are met. To ensure compliance
                             committee members retain the necessary knowledge and skills to continue to
                             carry out their duties and functions, they should complete adequate ongoing
                             training and educational programs.

              RG 132.193     The responsible entity should take action when it becomes aware that a
                             compliance committee member is not adequately performing their duties, or
                             where it is not appropriate for that member to continue to sit on the committee.


                             Appointment of committee members

              RG 132.194     The terms of appointment for compliance committee members should set out
                             clear requirements about:
                             (a)   the role and objectives of the compliance committee;
                             (b)   the responsibilities of the committee member;
                             (c)   the term of office of the committee member;
                             (d)   the independence of the committee member;
                             (e)   minimum standards of experience, qualifications and competence the
                                   committee member must meet and maintain; and
                             (f)   the committee member’s ongoing competence, including training and
                                   educational programs.


                             Performance of functions

              RG 132.195     The compliance committee should meet regularly to ensure that it can detect
                             instances of non-compliance early and report it to the responsible entity
                             before it worsens. In keeping with its important gatekeeping role, we
                             consider that the compliance committee should meet at least quarterly. We
                             are concerned that meeting any less frequently would not allow the
                             compliance committee to effectively fulfil its function.

              RG 132.196     The compliance committee may need to meet more frequently in some cases.
                             This will depend on the nature, scale and complexity of the registered
                             scheme, and whether:
                             (a)   non-compliance is detected;
                             (b)   a compliance committee member has concerns; or
                             (c)   there are other important changes to the operation of the registered
                                   scheme or the business environment.

              RG 132.197     The compliance committee should keep records to demonstrate that it is
                             appropriately monitoring compliance with the compliance plan. Appropriate
                             records would include meeting agendas, minutes, reports received by the
                             compliance committee and reports made by the compliance committee to the
                             board.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 65
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




Compliance plan auditor
              RG 132.198     An investment fund operator must ensure that at all times a registered
                             company auditor, an audit firm or an authorised audit company is engaged to
                             audit compliance with the compliance plan: see s601HG and 1226F.

              RG 132.199     The auditor of a compliance plan must give the investment fund operator a
                             report that states the auditor’s opinion on whether:
                             (a)   the investment fund operator has complied with the compliance plan
                                   during the financial year; and
                             (b)   the plan continues to meet the requirements of the Corporations Act.


                             Guidance for compliance plan auditors

                             Assurance standards

              RG 132.200     While the Corporations Act does not provide further standards for the
                             performance of a compliance plan audit, we expect auditors to follow
                             general auditing principles to the extent they are relevant and consistent.

                                   Note: The Auditing and Assurance Standards Board has issued Standard on Assurance
                                   Engagements ASAE 3100 Compliance engagements and Guidance Statement GS 013
                                   Special considerations in the audit of compliance plans of registered managed
                                   investment schemes.


                             Scope of audit

              RG 132.201     Under s601HG and 1226G, the auditor is required to provide an opinion on
                             the investment fund operator’s compliance with the compliance plan, as well
                             as the continued adequacy of the compliance plan. The report is not required
                             to directly address instances where the investment fund operator has failed to
                             comply with the Corporations Act or the constitution. However, determining
                             whether there are systemic or significant issues of non-compliance with the
                             law or the constitution will be essential in assessing whether the compliance
                             controls and monitoring processes contained in the compliance plan are
                             adequate to prevent future non-compliance.

              RG 132.202     While the auditor’s report on the investment fund operator’s compliance
                             with the compliance plan covers the relevant financial year, the compliance
                             plan’s continued adequacy to meet the requirements of the Corporations Act
                             is an ongoing requirement and the auditor’s assessment of adequacy must
                             reflect the auditor’s opinion at the time the auditor provides the report.

              RG 132.203     This does not mean the audit must be continuous during the relevant
                             financial year or that the audit must be continued to cover matters after the
                             end of the financial year. However, any significant breach identified after the
                             end of the financial year and up to the date of the audit report may indicate
                             that the compliance plan did not meet the requirements at the end of the



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                  Page 66
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             financial year, as the compliance controls in the compliance plan during the
                             financial year may not have been adequate to prevent the breach.

              RG 132.204     We consider that if such a breach comes to the attention of the auditor after
                             the year end, the auditor should re-evaluate if they are of the opinion that the
                             compliance plan continued to meet the requirements of the Corporations Act
                             at the end of the financial year.

              RG 132.205     In preparing the audit report, the auditor should not simply assume that the
                             compliance plan was necessarily compliant at any previous time. This includes
                             assuming that the compliance plan met s601HA or 1226A at the time the
                             investment fund was registered.

                             Testing of compliance plans

              RG 132.206     An investment fund operator might operate more than one investment fund.
                             The funds’ compliance plans might:
                             (a)   incorporate parts of one compliance plan into other compliance plans
                                   (although not as between a retail CCIV and a registered scheme), or
                                   have the same provisions in different compliance plans for a number of
                                   investment funds to address compliance risks that are relevant to those
                                   investment funds’ assets and operations, and monitor the controls across
                                   those investment funds in the same process; or
                             (b)   have group compliance controls and processes addressing compliance
                                   risks applicable to the investment fund operator generally, where the
                                   controls may be monitored in the same process.

              RG 132.207     Where this is the case, we consider that s601HG and 1226G still require the
                             auditor to assess whether the compliance plan is adequate for each
                             investment fund and that the investment fund operator has complied with
                             each compliance plan.

              RG 132.208     It may be sufficient in some cases to test compliance with common
                             compliance controls across investment funds, rather than individually for
                             each investment fund. Generally, this is likely to be sufficient for group
                             compliance controls. However, we consider it would not be sufficient to test
                             only some of the investment funds or rely on a sample of the compliance
                             controls where there are differences in the nature, scale and complexity of
                             the investment funds or sub-funds that should affect the design or effective
                             operation of a compliance control.

              RG 132.209     Similarly, if there is an indication that compliance controls may be operating
                             effectively for some investment funds and not others, this would affect the
                             appropriate nature, timing and extent of testing by the auditor.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 67
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Audit report

              RG 132.210     We consider that s601HG and 1226G require that compliance plan audit
                             reports must be prepared on the following bases:
                             (a)   a compliance plan audit must be undertaken in relation to each
                                   investment fund, regardless of similarities in the nature, phase of
                                   operations or registration dates of individual investment funds managed
                                   by the same investment fund operator; and
                             (b)   the auditor’s opinion in relation to each investment fund must be clear.

              RG 132.211     Whether the auditor prepares a consolidated report or individual reports for
                             each investment fund, the audit report must be a complete and comprehensible
                             document in its own right. The audit report must include a statement of
                             opinion on whether s601HG(3)(c)(i) and (ii) or 1226G(1)(c)(i) and (ii) are
                             met. If not, a modified opinion must be provided.

              RG 132.212     Where the auditor issues a modified audit report, we consider that the audit
                             report must include modifications with a sufficiently clear description of all
                             the reasons for why s601HG(3)(c)(i) and (ii) and 1226G(1)(c)(i) and (ii) are
                             not met that allows users to understand the nature of concerns without
                             reference to any other document. For example, a matter should not be
                             described only by reference to a paragraph number in the compliance plan.


                             Resignation or removal of compliance plan auditor

              RG 132.213     An auditor who wishes to resign, or an investment fund operator that wishes
                             to remove an auditor from office, must apply in writing to ASIC for our
                             consent: see s601HH(1) and (2) and 1226J(1) and (3).
                                   Note: For more information on how we apply the provisions of the Corporations Act
                                   relating to the resignation and removal of auditors of investment fund financial reports
                                   and compliance plans, see Regulatory Guide 26 Resignation, removal and replacement
                                   of auditors (RG 26). See also Information Sheet 64 Resignation and removal of auditors
                                   of registered scheme financial report or a compliance plan (INFO 64) for more
                                   information.


                             Auditor’s obligations to report to ASIC

              RG 132.214     The auditor is obliged, as soon as practicable (and in any case within
                             28 days), to notify ASIC in writing if it becomes aware of circumstances that
                             give it reasonable grounds to suspect that there has been a contravention of
                             the Corporations Act that is:
                             (a)   significant; or
                             (b)   not significant, but the auditor believes that the contravention has not been
                                   or will not be adequately dealt with by commenting on it in the auditor’s




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                      Page 68
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                                   report or by bringing it to the attention of the directors (see s601HG and
                                   1226H).
                                   Note: For more information on an auditor’s obligation to report to ASIC, see Regulatory
                                   Guide 34 Auditor’s obligations: Reporting to ASIC (RG 34).




Oversight of Australian passport funds
              RG 132.215     Oversight requirements for Australian passport funds under the Australian
                             Passport Rules are similar to the requirements for investment funds under the
                             Corporations Act. That is, Australian passport funds are subject to:
                             (a)   oversight by an independent oversight entity, whose functions are similar
                                   to those of a compliance committee under the Corporations Act; and
                             (b)   an annual implementation review.

              RG 132.216     The oversight requirements under the Australian Passport Rules do not
                             replace the requirements of the Corporations Act. This means that an
                             Australian passport fund operator must still meet the requirements of the
                             Corporations Act in relation to compliance plans, compliance committees
                             and compliance plan audits. However, we expect that where the obligations
                             overlap, the operator can satisfy both sets of obligations at the same time.
                             For example, an operator can engage an auditor to undertake the compliance
                             plan audit and annual implementation review in the one process.


                             Independent oversight entity

              RG 132.217     Under the Australian Passport Rules, the independent oversight entity for
                             each Australian passport fund is each of the external directors of the
                             Australian passport fund operator or, if there is a compliance committee, the
                             compliance committee: see section 14 of the Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 132.218     This means that we do not expect the Australian passport fund operator to
                             appoint a different person or group of people to act as the independent
                             oversight entity, separate from the compliance committee (if the Australian
                             passport fund is a registered scheme with a compliance committee).

              RG 132.219     The functions and duties of an independent oversight entity are substantially
                             similar to those of a compliance committee. Under the Australian Passport
                             Rules, the independent oversight entity must monitor the Australian passport
                             fund operator for compliance with:
                             (a)   the constitution of the Australian passport fund;
                             (b)   Australian laws administered by ASIC applying to fund operators; and
                             (c)   the Australian Passport Rules governing restrictions on investments,
                                   transactions and portfolio allocations of the Australian passport fund.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                     Page 69
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




              RG 132.220     If the Australian passport fund operator is required to report a breach of the
                             constitution or relevant Australian laws (including the Corporations Act and
                             the Australian Passport Rules) but fails to do so, the independent oversight
                             entity must notify ASIC. In some cases, the operator must also notify each
                             relevant host regulator, as soon as practicable and in any event within seven
                             days, and include particulars of the breach: see section 14 of the Australian
                             Passport Rules.

              RG 132.221     The Australian Passport Rules also impose some specific obligations on the
                             independent oversight entity. This includes the requirement that the entity
                             must specifically certify that it is not aware of any reason to believe the
                             Australian passport fund operator has not complied with the compliance
                             controls relating to performance fees before the operator may be paid a
                             performance fee: see section 47 of the Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 132.222     Similar to the requirements in relation to a compliance committee under the
                             Corporations Act, the Australian passport fund operator must provide any
                             assistance required by the independent oversight entity to perform its
                             functions.


                             Annual implementation review assurance report

              RG 132.223     An Australian passport fund operator must ensure that an implementation
                             review of the operation of the Australian passport fund is conducted in
                             relation to each period for which it prepares, or is required to prepare, a
                             financial statement for the Australian passport fund: see section 15 of the
                             Australian Passport Rules.

              RG 132.224     The implementation review for an Australian passport fund must be conducted
                             by a registered company auditor, an audit firm or an authorised audit company
                             under the Corporations Act. The implementation review must not be
                             conducted by the Australian passport fund operator or its related party.

              RG 132.225     The implementation review must be conducted independently in accordance
                             with standards acceptable to ASIC: see section 15(7) of the Australian
                             Passport Rules. We consider that ASAE 3100 is an appropriate standard for
                             the conduct of an implementation review in accordance with the Australian
                             Passport Rules.

              RG 132.226     The assurance report from the implementation review must state:
                             (a)   whether any matter has come to the attention of the reviewer that causes
                                   them to believe that, or to believe that it is likely that, the Australian
                                   passport fund was not operated in accordance with the Australian
                                   Passport Rules during the review period in all respects that may be
                                   material to the Australian passport fund operator, the independent
                                   oversight entity, ASIC and each host regulator;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 70
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             (b)   particulars of each matter, including details explaining the reasons why
                                   the reviewer has reason to believe that the Australian passport fund was
                                   not operated in accordance with, or was not likely to have been operated
                                   in accordance with, the Australian Passport Rules during the period; and
                             (c)   information on the basis for the statements made in RG 132.226(a) and
                                   RG 132.226(b).

              RG 132.227     The Australian passport fund operator must, within three months after the
                             end of the review period, provide a copy of the implementation review
                             assurance report to:
                             (a)   ASIC;

                                   Note: For more information on a reviewer’s obligation to report to ASIC, see RG 34.

                             (b)   each host regulator for a host economy where the Australian passport
                                   fund had, during the review period, members who became members
                                   following an application made in that economy;
                             (c)   each host regulator for each host economy where interests in the
                                   Australian passport fund were offered; and
                             (d)   the independent oversight entity of the Australian passport fund.

              RG 132.228     As noted at RG 132.216, the requirement for an annual implementation
                             review of an Australian passport fund is in addition to the requirement for a
                             compliance plan audit. The auditor must provide separate opinions in respect
                             of the compliance plan audit and annual implementation review. However,
                             the compliance plan audit and the annual implementation review may be
                             undertaken as part of a single engagement. In forming their opinion, the
                             reviewer will need to take into account information available to them from
                             any compliance plan audit they have conducted.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                     Page 71
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




Key terms


                               Term                            Meaning in this document

                               AFS licence                     An Australian financial services licence under s913B
                                                               of the Corporations Act that authorises a person who
                                                               carries on a financial services business to provide
                                                               financial services
                                                                 Note: This is a definition in s9.

                               AFS licensee                    A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of
                                                               the Corporations Act

                               Annex 3 (for example)           An annex to the Memorandum of Cooperation

                               annual implementation           A review of the operation of a passport fund in
                               review                          accordance with section 15 of the Australian Passport
                                                               Rules

                               Asia Region Funds               An agreement between economies in the Asia region
                               Passport                        that allows passport funds established and regulated
                                                               in one participating economy to offer interests to
                                                               investors in another participating economy

                               ASIC                            Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                        Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                               2001

                               Australian passport fund        A registered scheme or sub-fund of a retail CCIV that
                                                               is also registered as a passport fund under Pt 8A.3 of
                                                               the Corporations Act

                               Australian Passport             The Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018 made under
                               Rules                           s1211 and 1211A of the Corporations Act

                               CCIV                            A corporate collective investment vehicle—a company
                                                               that is registered as a corporate collective investment
                                                               vehicle under the Corporations Act
                                                                 Note: This is a definition in s9.

                               corporate director              The company named in ASIC’s record of the CCIV’s
                                                               registration as the corporate director or temporary
                                                               corporate director of the CCIV
                                                                 Note: This is a definition in s1224(3) of the Corporations
                                                                 Act.

                               Corporations Act                Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for
                                                               the purposes of that Act

                               Corporations                    Corporations Regulations 2001
                               Regulations

                               Div 2 (for example)             A division of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                               numbered 2) or the Corporations Regulations, unless
                                                               otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                           Page 72
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                               Term                            Meaning in this document

                               fund property                   The scheme property of a registered scheme or the
                                                               assets of the sub-funds of a retail CCIV

                               home economy                    The participating economy in which a passport fund is
                                                               first registered, approved or authorised as a regulated
                                                               collective investment scheme

                               host economy                    A participating economy that is not a passport fund’s
                                                               home economy and either:
                                                                permits the fund to offer interests in the fund in that
                                                                 economy under the Asia Region Funds Passport; or
                                                                has accepted an application from the fund to offer
                                                                 interests in the fund in that economy under the Asia
                                                                 Region Funds Passport (but not to register the fund
                                                                 as a passport fund in that economy)

                               host regulator                  The passport regulator in a passport fund’s host
                                                               economy

                               IDPS                            An investor directed portfolio service as defined in
                                                               ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed Portfolio
                                                               Services) Instrument 2023/669 or any instrument that
                                                               amends or replaces that instrument

                               IDPS Guide                      A document provided by an IDPS operator instead of a
                                                               PDS to help retail clients decide whether they should
                                                               use the IDPS

                               IDPS-like scheme                An investor directed portfolio services-like scheme as
                                                               defined in ASIC Corporations (Investor Directed
                                                               Portfolio Services Provided Through a Registered
                                                               Managed Investment Scheme) Instrument 2023/668,
                                                               or any instrument that amends or replaces that
                                                               instrument

                               IDPS operator                   A public company that is a holder of an AFS licence
                                                               that is authorised to operate an IDPS, and that
                                                               provides an IDPS or a function that forms part of the
                                                               IDPS

                               independent oversight           A body established under section 14 of the Australian
                               entity                          Passport Rules. In Australia, an independent oversight
                                                               entity comprises external directors of the passport
                                                               fund operator or the compliance committee

                               investment fund                 A registered scheme or retail CCIV

                               investment fund operator        A responsible entity of a registered scheme or
                                                               corporate director of a retail CCIV

                               managed investment              Has the meaning given in s9 of the Corporations Act
                               scheme                            Note: A notified foreign passport fund is a managed
                                                                 investment scheme for the purpose of the Corporations
                                                                 Act: see s1213E.

                               MDA                             Managed discretionary account




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                       Page 73
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                               Term                            Meaning in this document

                               MDA provider                    A person who holds an AFS licence with
                                                               authorisations to provide MDA services
                                                                 Note: A detailed definition is contained in ASIC Corporations
                                                                 (Managed Discretionary Account Services) Instrument
                                                                 2016/968.

                               MDA service                     Has the meaning given in ASIC Instrument 2016/968

                               member                          A member of a managed investment scheme or a
                                                               CCIV

                               Memorandum of                   The Memorandum of Cooperation on the
                               Cooperation                     Establishment and Implementation of the Asia Region
                                                               Funds Passport, available on the Asia Region Funds
                                                               Passport website

                               participating economy           An economy that is a participant under the
                                                               Memorandum of Cooperation (while it is in effect) and
                                                               has:
                                                                advised the Asia Region Funds Passport Joint
                                                                 Committee that it has implemented the Asia Region
                                                                 Funds Passport; and
                                                                not withdrawn from the Memorandum of
                                                                 Cooperation

                               passport fund                   A regulated collective investment scheme, or sub-fund
                                                               of a regulated collective investment scheme,
                                                               registered as a passport fund in a participating
                                                               economy
                                                                 Note: Some regulated collective investment schemes, or
                                                                 sub-funds of regulated collective investment schemes, that
                                                                 have been deregistered as passport funds remain subject
                                                                 to obligations as if they were still a passport fund.

                               passport fund operator          An entity that operates a passport fund

                               passport regulator              The entity that regulates passport funds in a
                                                               participating economy
                                                                 Note: See also the definition of ‘passport regulator’ in
                                                                 section 55 of the Australian Passport Rules.

                               Passport Rules                  The requirements in Annex 3 to the Memorandum of
                                                               Cooperation, as incorporated into the domestic law of
                                                               a participating economy

                               PDS                             A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that
                                                               must be given to a retail client for the offer or issue of
                                                               a financial product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9
                                                               of the Corporations Act
                                                                 Note: See s9 for the exact definition.

                               Pt 8A.3 (for example)           A part of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                               numbered 8A.3) or the Corporations Regulations,
                                                               unless otherwise specified




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                            Page 74
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                               Term                            Meaning in this document

                               reg 8B.5.10(2) (for             A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                               example)                        example number 8B.5.10(2)), unless otherwise
                                                               specified

                               registered scheme               A managed investment scheme that is registered
                                                               under s601EB of the Corporations Act

                               regulated collective            A regulated collective investment scheme as defined
                               investment scheme               by the Passport Rules for a participating economy

                               responsible entity              A responsible entity of a registered scheme as defined
                                                               in s9 of the Corporations Act

                               retail CCIV                     A CCIV that satisfies the retail CCIV test in s1222K of
                                                               the Corporations Act or is notified as a retail CCIV
                                                               under s1222L of the Corporations Act
                                                                 Note: This is a definition in s1222J.

                               retail client                   A client as defined in s761G and 761GA of the
                                                               Corporations Act and Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the
                                                               Corporations Regulations

                               RG 259 (for example)            An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered
                                                               259)

                               s601HG (for example)            A section of the Corporations Act (in this case
                                                               numbered 601HG), unless otherwise specified

                               sub-fund                        Has the meaning given in s1222Q of the Corporations
                                                               Act
                                                                 Note: A sub-fund is established on the day on which it is
                                                                 registered: see s1222T.

                               wholesale CCIV                  A CCIV that is not a retail CCIV
                                                                 Note: This is a definition in s1222J of the Corporations Act.

                               wholesale scheme                An operator of a managed investment scheme that is
                               operator                        unregistered and not required to be registered
                                                               because of s601ED(2) of the Corporations Act, who
                                                               holds an AFS licence in relation to financial services
                                                               provided in the operation of the scheme

                               wholesale unregistered          A managed investment scheme that is not required to
                               scheme                          be registered under s601ED(2) of the Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                                           Page 75
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




Related information

                             Headnotes

                             Asia Region Funds Passport, Australian passport fund, CCIV, compliance
                             committee, compliance control, compliance management system,
                             compliance plan, compliance plan audit, compliance plan auditor,
                             compliance risk, corporate collective investment vehicle, corporate director,
                             implementation review, independent oversight entity, investment fund,
                             managed investment scheme, operator, oversight, registered scheme


                             Regulatory guides
                             RG 26 Resignation, removal and replacement of auditors
                             RG 34 Auditor’s obligations: Reporting to ASIC
                             RG 45 Mortgage schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors
                             RG 46 Unlisted property schemes: Improving disclosure for retail investors
                             RG 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees and credit licensees
                             RG 104 AFS licensing: Meeting the general obligations
                             RG 105 AFS licensing: Organisational competence
                             RG 131 Funds management: Establishing and registering a fund
                             RG 133 Funds management and custodial services: Holding assets
                             RG 134 Funds management: Constitutions
                             RG 148 Platforms that are managed investment schemes and nominee and
                             custody services
                             RG 166 AFS licensing: Financial requirements

                             RG 179 Managed discretionary accounts
                             RG 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest
                             RG 231 Infrastructure entities: Improving disclosure for retail investors

                             RG 232 Agribusiness managed investment schemes: Improving disclosure
                             for retail investors
                             RG 240 Hedge funds: Improving disclosure
                             RG 259 Risk management systems of responsible entities

                             RG 267 Oversight of the Australian Financial Complaints Authority
                             RG 271 Internal dispute resolution




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 76
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 132: Funds management: Compliance and oversight




                             Information sheets

                             INFO 64 Resignation and removal of auditors of registered scheme financial
                             report or a compliance plan

                             INFO 272 How to register a corporate collective investment vehicle and
                             sub-fund


                             Reports

                             REP 429 Cyber resilience: Health check

                             REP 555 Cyber resilience of firms in Australia’s financial markets


                             Legislative instruments and pro formas

                             ASIC Corporations (Chapter 5C—Miscellaneous Provisions) Instrument
                             2017/125

                             PF 209 Australian financial services licence conditions


                             Legislation

                             Corporations (Passport) Rules 2018, Part 7; Divisions 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5;
                             sections 8(2)(d), 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 47

                             Corporations Act 2001, s601EA, 601ED, 601FC, 601GA, 601GB, 601HA,
                             601HB, 601HD, 601HE, 601HF, 601HG, 601HH, 601JA, 601JB, 601JC,
                             912A, 912D, 912DAA, 1211, 1211A, 1222A, 1223B, 1223G, 1223H,
                             1224D, 1224G, 1226A, 1226B, 1226D, 1226E, 1226F, 1226G, 1226H,
                             1226J, 1233C, 1234, 1234J, 1238H

                             Corporations Regulations 2001, Pt 8B.5; reg 8B.5.10(2)


                             Other documents

                             ASAE 3100 Compliance engagements

                             AS ISO 31000:2018 Risk management—Guidelines

                             AS ISO 37301:2023 Compliance management systems—Requirements with
                             guidance for use

                             GS 013 Special considerations in the audit of compliance plans of registered
                             managed investment schemes

                             Memorandum of Cooperation on the Establishment and Implementation of
                             the Asia Region Funds Passport




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission June 2025                                            Page 77
