REGULATORY GUIDE 107

Fundraising: Facilitating
electronic offers of securities

July 2020




About this guide
This is a guide to facilitate the use of email and the internet to make offers of
securities under Ch 6D of the Corporations Act.

This guide:
    explains how we interpret the fundraising provisions in Ch 6D when
     using electronic disclosure documents and electronic application forms,
     including the distribution of these documents by email and the internet;
    describes the relief we have provided for personalised or Australian
     financial services (AFS) licensee created application forms; and
    sets out our ‘good practice guidance’ for using electronic disclosure
     documents and electronic application forms, including the distribution of
     these documents by email and the internet.
                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                                  About ASIC regulatory documents

                                  In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                  documents.
                                  Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                  is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                  Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                      explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                       legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                      explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                      describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                      giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                       as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                       regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                  Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                  compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                  Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                  research project.



                              Document history
                              This guide was issued in July 2020 and is based on legislation and
                              regulations as at the date of issue.

                              This guide replaces:
                                     Superseded Policy Statement 107, issued September 1996, reissued
                                      February 2000, rebadged as a regulatory guide on 5 July 2007
                                     Superseded Policy Statement 150, issued February 2000, reissued July
                                      2000, rebadged as a regulatory guide on 5 July 2007


                              Disclaimer
                              This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                              own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                              applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                              obligations.

                              Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                              are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                       Page 2
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




Contents
                              A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                     Facilitating the use of email and the internet for offers of securities . 4
                                     Our guidance and relief ..................................................................... 6
                                     ASIC’s role ......................................................................................... 7
                                     How you lodge disclosure documents and submit applications for
                                     relief ................................................................................................... 8
                              B      Offers of securities using email or the internet under Ch 6D ..... 9
                                     Key requirements in Ch 6D................................................................ 9
                                     When is ASIC relief required for offers of securities using email or
                                     the internet? ..................................................................................... 10
                                     Electronic disclosure documents ..................................................... 12
                                     Electronic application forms and electronic acceptances ................ 13
                                     Electronic supplementary and replacement disclosure documents 15
                                     Advertising and social media ........................................................... 16
                                     Securities hawking provisions.......................................................... 18
                                     Jurisdictional issues ......................................................................... 18
                              C      Personalised or AFS licensee created application forms ......... 20
                                     Personalised and AFS licensee created application forms ............. 20
                                     Requirements of the legislative instrument...................................... 22
                              D      Good practice guidance ................................................................ 23
                                     Principles for good practice guidance .............................................. 23
                              Key terms ............................................................................................... 37
                              Related information ............................................................................... 39




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                                                Page 3
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




A          Overview

                               Key points

                               ASIC aims to facilitate and encourage the use of electronic disclosure
                               documents and electronic application forms, including the use of email and
                               the internet, for making offers of securities.

                               In this guide, we:
                               • explain our interpretation of the fundraising provisions in Ch 6D of the
                                 Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act) when using electronic
                                 disclosure documents and electronic application forms, including the
                                 distribution of these documents by email and the internet;
                               • describe the relief we have provided for personalised or Australian
                                 financial services (AFS) licensee created application forms; and
                               • set out our good practice guidance for using electronic disclosure
                                 documents and electronic application forms, including the distribution of
                                 these documents by email and the internet.




Facilitating the use of email and the internet for offers of securities
               RG 107.1       While disclosure documents used for offers of securities have historically
                              been paper-based documents, persons offering securities under Ch 6D of the
                              Corporations Act are increasingly using electronic means and electronic
                              media—primarily email and the internet (e.g. web-based platforms)—to
                              distribute and present disclosure documents to investors. Additionally, it is
                              becoming increasingly common for investors to receive and access important
                              information in their daily life—including news, internet banking and
                              securities trading—using electronic devices such as computers, tablets
                              and smartphones.

                                   Note: In this document, references to sections (s), parts (Pts) and chapters (Chs) are to
                                   the Corporations Act, unless otherwise specified. References to ‘disclosure document’
                                   include any supplementary or replacement disclosure document lodged with ASIC:
                                   see s719(4) and (5) of the Corporations Act.

               RG 107.2       We want to facilitate and encourage the continued and future use of
                              electronic disclosure documents and electronic application forms for offers
                              of securities under Ch 6D, including the use of multimedia or web-based
                              platforms, particularly as we anticipate that this is an area that will grow in
                              popularity and that may experience significant advances in technology.

               RG 107.3       We recognise that there are many advantages of using email and the internet
                              to distribute disclosure documents and application forms, including the ease
                              and convenience of use for investors. Additionally, web-based disclosure




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                          Page 4
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              documents with electronic content can be more interactive and promote
                              understanding for investors.

               RG 107.4       The use of electronic disclosure documents also has advantages for persons
                              offering securities and persons involved in the distribution of disclosure
                              documents by reducing costs (e.g. printing and mailing) and increasing the
                              speed and availability of information.

               RG 107.5       We are aware that some investors may not have access to the internet, or
                              may still prefer to receive important and extensive information, such as
                              disclosure documents, in paper format. Accordingly, we believe it is
                              desirable for paper disclosure documents to remain accessible and be made
                              available to investors on request to ensure that information is freely available
                              to all sections of the community.

               RG 107.6       We have historically provided class order relief to permit the use of
                              electronic disclosure documents in relation to the provisions of the old
                              Corporations Law as it stood before the implementation of the Corporate
                              Law Economic Reform Program Act 1999 (CLERP Act). We continued the
                              relief in Class Order [CO 00/44] Electronic disclosure documents, electronic
                              application forms and dealer personalised applications following CLERP,
                              for the avoidance of doubt, to help ensure the continued use of electronic
                              disclosure documents, even though the CLERP amendments were intended
                              to facilitate the use of electronic disclosure documents. We have now
                              revoked [CO 00/44] because we take the view that relief is not required.

               RG 107.7       We consider that the use of electronic disclosure documents and electronic
                              application forms is permitted under Ch 6D without relief. As explained in
                              the Explanatory Memorandum to the Corporate Law Economic Reform
                              Program Bill 1998 (CLERP Bill), changes to the fundraising provisions by the
                              CLERP Act were made to:
                                   … facilitate the issue of a disclosure document in electronic form as well as
                                   paper documents. The Bill will remove barriers to electronic commerce by
                                   providing a statutory framework for electronic disclosure documents which
                                   is designed to promote investor confidence in the integrity of the electronic
                                   financial services marketplace.

               RG 107.8       The market now routinely uses electronic disclosure documents and
                              electronic application forms for offers of securities under Ch 6D, and is
                              comfortable with the ability to distribute these documents by email and the
                              internet. Consequently, we believe that the market no longer requires
                              comfort relief under [CO 00/44].




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                      Page 5
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




Our guidance and relief
               RG 107.9       To facilitate the use and distribution of electronic disclosure documents and
                              electronic application forms, including the use of email and the internet, to
                              make offers of securities, we have:
                              (a)   explained our interpretation of the fundraising provisions in Ch 6D
                                    applying to electronic disclosure documents and electronic application
                                    forms, including the use of email and the internet to distribute these
                                    documents (see Section B);
                              (b)   provided relief for personalised and AFS licensee created application
                                    forms in ASIC Corporations (Application Form Requirements)
                                    Instrument 2017/241—and explained when ASIC relief may still be
                                    needed (see Sections B and C); and
                              (c)   given ‘good practice guidance‘ (see Table 1 for an overview) on using
                                    electronic disclosure documents and electronic application forms,
                                    including the use of email and the internet to distribute these
                                    documents, to assist persons offering securities (offerors), distributors
                                    and publishers in complying with their legal obligations, and meeting
                                    the objectives underlying the provisions, in Ch 6D (see Section D).

               RG 107.10      This guide focuses primarily on the use of email and the internet to distribute
                              and present electronic disclosure documents and electronic application
                              forms, as we understand that these are currently the most common electronic
                              means and electronic media used for offers of securities.

               RG 107.11      We recognise that there may be other types of multimedia or web-based
                              platforms that emerge in the future to distribute and present electronic
                              disclosure documents and electronic application forms. This guide is
                              principles based and is intended to apply to current and emerging forms of
                              electronic disclosure documents and electronic application forms.

Table 1:     Overview of our good practice guidance

 Principle 1          Electronic disclosure documents should be easy to access, retrieve and read.

 Principle 2          Electronic disclosure documents should be distributed in a way that does not unreasonably
                      expose investors to security risks.

 Principle 3          Offerors and distributors that distribute electronic disclosure documents for an entitlement
                      offer to existing investors of a company should take reasonable steps to ensure that
                      investors receive the electronic disclosure document.

 Principle 4          Offerors, distributors and publishers should take reasonable measures to ensure that
                      electronic disclosure documents received by investors are complete and have not been
                      altered or tampered with.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                      Page 6
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




 Principle 5          Offerors and distributors that distribute electronic disclosure documents and electronic
                      application forms should make available free paper copies of disclosure documents and
                      application forms on request by an investor.

 Principle 6          Offerors and distributors of electronic disclosure documents should make updated
                      disclosure documents available in both paper and electronic format.

 Principle 7          Investors should be able to keep a copy of the electronic disclosure document so that they
                      can access it in the future.

 Principle 8          Offerors, distributors and publishers should retain copies and records of all electronic
                      disclosure documents so that investors are able to prove which version of the disclosure
                      document they relied on.

 Principle 9          Electronic disclosure documents should have the same content, presentation and
                      prominence of information as paper versions.

 Principle 10         Hypertext links to, from or within the electronic disclosure document should not be used to
                      take investors to material not forming part of the electronic disclosure document, other than
                      jurisdictional confirmations or educational material.

 Principle 11         Electronic application forms must be included in, or accompanied by, the electronic
                      disclosure document.

 Principle 12         Electronic application forms should contain appropriate warnings to ensure that investors
                      are informed of the importance of reading the disclosure document before applying for
                      securities.

 Principle 13         Electronic application forms should contain verification processes and should be secure.

 Principle 14         Reasonable measures should be taken to ensure that offers are only made in jurisdictions
                      where the offer complies with the relevant securities laws.

 Principle 15         Promotional material should not be published in a way that may cause it to be confused
                      with all or any part of the electronic disclosure document.




ASIC’s role
                RG 107.12     ASIC administers Offer Notice Board, a database providing information on
                              current and past disclosure documents. We will continue to include details
                              on Offer Notice Board of where disclosure documents may be accessed,
                              including through a website.

                RG 107.13     We will consider applications for relief from offerors where there is some
                              doubt about whether the proposed electronic disclosure document is a copy
                              of the disclosure document lodged with ASIC.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                      Page 7
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




How you lodge disclosure documents and submit applications for
relief
               RG 107.14      Disclosure documents should be lodged through the ASIC Regulatory Portal
                              using the ‘Lodge fundraising disclosure documents or statements’
                              transaction. Fees will apply for lodgement of these documents. We have
                              provided details about payment options in the portal. For more information,
                              see how you lodge fundraising and corporate finance documents.

               RG 107.15      Applications for relief should also be submitted through the ASIC
                              Regulatory Portal. Fees will apply to an application. We have provided
                              details about payment options in the portal. For more information, see how
                              you apply for relief.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                      Page 8
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




B          Offers of securities using email or the internet
           under Ch 6D

                               Key points

                               This section sets out our interpretation of the fundraising provisions under
                               Ch 6D and how they apply to:
                               • making offers of securities using and distributing electronic disclosure
                                 documents, including by email and the internet; and
                               • using and distributing electronic application forms for offers of securities,
                                 including by email, and through online applications and electronic
                                 payment processes.

                               Our relief is not required for using electronic disclosure documents if the
                               electronic version has the same content, presentation and prominence of
                               information as the version lodged with ASIC. This section sets out some of
                               the circumstances in which we may consider granting individual relief to
                               facilitate the broader use of electronic disclosure documents.

                               This section also provides some guidance on issues that might arise from
                               email or internet distribution of these documents.




Key requirements in Ch 6D
               RG 107.16      The fundamental policy of the fundraising provisions in the Corporations
                              Act is to ensure that investors can make informed investment decisions on
                              the basis of a current disclosure document containing or incorporating all
                              material and relevant information about the securities being offered and
                              about the person offering the securities for issue or sale.

               RG 107.17      The key components of the regulatory regime that are relevant in this context
                              are summarised in Table 2.

Table 2:     Key Ch 6D requirements

 Requirement               Description                                                              Section

 Offers of securities      The Corporations Act requires an offer for issue or sale of              s706, 707, 708,
 require a disclosure      securities to be made using a disclosure document, unless the            708AA, 708A, 718
 document                  offer falls into a relevant exception. The disclosure document           and 727
                           must be lodged with ASIC.

 Information required      The Corporations Act requires that investors (and their advisers)        s710, 711, 713
 in a disclosure           are provided with sufficient information to make an informed             and 715
 document                  investment decision.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                      Page 9
                                              REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




 Requirement                   Description                                                             Section

 Application form              The Corporations Act requires that application forms for an offer       s723 and 727
 included in, or               of securities are only distributed if they are included in, or
 accompanied by,               accompanied by, a disclosure document. This establishes a
 disclosure document           mechanism so that the investor receives a current disclosure
                               document (which satisfies the information needs of investors
                               and their advisers) before applying for securities.

 Advertising and               The Corporations Act seeks to ensure that investors are                 s734 and 736
 securities hawking            encouraged to make investment decisions on the basis of a
 restrictions                  disclosure document rather than on the basis of promotional
                               material or pressure selling.

 Updating                      The Corporations Act seeks to ensure that investors receive any         s719 and 724
 requirements                  necessary updates to information before their investment decision
                               is finalised.

 Civil liability               The Corporations Act seeks to ensure that investors have                s729, 737 and
 provisions                    access to appropriate remedies if they invest on the basis of           738
                               defective disclosure.



                   RG 107.18      The requirements in Ch 6D apply to offers of securities made in any form,
                                  whether oral or written, and whether the offer is made on paper, by email or
                                  on the internet. Offering securities for issue includes inviting applications for
                                  the issue of securities, and offering securities for sale includes inviting offers
                                  to purchase the securities.

                   RG 107.19      For a person to make an offer of securities, or distribute an application form
                                  for an offer of securities, they must first lodge a disclosure document for the
                                  offer with ASIC. They should lodge the disclosure document through the
                                  ASIC Regulatory Portal: see RG 107.14.




When is ASIC relief required for offers of securities using email or
the internet?
                   RG 107.20      The underlying purpose of the relevant provisions in Ch 6D is to ensure that
                                  persons considering applying for securities under an offer are given the same
                                  information as is included in the disclosure document lodged with ASIC.

                   RG 107.21      Our view is that electronic disclosure documents can be used and distributed
                                  without the need for ASIC relief, and constitute a ‘copy’ of the lodged
                                  disclosure document, provided that the electronic disclosure document:
                                  (a)   is identical in format and content to the disclosure document lodged
                                        with ASIC; or




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                        Page 10
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              (b)   contains the same information in the same sequence and with the same
                                    prominence, as the lodged disclosure document, with the exception of
                                    modifications that are immaterial and reflect necessary adjustments or
                                    increased functionality when using different electronic media—for
                                    example, modifications to enable the electronic document to be
                                    accessed and displayed in html format or on a web-based platform.

               RG 107.22      Our view in RG 107.21 reflects the legal requirement that, if an offer of
                              securities needs disclosure to investors under Pt 6D.2 of the Corporations
                              Act, a person is prohibited from offering securities or distributing an
                              application form for the offer unless:
                              (a)   a disclosure document for the offer is lodged with ASIC; and
                              (b)   the offer or form is included in the disclosure document or accompanied
                                    by a copy of the disclosure document: see s727.

               RG 107.23      Our view is that electronic disclosure documents can be used and distributed
                              without the need for ASIC relief where the circumstances in RG 107.21 are
                              met.


                              Use of electronic devices

               RG 107.24      To facilitate electronic disclosure documents being accessible and readable
                              on different electronic devices (e.g. computers, smartphones and tablets),
                              we recognise that modifications to the presentation and format of these
                              documents may be required. In our view, relief is not required for necessary
                              modifications to the display information in the electronic disclosure
                              document on the investor’s electronic viewing device or in a print-out.
                              Additionally, relief is not required for the use of aids to assist investors in
                              reading the disclosure document—for example, the ability to enlarge text.
                              This is provided that these modifications do not change the information, its
                              prominence or its sequence.


                              Use of hypertext links

               RG 107.25      Hypertext links and search facilities within an electronic disclosure
                              document can assist readers to navigate through the document easily, and
                              can make information more accessible (including allowing the reader to
                              directly access sections of the document through the table of contents and to
                              access documents incorporated by reference within the electronic disclosure
                              document). We encourage the use of hypertext links and search tools within
                              an electronic disclosure document to assist the reader.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 11
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.26      In our view, the use of hypertext links or the inclusion of search facilities will
                              not, in itself, require our relief, because this would not change the content,
                              presentation or prominence of the information contained in the electronic
                              disclosure document from the disclosure document lodged with ASIC.

                                   Note: Principle 9 of our good practice guidance provides that electronic disclosure
                                   documents should contain the same information, in the same sequence and with the
                                   same prominence, as the disclosure document lodged with ASIC. The discussion in
                                   Principle 9 explains the modifications that can be made to the electronic disclosure
                                   document for it still to be considered a copy of the lodged version. The discussion in
                                   Principle 10 explains how we believe hypertext links should be used to, from or within
                                   an electronic disclosure document.


                              Use of video and audio presentations

               RG 107.27      We also aim to encourage and facilitate the use of non-print based
                              communication (e.g. video or audio presentations) to assist investors in
                              understanding information and making informed investment decisions.
                              However, in our view, information communicated in non-print form may not
                              constitute a copy of the disclosure document lodged with ASIC.

               RG 107.28      Therefore, we encourage offerors seeking to use non-print based
                              communication or multimedia platforms to assist in presenting the
                              information in their electronic disclosure documents to make an application
                              to ASIC for individual relief for our consideration.



Electronic disclosure documents
               RG 107.29      An offeror or distributor needs to ensure that documents are easy to access
                              and are capable of being easily saved and printed by the investor so that the
                              investor can access an electronic version of the document at any time
                              following the offer.

                                   Note: The discussion in Principles 1, 7 and 8 of our good practice guidance explains
                                   what steps we believe offerors, distributors and publishers should take to ensure the
                                   accessibility and retention of electronic disclosure documents.

               RG 107.30      While we want to encourage and facilitate the use of electronic disclosure
                              documents, we also believe that investors should have the opportunity to
                              obtain a free paper copy on request—and to be informed of this right—to
                              ensure that disclosure is freely available to all sections of the community in
                              whatever form they choose.

                                   Note: Principle 5 of our good practice guidance states that, if an electronic disclosure
                                   document is available, free paper copies should also be made available on request.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                         Page 12
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.31      We also recognise that there are certain risks that could arise from the use
                              and distribution of electronic disclosure documents, including that electronic
                              disclosure documents are potentially vulnerable to hacking or unauthorised
                              alteration and tampering of information contained within the document.

               RG 107.32      Offerors, distributors and publishers need to ensure that adequate safeguards
                              and precautions are in place to help reduce the risks of tampering. This will
                              ensure that the electronic disclosure document received by the investor is the
                              same as the disclosure document lodged with ASIC, and has not been
                              tampered with or altered in any way (including the form, order, context
                              and content).

                                    Note: The discussion in Principle 4 of our good practice guidance refers to some of the
                                    safeguards that should be considered to make an electronic disclosure document safe
                                    from unauthorised tampering or amendment (e.g. using a locked PDF file or a tagged
                                    image file format (TIFF), and using adequate firewall protection).




Electronic application forms and electronic acceptances
               RG 107.33      There is no requirement in the Corporations Act for an application form to
                              be lodged with ASIC when lodging a disclosure document.

               RG 107.34      Under the Corporations Act—specifically, s723—securities may only be
                              issued or transferred in response to an application form if the person issuing
                              or transferring the securities has reasonable grounds to believe that:
                              (a)   the application form was included in, or accompanied by, the disclosure
                                    document when the form was distributed by the person issuing or
                                    transferring the securities; or
                              (b)   the application form was copied, or directly derived, by the person
                                    making the application from a form referred to in RG 107.34(a).

               RG 107.35      Distributing and accessing disclosure documents and application forms by
                              electronic means may make complying with these legal requirements more
                              difficult to satisfy than distributing these documents in a paper format.

               RG 107.36      There is a risk arising from the distribution of electronic disclosure
                              documents and electronic application forms that an investor may receive an
                              application form without receiving the disclosure document. Offerors need
                              to take steps to satisfy themselves that they have reasonable grounds to
                              believe that the application form that the investor has received was
                              accompanied by the electronic disclosure document.

                                    Note: The discussion in Principles 10 and 11 of our good practice guidance contains
                                    some measures that we believe offerors, distributors and publishers should consider
                                    when distributing electronic application forms to assist offerors in satisfying this
                                    requirement.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                        Page 13
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.37      Offerors, and distributors on behalf of offerors, are able to accept electronic
                              application forms for offers of securities. If online applications are to be
                              received, adequate safeguards and precautions should be in place (including
                              encryption software, protection of confidential information, and adequate
                              firewall protection) to ensure that information transmitted through email or
                              the internet remains secure and safe from hacking.

                                    Note: The discussion in Principle 13 of our good practice guidance contains some
                                    precautions that we believe offerors and distributors should consider if they are to
                                    receive electronic applications for offers of securities.


                              Electronic payment processes
               RG 107.38      We consider that the use of electronic payment processes (e.g. BPAY) to
                              apply for securities, without investors being required to submit a completed
                              application form to the issuer, may comply with the legal requirements and
                              meet the underlying policy objectives of s723(1).

               RG 107.39      The underlying purpose of s723(1) is to ensure that a person applying for
                              securities has received, and is making an investment decision based on, a
                              current disclosure document. In our view, an issue or transfer of securities
                              that occurs as a result of an electronic payment (e.g. BPAY) without the
                              investor submitting a completed application form may, in certain
                              circumstances, meet the requirement that the securities are issued or
                              transferred ‘in response to an application form’ and that the form has been
                              directly derived from an application form that was included in, or
                              accompanied by, the disclosure document.

               RG 107.40      We believe that an electronic payment process that contains a means of
                              verifying or linking an identifiable investor’s electronic payment to an
                              application form distributed with a specific version of the disclosure
                              document (including any supplementary or replacement disclosure
                              document) is likely to satisfy s723(1).

               RG 107.41      In our view, this verification can be achieved if an investor makes an
                              electronic payment using information that is contained only in an application
                              form that was received together with a disclosure document (where that
                              information is unique to the investor, the offer and to the specific version of
                              the disclosure document), and if the issuer or the issuer’s share registry can
                              only issue or transfer the securities on receipt of that information.

               RG 107.42      An example of an electronic payment process that satisfies the above settings
                              is one that has the following features (which we understand is similar to the
                              current BPAY payment process):
                              (a)   the investor receives a disclosure document together with a personalised
                                    application form which contains information that must be used by the
                                    investor to make an electronic payment, including:




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                          Page 14
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                                    (i)     information that identifies the issuer (issuer identifier) (e.g. a
                                            numerical code such as a biller code); and
                                    (ii)    information that is unique to the investor and to the disclosure
                                            document, which allows the investor and the disclosure document
                                            to be identified (investor identifier) (e.g. a customer reference
                                            number or barcode number);
                                    Note: The information in paragraphs RG 107.42(a)(i) and RG 107.42(a)(ii) can only be
                                    derived from the personalised application form that accompanied, or was included in,
                                    the disclosure document and not from any other source.

                              (b)   when an investor makes an electronic payment, the issuer or the issuer’s
                                    share registry receives notification (e.g. BPAY notification) from the
                                    issuer’s financial institution of the payment amount, payment date, the
                                    issuer identifier and the investor identifier; and
                              (c)   the issuer or the issuer’s share registry uses:
                                    (i)     the payment amount to calculate the number of securities
                                            applied for;
                                    (ii)    the issuer identifier to identify or confirm the offer and the
                                            issuer; and
                                    (iii)   the investor identifier to identify the investor to which the payment
                                            relates.
                                    Note: The issuer should also be able to use the information received (or received by its
                                    share registry) to determine which version of the disclosure document the investor
                                    received with the application form (which contained the information required to make
                                    the payment).

               RG 107.43      We recognise that new electronic payment processes with different features
                              may develop over time. If these do not satisfy the legal requirements, but
                              may satisfy the policy objectives of s723(1), we will consider applications
                              for individual relief.


Electronic supplementary and replacement disclosure documents
               RG 107.44      A disclosure document lodged with ASIC may be updated or replaced by a
                              supplementary or replacement disclosure document. The supplementary or
                              replacement disclosure document must also be lodged with ASIC. They
                              should be lodged through the ASIC Regulatory Portal: see RG 107.14.

               RG 107.45      Following lodgement of a supplementary or replacement disclosure
                              document, any new offers to an investor must be made in, or be
                              accompanied by:
                              (a)   the original disclosure document together with the supplementary
                                    disclosure document; or
                              (b)   the replacement disclosure document.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                         Page 15
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.46      In addition, offerors or persons involved in the distribution of an offer should
                              consider providing the supplementary or replacement document to investors
                              who have already received the original disclosure document if this will assist
                              investors in making an investment decision.

               RG 107.47      Sometimes a supplementary or replacement disclosure document is lodged
                              because the original disclosure document makes a misleading statement,
                              omits information or does not refer to a new circumstance. If any of these are
                              ‘materially adverse’ from the point of view of an investor, and the issuer
                              does not opt to repay the application money, the Corporations Act requires
                              the supplementary or replacement disclosure document to be provided to all
                              applicants: see s724(2).

               RG 107.48      Consistent with the original disclosure document, electronic distribution of
                              the supplementary or replacement disclosure documents is permissible under
                              Ch 6D. If the original disclosure document was available in electronic
                              format, any supplementary or replacement disclosure document should also
                              be made available in electronic format.

                                   Note: The discussion in Principle 6 of our good practice guidance explains what steps
                                   we think should be taken by offerors and distributors when distributing supplementary
                                   and replacement disclosure documents.

               RG 107.49      The use of electronic disclosure documents and electronic application forms
                              may create potential difficulties for offerors and distributors in knowing
                              which version of the disclosure document was accessed in relation to an
                              application (i.e. whether it was based on the original disclosure document or
                              any updated disclosure document). In our view, such difficulties can be
                              overcome if offerors and distributors retain copies and records of all
                              electronic disclosure documents distributed to investors.

                                   Note: The discussion in Principle 8 of our good practice guidance explains what steps
                                   we think offerors, distributors and publishers should take to ensure that adequate copies
                                   and records of electronic disclosure documents are retained.

               RG 107.50      To comply with s723(1) of the Corporations Act, offerors need to take steps
                              to help determine which version of the disclosure document a particular
                              application form accompanied if new offers are made after the lodgement of
                              a supplementary or replacement disclosure document.



Advertising and social media
               RG 107.51      The Corporations Act provides advertising restrictions in relation to an offer
                              of securities. These restrictions are to ensure that investors make a decision
                              about the offer of securities on the basis of the disclosure document and not
                              promotional material.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                        Page 16
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.52      Where a disclosure document has been lodged with ASIC, any advertisement
                              or publication in relation to an offer must include statements explaining:
                              (a)   who the issuer is and what the securities are;
                              (b)   that a disclosure document for the offer is available and how this may
                                    be obtained;
                              (c)   that offers will be made in, or will be accompanied by, a copy of the
                                    disclosure document;
                              (d)   that persons should consider the disclosure document in deciding
                                    whether to acquire the securities; and
                              (e)   that persons wanting to acquire the securities will have to complete an
                                    application form that will be contained in, or will accompany, the
                                    disclosure document.

                                    Note: Restrictions in relation to pre-offer advertising and advertising after the
                                    lodgement of a disclosure document with ASIC are contained in s734(5) and (6),
                                    respectively: see Regulatory Guide 254 Offering securities under a disclosure document
                                    (RG 254).

               RG 107.53      In the paper environment, the disclosure document is usually a single
                              bound document, which is readily distinguishable from any accompanying
                              advertising material. The electronic environment potentially creates more
                              ambiguity for investors to determine whether the information they are reading
                              is promotional material or part of the electronic disclosure document.

               RG 107.54      We think that the advertising provisions should be considered by offerors,
                              distributors and publishers during an offer period in relation to information
                              contained on their own websites, social media platforms and blogs, and that
                              care should be taken to ensure that the provisions of the Corporations Act
                              have not been contravened in relation to such information contained on
                              these platforms.

               RG 107.55      Advertising restrictions apply to all persons and, as such, third parties
                              discussing an offer of securities on a website, social media page or blog
                              should ensure that they do not inadvertently contravene advertising
                              restrictions for offers requiring a disclosure document.

                                    Note: The discussion in Principle 15 of our good practice guidance refers to safeguards
                                    that should be taken in relation to promotional material about an offer that is published
                                    in electronic format, including promotional material distributed by email or published
                                    on the internet. Regulatory Guide 234 Advertising financial products and services
                                    (including credit): Good practice guidance (RG 234) provides further guidance for
                                    promoters of financial products and publishers of advertising for these products.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                         Page 17
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




Securities hawking provisions
               RG 107.56      The securities hawking provisions in the Corporations Act stipulate that a
                              person must not offer securities for issue or sale in the course of, or because of,
                              an unsolicited meeting with another person or telephone call to another person.

               RG 107.57      The hawking prohibitions do not apply to unsolicited communications such
                              as emails, letters, facsimiles, brochures, and media advertisements (press,
                              radio or television), or making a disclosure document generally available on
                              a website. However, when using these communication methods, the offeror
                              or distributor still needs to ensure that they comply with any other relevant
                              laws, including the consumer protection provisions.

               RG 107.58      Regardless of whether an offeror or distributor is subject to the hawking
                              prohibitions for a particular transaction, the offeror or distributor needs to
                              ensure that it complies with the prohibitions on:
                              (a)   unconscionable conduct (s12CA–12CC of the Australian Securities and
                                    Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act)) and s991A of the
                                    Corporations Act);
                              (b)   misleading or deceptive conduct (s12DA–12DB of the ASIC Act and
                                    s1041E–1041H of the Corporations Act); and
                              (c)   harassment or coercion (s12DJ of the ASIC Act).


Jurisdictional issues

                              Offers of foreign securities

               RG 107.59      Offers received in Australia, irrespective of where the securities are
                              transferred or issued, are subject to the fundraising provisions of the
                              Corporations Act. Therefore, offers transmitted electronically, including by
                              email, into Australia from outside Australia must comply with Ch 6D.
                              Similarly, an offer placed on an internet site generated by a server situated
                              outside Australia will be subject to the fundraising provisions if it is capable
                              of being received in Australia.

               RG 107.60      We have given guidance in Regulatory Guide 141 Offers of securities on the
                              internet (RG 141), which explains our policy of not intending to regulate
                              offers, invitations and advertisements of securities that are accessible in
                              Australia on the internet if:
                              (a)   the offer, invitation or advertisement is not targeted at persons in
                                    Australia;
                              (b)   the offer or invitation contains a meaningful jurisdictional disclaimer;
                              (c)   the offer, invitation or advertisement has little or no impact on
                                    Australian investors; and
                              (d)   there is no misconduct.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 18
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              Offers accessible overseas

               RG 107.61      An electronic disclosure document on an internet site may be accessible
                              throughout the world. As a result, the person issuing the disclosure document
                              may be subject to foreign laws, as well as Australian law.

               RG 107.62      One way of reducing the risk of contravening foreign securities laws may be
                              to insert into an electronic disclosure document a jurisdictional clause stating
                              to whom it is intended that the offer will be available.

                                   Note: The discussion in Principle 14 of our good practice guidance explains what steps
                                   we think offerors and distributors should take to ensure that offers are only made in
                                   certain jurisdictions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                      Page 19
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




C          Personalised or AFS licensee created
           application forms

                               Key points

                               This section discusses our class order relief for the use and distribution of
                               personalised or AFS licensee created application forms.

                               We have given this relief in ASIC Corporations (Application Form
                               Requirements) Instrument 2017/241.


               RG 107.63      Under s723(1), securities may only be issued or transferred in response to an
                              application form and if the person issuing or transferring them has
                              reasonable grounds to believe that:
                              (a)   the application form was included in, or accompanied by, the disclosure
                                    document when the form was distributed by the person; or
                              (b)   the application form was copied, or directly derived, by the person
                                    making the application from a form referred to in RG 107.63(a).

               RG 107.64      We have continued to grant class order relief to facilitate the distribution of
                              personalised and AFS licensee created application forms, and to remove any
                              doubt about whether the requirements of s723 are met when such application
                              forms are used. Our relief applies to application forms in both paper and
                              electronic formats.

               RG 107.65      We have granted class order relief because using personalised or AFS
                              licensee created application forms can:
                              (a)   promote efficiency and may therefore lead to costs savings which could
                                    flow through to investors and industry;
                              (b)   assist in reducing the number of errors made in completing and
                                    processing multiple handwritten forms;
                              (c)   assist in reducing the time currently taken to complete and process
                                    handwritten forms; and
                              (d)   facilitate electronic acceptances.



Personalised and AFS licensee created application forms
               RG 107.66      Offerors and AFS licensees occasionally personalise application forms they
                              distribute to investors to assist investors with completing these forms. AFS
                              licensees may also create and distribute their own application forms for
                              offers of securities. A form created by an AFS licensee may differ from the
                              application form distributed by the offeror to issue or transfer the securities.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 20
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.67      Relief is not needed to personalise an application form if the personalised
                              application form has been distributed by the offeror and is included in, or
                              accompanied by, the disclosure document. We consider that this is the case
                              whether or not a blank application form was included in the disclosure
                              document lodged with ASIC (as there is no requirement in the Corporations
                              Act for an application form to be lodged with ASIC).

               RG 107.68      If an AFS licensee creates an application form, or personalises an
                              application form that has been distributed by the offeror, the offeror may
                              not have reasonable grounds to believe that the conditions in s723(1) are
                              satisfied, because:

                              (a)   the personalised application form or AFS licensee-created application
                                    form is not the form that was distributed by the offeror;

                              (b)   the personalised application form is not a form that has been copied, or
                                    directly derived, by the person making the application from a form
                                    distributed by the offeror, unless the person making the application has
                                    authorised the AFS licensee to copy or derive the application form from
                                    the application form distributed by the offeror; and

                              (c)   the application form created by the AFS licensee has not been copied,
                                    or directly derived, by the investor from an application form included in
                                    or accompanied by the disclosure document distributed by the offeror.

               RG 107.69      ASIC Corporations (Application Form Requirements) Instrument 2017/241
                              provides relief so that an offeror may issue or transfer securities in response
                              to an application form that has been:

                              (a)   personalised by an AFS licensee for an investor—our relief overcomes
                                    any concerns about the personalised application form not being one that
                                    has been distributed by the offeror, or not being copied or directly
                                    derived from such a form by the investor; or

                              (b)   created by an AFS licensee—our relief overcomes any concerns about
                                    an application form created by an AFS licensee not being one that has
                                    been distributed by the offeror, or not being copied or directly derived
                                    from such a form by the investor.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 21
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.70      AFS licensees creating or personalising application forms should ensure that
                              they comply with the licensee obligations under the Corporations Act and
                              any authorisation or conditions on their AFS licence.
                                   Note 1: Regulatory Guide 36 Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing (RG 36)
                                   contains guidance on the meaning of ‘provide financial product advice’, and the
                                   meaning of ‘deal in a financial product’ and ‘arranging’ in the context of activities
                                   involving the distribution of application forms: see, in particular, Table 4 in RG 36.
                                   Note 2: In addition, Regulatory Guide 244 Giving information, general advice and
                                   scaled advice (RG 244) contains guidance about how AFS licensees can distribute and
                                   present information about a financial product without giving financial product advice,
                                   and Regulatory Guide 221 Facilitating digital financial services disclosure (RG 221)
                                   contains ‘good practice guidance’ on how to deliver digital financial services disclosure
                                   (e.g. Product Disclosure Statements and Financial Services Guides) to clients under
                                   Pts 7.6–7.9 of the Corporations Act.




Requirements of the legislative instrument
               RG 107.71      An offeror may rely on the relief in ASIC Corporations (Application Form
                              Requirements) Instrument 2017/241 if all of the requirements of the relief
                              are fully complied with: see Table 3.

Table 3:     Requirements of the legislative instrument

 Requirement                    Description

 Access                         The investor is given access to the disclosure document at the same time and by
                                the same means as access to the application form.
                                  Note: The reference to ‘disclosure document’ includes any supplementary or replacement
                                  disclosure document lodged with ASIC: see s719(4) and (5) of the Corporations Act.

 Application form               The application form contains:
                                 the following particulars of the offer and the disclosure document:
                                  − the identity of the issuer;
                                  − the nature of the securities being offered (e.g. ordinary shares or options);
                                  − the price of the securities;
                                  − the date of the disclosure document; and
                                  − the expiry date of the disclosure document; and
                                 a prominent statement to the effect that:
                                  − there is a disclosure document with information about investing in the
                                    securities; and
                                  − it is advisable to read the disclosure document before applying for the
                                    securities.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                        Page 22
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




D          Good practice guidance


                               Key points

                               In this section, we have set out our good practice guidance for the use and
                               distribution of electronic disclosure documents and electronic application
                               forms. This guidance focuses primarily on the distribution of documents by
                               email and the internet. However, the principles of good practice should be
                               applied to any electronic method of distributing disclosure documents and
                               application forms.

                               We encourage offerors, distributors and publishers to apply our good
                               practice guidance when distributing electronic disclosure documents and
                               electronic application forms.




Principles for good practice guidance
               RG 107.72      Our 15 principles for good practice guidance seek to ensure that investors
                              receive clear, concise and effective disclosure when disclosure documents
                              and application forms are distributed in electronic format. Our principles aim
                              to address some of the specific risks that may arise or increase when using and
                              distributing electronic disclosure documents and electronic application forms.

               RG 107.73      Some of this guidance includes our views on the legal requirements in
                              Ch 6D. Our principles aim to assist offerors, distributors and publishers in
                              complying with their legal obligations, and meeting the objectives
                              underlying the provisions, in Ch 6D. We encourage offerors, distributors and
                              publishers of electronic disclosure documents to apply our good practice
                              guidance when using email and the internet for making offers of securities.

               RG 107.74      While our guidance is directed to prospectuses and other Ch 6D disclosure
                              documents, we encourage offerors to apply the principles (where applicable)
                              to other ‘prospectus-like’ documents (e.g. offer documents used for
                              entitlement offers).

                              Principle 1: Ensuring ease of access to electronic
                              disclosure documents

                               Principle 1

                               Electronic disclosure documents should be easy to access, retrieve
                               and read.

               RG 107.75      We recognise that electronic disclosure documents may be distributed to
                              investors in a number of different ways. We understand that the main way in
                              which electronic disclosure documents and electronic application forms are



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 23
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              currently distributed in the market is by sending an email to an investor
                              containing:
                              (a)   a downloadable electronic copy of the disclosure document (i.e. a
                                    locked PDF or TIFF file); or
                              (b)   a hypertext link to the disclosure document (on a webpage) or to a
                                    website containing the disclosure document.

               RG 107.76      When a disclosure document is made available on a website, we think it
                              should be easy to find and access, particularly as investors may wish to view
                              the document more than once. Investors should also be provided with clear
                              instructions on how to view and download the disclosure document.

               RG 107.77      When an investor is provided with a hypertext link to the electronic
                              disclosure document or to a website, the link should take the investor:
                              (a)   directly to the disclosure document itself. Hypertext links should take
                                    an investor to the first page of the disclosure document and not to a
                                    subsidiary page within the disclosure document (e.g. the hypertext link
                                    should not take an investor straight to an application form);
                              (b)   to a webpage containing the disclosure document (rather than a generic
                                    website address); or
                              (c)   to a webpage confirming the person’s eligibility to participate in the
                                    offering (including but not limited to a jurisdictional disclaimer or
                                    confirmation).

               RG 107.78      This is not intended to be an exhaustive description of the ways in which
                              electronic disclosure documents may be distributed to investors. We
                              acknowledge that there may be other methods of electronic distribution that
                              are currently used in the market, and that technological developments may
                              emerge in the future that create new ways for electronic distribution. We
                              believe that it is up to the offeror to assess and determine the most appropriate
                              method of distribution, taking into account the needs of investors.

                              Principle 2: Managing security risks

                               Principle 2

                               Electronic disclosure documents should be distributed in a way that does
                               not unreasonably expose investors to security risks.

               RG 107.79      When an offeror or distributor distributes an electronic disclosure document
                              by email with a hypertext link to a website containing the electronic
                              disclosure document, the email should state whether the website is secure
                              and that any personal details provided by the investor (e.g. to access the
                              disclosure) will be kept confidential.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 24
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.80      An offeror should take reasonable steps to ensure that a website that contains
                              the electronic disclosure document or electronic application form is secure.

               RG 107.81      We believe such reasonable steps would include the offeror ensuring that the
                              publisher has a legal or contractual obligation (e.g. under the terms of any
                              agreement between the offeror and publisher) to ensure that:
                              (a)   the website containing the electronic disclosure document or electronic
                                    application form is, and will remain, secure; and
                              (b)   the publisher has adequate software and safeguards to mitigate
                                    security risks.

               RG 107.82      Offerors and distributors should continue efforts to educate investors about
                              internet scams and other security risks (e.g. phishing, fraud and data
                              corruption or tampering), and may wish to direct investors to the Australian
                              Cyber Security Centre’s Stay Smart Online program.

                              Principle 3: Ensuring receipt of electronic disclosure
                              documents

                               Principle 3

                               Offerors and distributors that distribute electronic disclosure documents for
                               an entitlement offer to existing investors of a company should take reasonable
                               steps to ensure that investors receive the electronic disclosure document.

               RG 107.83      In the case of entitlement offers to existing investors of a company, it is
                              important that offers are made to all eligible investors. It is becoming more
                              common for investors to nominate an email address to receive
                              communications from companies. Offerors and distributors should use that
                              email address when sending electronic disclosure documents to investors.

               RG 107.84      If an offeror or distributor becomes aware that an existing investor of a
                              company has not received the electronic disclosure document (e.g. the
                              offeror or distributor receives an undeliverable email notice), it should make
                              reasonable attempts to contact the investor by other means to give them the
                              disclosure document (e.g. by sending it to an alternative electronic address, if
                              one has been provided, or by sending a paper copy by mail to the investor).

               RG 107.85      We do not expect offerors and distributors to use special software to monitor
                              whether emails containing electronic disclosure documents have been
                              received, read or accessed. In our view, using a standard email ‘bounce-back’
                              or undeliverable notification function is a reasonable step that offerors and
                              distributors can take to monitor the receipt of electronic disclosure documents.

               RG 107.86      We recommend that offerors (and their share registries, as relevant) should
                              endeavour to ensure that investors’ contact details are kept up to date,
                              particularly their email addresses if the offeror proposes to distribute
                              entitlement offers to investors by email.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 25
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              Principle 4: Ensuring electronic disclosure documents
                              received are complete and protected from tampering

                               Principle 4

                               Offerors, distributors and publishers should take reasonable measures to
                               ensure that electronic disclosure documents received by investors are
                               complete and have not been altered or tampered with.

               RG 107.87      There are a variety of measures that an offeror, distributor or publisher can
                              take to protect the integrity of an electronic disclosure document from
                              unauthorised alteration or tampering, such as:
                              (a)   using firewall software to control the security settings of a webpage
                                    containing the electronic disclosure document; or
                              (b)   using protection tools—such as permission password encryptions, and
                                    locked and read-only functions—to control the security settings of the
                                    document.

               RG 107.88      The use of protection features should not prevent the electronic disclosure
                              document from being downloaded, saved or copied by the investor into a
                              personal electronic file for the investor’s own records.

               RG 107.89      We recommend that offerors and distributors clearly inform investors that
                              they should contact the issuer if they are concerned that they have received
                              an incomplete or altered version of the disclosure document, and advise
                              them how to do so.

               RG 107.90      An offeror, or a distributor on behalf of an offeror, must not accept an
                              application for securities if it has reason to believe that an investor has, or
                              may have, received an electronic disclosure document that is incomplete, or
                              may have been altered or tampered with.

                              Principle 5: Providing free paper disclosure documents
                              on request

                               Principle 5

                               Offerors and distributors that distribute electronic disclosure documents
                               and electronic application forms should make available free paper copies of
                               disclosure documents and application forms on request by an investor.

               RG 107.91      An offeror or distributor should make available, during the life of the
                              electronic disclosure document, paper versions of the disclosure document
                              (including any supplementary or replacement document) and the application
                              form, on request by an investor and free of charge. Such paper versions
                              should be sent to the investor within a reasonable time period, being no more
                              than two to three business days from the request being received.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 26
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.92      Any person receiving the electronic disclosure document should be clearly
                              informed that they may obtain a paper version of the disclosure document
                              and advised how they may do so.

                              Principle 6: Ensuring access to updated disclosure documents

                               Principle 6

                               Offerors and distributors of electronic disclosure documents should make
                               updated disclosure documents available in both paper and electronic format.

               RG 107.93      Offerors and distributors that have distributed the original disclosure
                              document in both a paper and electronic format should ensure that any
                              supplementary or replacement disclosure documents are also made available
                              in both a paper and electronic format.

               RG 107.94      Care should be taken so that investors do not continue to consider an outdated
                              document in making their investment decision. If a disclosure document is
                              generally accessible from a website, steps to avoid this might include:
                              (a)   removing outdated documents from the website; and/or
                              (b)   ensuring that the updated disclosure documents are accessible at least as
                                    easily as the original disclosure document, and that there are clear
                                    directions about which are the current disclosure documents that
                                    investors should consider in making an investment decision.

               RG 107.95      As a matter of good practice, offerors, or distributors on behalf of offerors,
                              should not accept applications if they have reason to believe an investor is
                              making an investment decision based on an outdated disclosure document
                              without the benefit of any supplementary or replacement disclosure document.
                              To do so in circumstances where the offer is made after the supplementary or
                              replacement document has been lodged with ASIC, or where the updated
                              disclosure document contains information that is ‘materially adverse’ from the
                              point of view of the investor, may contravene the Corporations Act.

                                    Note: See s719(4) and (5), 723 and 724.

               RG 107.96      If a supplementary or replacement disclosure document is lodged with ASIC,
                              offerors should take steps to help determine which version of the disclosure
                              document an application is based on. This is particularly the case if new
                              offers may be made after a supplementary or replacement document has
                              been lodged with ASIC without any active steps being taken by the
                              offeror—for instance, if the original disclosure document has continued to be
                              accessible from a website. Examples of steps an offeror could take include:
                              (a)   assigning a number to each version of an electronic application form
                                    that links it to a particular version of the disclosure document that has
                                    been made available; or




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 27
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              (b)   where an electronic payment process is available that allows investors
                                    to apply for securities without submitting a completed application form,
                                    providing a personalised application form that contains information that
                                    is unique to a specific version of the electronic disclosure document
                                    (e.g. an ‘investor identifier’ or ‘issuer identifier’), which must be used
                                    by an investor to make an electronic payment.

                                    Note: See RG 107.38–RG 107.43 for further discussion about electronic payment
                                    processes.


                              Principle 7: Ensuring access to electronic disclosure
                              documents in the future

                               Principle 7

                               Investors should be able to keep a copy of the electronic disclosure
                               document so that they can access it in the future.

               RG 107.97      The electronic disclosure document should be capable of being easily
                              downloaded, printed and saved so that an investor is able to access at any
                              later time a copy of the disclosure document that they viewed.

               RG 107.98      If the disclosure document is provided through a hypertext link to a webpage,
                              offerors and distributors should encourage investors to make an electronic
                              copy or, where practical, a printed copy of the disclosure document.

               RG 107.99      Offerors, distributors and publishers should also ensure that the electronic
                              disclosure document continues to be accessible from the link to the webpage
                              for a period that they consider is reasonable (and at least until the expiry of
                              the disclosure document).

               RG 107.100     We think that a period of two years would be reasonable for most disclosure
                              documents to continue to be accessible, unless the disclosure document has
                              been superseded or updated sooner. If it is not possible to continue to make
                              the electronic disclosure document available from the specified link or
                              webpage throughout that period, the offeror or distributor should make it
                              easy for clients to request an electronic or paper copy of the disclosure
                              document free of charge (e.g. by providing a toll-free telephone number,
                              an electronic address or a request button).

                              Principle 8: Retaining copies and records of electronic
                              disclosure documents

                               Principle 8

                               Offerors, distributors and publishers should retain copies and records of all
                               electronic disclosure documents so that investors are able to prove which
                               version of the disclosure document they relied on.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 28
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.101     Offerors, distributors and publishers should retain a copy of all versions of
                              the electronic disclosure document that they distribute or publish.

               RG 107.102     As a matter of good practice, these records should be kept for a period of at
                              least seven years (or as required by law).

               RG 107.103     An offeror or distributor that provides the ability for an investor to apply for
                              securities by using software should also retain a copy of each screen that
                              would be displayed to the investor using the software to apply for securities,
                              in any durable and legible medium.

               RG 107.104     Offerors, distributors and publishers should also maintain records that are
                              adequate to demonstrate that a particular electronic application form was
                              included in, or accompanied by, the electronic disclosure document.

                              Principle 9: Ensuring that electronic disclosure documents
                              have the same information as paper versions

                               Principle 9

                               Electronic disclosure documents should have the same content,
                               presentation and prominence of information as paper versions.

               RG 107.105     The paper or electronic disclosure document distributed to an investor
                              should contain the same information, in the same sequence and with the
                              same prominence, as the disclosure document lodged with ASIC.

               RG 107.106     Modifications to electronic versions of the disclosure document should only
                              be included where those modifications are immaterial and reflect necessary
                              adjustments or increased functionality when using different electronic
                              media—for example:
                              (a)   the inclusion of hypertext links (see further guidance in Principle 10
                                    below);
                              (b)   formatting changes required as a result of compatibility issues (i.e. font
                                    sizes, page margins and general formatting);
                              (c)   the use of additional electronic functions that do not affect the content
                                    of the document, such as:
                                    (i)     a facility for searching defined expressions;
                                    (ii)    prompts to help investors use and find information in the electronic
                                            disclosure document;
                                    (iii)   ‘pop-ups’ that explain definitions, in place of standard glossaries;
                                            and
                                    (iv)    a zoom facility so that investors may enlarge or reduce the
                                            information displayed; and




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                       Page 29
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              (d)   prompts that encourage investors to read the disclosure document
                                    before they complete the application form. Such prompts should not
                                    contain substantive information that does not appear in the disclosure
                                    document lodged with ASIC.

               RG 107.107     We think that the electronic version of a disclosure document should not
                              cause an investor to confuse all or part of the disclosure document with any
                              other document.

                              Principle 10: Ensuring appropriate use of hypertext links to,
                              from and within electronic disclosure documents

                               Principle 10

                               Hypertext links to, from or within the electronic disclosure document
                               should not be used to take investors to material not forming part of the
                               electronic disclosure document, other than jurisdictional confirmations
                               or educational material.

                              Hypertext links to the electronic disclosure document

               RG 107.108     We think that hypertext links can assist in the efficient distribution and
                              accessing of electronic disclosure documents, either on a webpage or by
                              email. We think that a hypertext link should take an investor directly to the
                              electronic disclosure document itself, to a webpage containing the disclosure
                              document or to a webpage confirming the investor’s eligibility to participate
                              in the offering (including but not limited to a jurisdictional disclaimer or
                              confirmation), and not to a page that contains information about the offeror
                              and/or the offer.

               RG 107.109     Additionally, the page or email containing the hypertext link should not
                              contain any information about the offeror and/or offer that may contravene
                              the advertising provisions in s734. Hypertext links to the electronic
                              application form should only be accessible through the electronic disclosure
                              document itself.

                              Hypertext links within the electronic disclosure document or to
                              documents incorporated by reference

               RG 107.110     We encourage the use of hypertext links in electronic disclosure documents
                              in the following ways:
                              (a)   within the electronic disclosure document itself (i.e. between a contents
                                    page and each section of the document, between sections of the
                                    document, or between defined expressions and the places where the
                                    expressions are used);
                              (b)   from the electronic disclosure document to documents incorporated by
                                    reference—where that information is available electronically (e.g. on




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 30
                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                                    the ASX Market Announcements Platform or on the offeror’s
                                    website)—and only if a reasonable person would be unlikely to confuse
                                    the linked documents with the electronic disclosure document; and

                                    Note: Under s712, a disclosure document may refer to a document that has been lodged
                                    with ASIC instead of setting out information that is contained in that document,
                                    provided that the reference (among other things) identifies the document that contains
                                    the information and informs a person of their right to obtain a copy of the document.
                                    This is commonly referred to as ‘incorporated by reference’. It is not sufficient to link to
                                    other documents for them to be incorporated by reference, as these documents must be
                                    lodged with ASIC.

                              (c)   from the electronic disclosure document to educational material
                                    (e.g. webpages on ASIC’s Moneysmart website) providing information
                                    about the risks associated with investing in certain types of securities
                                    (e.g. hybrid securities), which may assist an investor in deciding
                                    whether or a not particular investment suits their needs.

               RG 107.111     Hypertext links to documents incorporated by reference should allow the
                              investor to return to the point in the electronic disclosure document at which
                              they entered the link to assist the investor to continue to read the remainder
                              of the disclosure document.

               RG 107.112     If an investor requests that the incorporated documents are sent to them, the
                              documents should be provided by the same means as the electronic
                              disclosure document, unless the investor has requested paper copies of the
                              incorporated documents. It is not sufficient that the incorporated documents
                              are accessible on the internet unless the offeror gives the investor notice of
                              this and the address of the relevant website.

               RG 107.113     A hypertext link to an electronic disclosure document should not be provided
                              in a manner that selectively presents only parts of the disclosure document or
                              that reduces the likelihood of an investor reading any part of the disclosure
                              document.

               RG 107.114     We think that hypertext links should not be used:
                              (a)   from the electronic disclosure document directly to promotional
                                    material;
                              (b)   from the electronic disclosure document to the electronic application
                                    form or electronic payment process (unless the link can only be
                                    accessed after the investor has positively confirmed that they have
                                    accessed or read the disclosure document); or
                              (c)   from a webpage containing the electronic disclosure document to an
                                    electronic application form or electronic payment process (unless the
                                    link can only be accessed after the disclosure document has been
                                    accessed or after the investor has positively confirmed that they have
                                    accessed or read the disclosure document).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                           Page 31
                                            REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              Principle 11: Ensuring electronic application forms are
                              issued in or with an electronic disclosure document

                               Principle 11

                               Electronic application forms must be included in, or accompanied by, the
                               electronic disclosure document.

               RG 107.115     Offerors, distributors and publishers should take reasonable measures to
                              ensure that an investor who is issued with an electronic application form
                              is given access, at the same time and by the same means, to the disclosure
                              document.
                                    Note: This guidance reflects the legal requirements in s721 and 727(1), under which an
                                    offer of securities must be made in, or accompanied by, a disclosure document; and
                                    s723(1), under which it is an offence to issue securities unless they are issued in
                                    response to an application form and the issuer has reasonable grounds to believe that the
                                    form was included in, or accompanied by, the disclosure document (or was copied or
                                    directly derived from such a form).

               RG 107.116     We consider the following to be examples of reasonable measures that can
                              be taken to satisfy this requirement in the electronic environment:
                              (a)   the electronic application form and the electronic disclosure document
                                    should be contained in the same electronic document file (e.g. a PDF or
                                    TIFF file), with the electronic application form at the end of that file
                                    after the electronic disclosure document; or
                              (b)   if providing an electronic application form or electronic payment
                                    process to allow investors to apply for securities online, an electronic
                                    mechanism or software should be used, through which:
                                    (i)    investors can gain access to the electronic application form or
                                           make an electronic payment only if they have received and
                                           accessed the electronic disclosure document; or
                                    (ii)   offerors, or distributors on behalf of offerors, can verify that the
                                           investor received and accessed the electronic disclosure document
                                           before accessing and completing the application form, or making
                                           an electronic payment.

               RG 107.117     For example, an offeror or distributor may provide for a ‘certify’ message
                              requiring the investor to confirm that the electronic disclosure document has
                              actually been received and accessed before the application for securities is
                              made. A further example is where investors are provided with a unique
                              personal identification number, which can only be derived from the
                              electronic disclosure document—or from the electronic application form that
                              accompanied, or was included in, the electronic disclosure document—and
                              which is required for an investor to complete the electronic application form
                              or to make an electronic payment for securities.
                                    Note: See RG 107.38–RG 107.43 for further discussion about electronic payment
                                    processes.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                        Page 32
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




               RG 107.118     Offerors might want to take additional steps in their compliance programs.
                              For example, if applications are made through an AFS licensee, an offeror
                              might want to obtain confirmation from the AFS licensee that all investors
                              have received the disclosure document, and to require the AFS licensee to
                              obtain an acknowledgement from the investor that they have received the
                              disclosure document. However, we do not expect offerors to implement
                              mechanisms or software to monitor whether an investor has viewed each
                              page of the electronic disclosure document.

               RG 107.119     An offeror, or a distributor on behalf of an offeror, must only accept
                              applications for securities if it has reasonable grounds to believe that the
                              electronic application form was included in, or accompanied by, an electronic
                              disclosure document when the application form was received by the investor.


                              Principle 12: Ensuring appropriate warnings are included in
                              electronic application forms

                               Principle 12

                               Electronic application forms should contain appropriate warnings to ensure
                               that investors are informed of the importance of reading the disclosure
                               document before applying for securities.

               RG 107.120     Offerors and distributors should display a prominent statement, which the
                              investor will see no later than the electronic application form, to the effect
                              that securities will only be issued or transferred on receipt of an electronic
                              application form that was issued together with the electronic disclosure
                              document, or on receipt of an electronic payment that is made with
                              information derived from such a form.

               RG 107.121     Whether an electronic application form is contained in the same file as the
                              electronic disclosure document (i.e. a PDF or TIFF file), or is an online
                              generated application form, all electronic application forms should display
                              prominent statements to the effect that:
                              (a)   there is a disclosure document with information about investing in the
                                    securities—including details about the offer and the disclosure
                                    document, such as the identity of the issuer, the nature of the securities
                                    being offered (e.g. ordinary shares or options), the price of the
                                    securities, the date of the disclosure document and the expiry date of the
                                    disclosure document; and
                              (b)   investors should read the disclosure document before applying for the
                                    securities.

                                    Note: Application forms should also contain a statement to the effect that, by applying
                                    for securities, an investor is agreeing to become a member of the company. This reflects
                                    the requirement in s231(b), which provides that a person is a member of a company if
                                    they agree to become a member of the company after its registration and their name is
                                    entered on the register of members.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                        Page 33
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              Principle 13: Ensuring electronic application forms are
                              secure

                               Principle 13

                               Electronic application forms should contain verification processes and
                               should be secure.

               RG 107.122     Offerors, and distributors on behalf of offerors, may accept applications for
                              securities that are completed and submitted online, and may accept
                              electronic payment for securities, provided that they have the appropriate
                              systems in place to ensure that such information is securely transmitted and
                              free from possible hacking or fraud.

               RG 107.123     We consider that electronic application forms should not be able to be
                              transmitted and received electronically unless the offeror or distributor has
                              reasonable systems and controls in place to ensure the security and safety of
                              the information being transmitted. Such systems and controls would include
                              encryption-type software effectively encrypting the confidential information
                              being transmitted, and appropriate firewalls to prevent the hacking of such
                              information once it has been received by the offeror or distributor.

               RG 107.124     We recommend that offerors and distributors should ensure that electronic
                              application forms are secure to protect them from any unauthorised
                              alteration or tampering and to protect the privacy of the investor’s personal
                              information. Additionally, encryption-type software should be used to
                              transmit payments and confidential information about the investor.

               RG 107.125     While we think that it is primarily a matter for the offeror to decide whether
                              an investor must sign an application form—and how to resolve the technical
                              issues for an investor (whether an individual or a corporate entity) signing
                              electronically—we do recommend that offerors, and distributors on behalf of
                              offerors, should take reasonable measures to verify the identity of the investor.

               RG 107.126     For example, the offeror or distributor may require the investor to:
                              (a)   use personalised log-in details to access the electronic disclosure
                                    document, electronic application form and/or details that must be
                                    known by the investor in order to make an electronic payment for
                                    securities, including:
                                    (i)     details about how to make an electronic payment;
                                    (ii)    a unique personal identification number for the investor
                                            (e.g. customer reference number); and
                                    (iii)   an identification code for the issuer (e.g. biller code);
                              (b)   provide a verification code, which may be sent by the offeror to the
                                    investor’s personal email address, to allow the investor to submit the
                                    application form and/or make an electronic payment; or



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                       Page 34
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              (c)   answer a security question (to which they have previously provided the
                                    answer) to allow the investor to submit an application form and/or make
                                    an electronic payment.

               RG 107.127     We understand that some offerors might want an investor to sign an
                              application form as evidence that the investor agrees to the terms on which
                              the offeror will issue securities to them. In such instances, an investor should
                              be able to print or download an application form from an electronic
                              disclosure document or website.

               RG 107.128     Electronic application forms or electronic payment processes should also
                              allow the investor to easily download, print and save a copy of the
                              electronically submitted application form or receipt of payment. While the
                              electronic application form may contain links and information relevant to
                              applying for the securities, these should not distract the investor from reading
                              and understanding the electronic disclosure document or application form.


                              Principle 14: Ensuring offers are only made in specific
                              jurisdictions

                               Principle 14

                               Reasonable measures should be taken to ensure that offers are only made
                               in jurisdictions where the offer complies with the relevant securities laws.

               RG 107.129     Offerors and distributors that distribute electronic disclosure documents
                              should take reasonable measures to ensure that the offer is only received in
                              Australia or other specific jurisdictions where it is intended that the offer
                              will be available, and where they are satisfied that the offer complies with all
                              the relevant securities laws of those jurisdictions.

               RG 107.130     We think that an electronic disclosure document should contain a prominent
                              statement that the offer or invitation is only available to persons receiving
                              the document in certain specified jurisdictions.

               RG 107.131     If an electronic disclosure document is made available on the websites of
                              financial intermediaries or regulated markets, these persons should also take
                              measures to avoid targeting residents in countries where the offer of
                              securities to the public is not taking place.

               RG 107.132     Some additional measures offerors or distributors may wish to take to reduce
                              the risk of contravening foreign securities laws include:
                              (a)   the inclusion of a ‘certify’ message on the webpage containing the
                                    electronic disclosure document and/or electronic application form,
                                    requiring the investor to confirm, before accessing the documents, that
                                    they are located in Australia or another specific jurisdiction where the
                                    offer is being made; or




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 35
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                              (b)   the use of firewall software to control the security settings of an
                                    electronic application form to prevent applications being made by
                                    investors located outside Australia or other specific jurisdictions where
                                    the offer is being made.


                              Principle 15: Ensuring investors do not confuse promotional
                              material with the electronic disclosure document

                               Principle 15

                               Promotional material should not be published in a way that may cause it to
                               be confused with all or any part of the electronic disclosure document.

               RG 107.133     Electronic disclosure documents should be presented to investors in a way
                              that encourages investors to make decisions on the basis of the contents of
                              the document and not on the basis of promotional or marketing material.

               RG 107.134     Offerors, distributors and publishers should not publish promotional material
                              in such a way that a reasonable person would be likely to confuse it with all
                              or any part of the electronic disclosure document.

               RG 107.135     As a matter of good practice, offerors, distributors and publishers of
                              electronic disclosure documents should take the following reasonable
                              measures:
                              (a)   use separate electronic document files for the disclosure document and
                                    any promotional and advertising material;
                              (b)   in the email containing the electronic disclosure document or a link to
                                    the electronic disclosure document, only include a basic description of
                                    the offer—for example, the identity of the issuer, the nature of the
                                    securities being offered (e.g. ordinary shares or options), the price of the
                                    securities and the closing date of the offer;
                              (c)   include a clear and prominent statement in any promotional and
                                    advertising material to the effect that:
                                    (i)     the information does not constitute part of the disclosure
                                            document;
                                    (ii)    a disclosure document for the offer is available—and advise on
                                            how this may be obtained—and that investors should obtain a copy
                                            and read the disclosure document before making an investment
                                            decision; and
                                    (iii)   securities will only be issued in response to an application form
                                            that was either included in, or accompanied by, a disclosure
                                            document; and
                              (d)   do not provide hypertext links from the electronic disclosure document
                                    directly to promotional material.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                       Page 36
                                             REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




Key terms


                               Term                         Meaning in this document

                               AFS licence                  An Australian financial services licence under s913B of the
                                                            Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries on
                                                            a financial services business to provide financial services
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                               AFS licensee                 A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                            Corporations Act
                                                               Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                               ASIC                         Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                               ASIC Act                     Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                            2001

                               ASX                          The exchange market operated by ASX Limited

                               Ch 6D (for example)          A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                            numbered 6D)

                               CLERP Act                    Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Act 1999

                               [CO 00/44] (for              An ASIC class order (in this example numbered
                               example)                     CO 00/44)

                               Corporations Act             Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                            purposes of that Act

                               CP 155 (for example)         An ASIC consultation paper (in this example numbered
                                                            155)

                               disclosure document          A prospectus, a profile statement or an offer information
                                                            statement for an offer of securities under Ch 6D of the
                                                            Corporations Act

                               distributor                  Any person sending or disseminating an electronic
                                                            disclosure document or electronic application form, or a
                                                            hypertext link to an electronic disclosure document or
                                                            electronic application form, including but not limited to AFS
                                                            licensees and excluding offerors and publishers

                               electronic application       Any application form for an offer of securities that is
                               form                         distributed and accessed in electronic format, including:
                                                             an online or web-based application form, such as one
                                                              that can be completed and submitted online; and
                                                             an application form that is a digital copy of a paper form
                                                              that is able to be distributed, downloaded or viewed
                                                              electronically (e.g. by email or on an electronic device)




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                       Page 37
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




                               Term                       Meaning in this document

                               electronic disclosure      Any disclosure document under Ch 6D of the
                               document                   Corporations Act that is distributed and accessed in
                                                          electronic format, including:
                                                           an online or web-based disclosure document (which
                                                            may contain electronic content); and
                                                           a disclosure document that is a digital copy of a paper
                                                            document that is able to be distributed, downloaded or
                                                            viewed electronic electronically (e.g. by email or on an
                                                            electronic device)

                               good practice              Good practice guidance, contained in Section D of this
                               guidance                   guide, for the electronic distribution of disclosure
                                                          documents and application forms under Ch 6D of the
                                                          Corporations Act

                               Offer Notice Board         A database of all disclosure documents for fundraising
                                                          offers lodged with ASIC under Ch 6D of the Corporations
                                                          Act and for some disclosure documents required to be
                                                          lodged under Pt 7.9

                               offeror                    Any person making an offer of securities under Ch 6D of
                                                          the Corporations Act, including any person issuing or
                                                          transferring securities under Ch 6D. Offering securities
                                                          includes inviting applications for the issue of securities and
                                                          inviting offers to purchase the securities: s700(2)

                               old Corporations Law       The law, set out in s82 of the Corporations Act 1989, which
                                                          preceded the Corporations Act. A reference to the old
                                                          Corporations Law is a reference to the law as it stood
                                                          before the implementation of the CLERP Act

                               PDF                        Portable document format

                               phishing                   Emails or text messages that attempt to deceive a person
                                                          into disclosing their personal information, such as
                                                          usernames, passwords or banking details

                               Pt 6D.2                    A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                          6D.2)

                               publisher                  Any person who publishes through electronic means an
                                                          electronic disclosure document or electronic application
                                                          form in the course of business. This includes a website
                                                          host provider, through which an electronic disclosure
                                                          document or electronic application form can be accessed

                               RG 107 (for example)       An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 107)

                               s723 (for example)         A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                          numbered 723), unless otherwise specified

                               TIFF                       Tagged image file format




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                      Page 38
                                           REGULATORY GUIDE 107: Fundraising: Facilitating electronic offers of securities




Related information

                              Headnotes

                              advertising, AFS licensee, AFS licensee created application form, Australian
                              financial services licensee, disclosure document, electronic application form,
                              electronic disclosure document, electronic distribution, electronic payment
                              process, hypertext link, offer of securities, personalised application form,
                              social media


                              Legislative instruments

                              ASIC Corporations (Application Form Requirements) Instrument 2017/241

                              [CO 00/44] Electronic disclosure documents, electronic application forms
                              and dealer personalised applications (now superseded)


                              Regulatory guides

                              RG 36 Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing

                              RG 141 Offers of securities on the internet

                              RG 221 Facilitating digital financial services disclosure

                              RG 234 Advertising financial products and services (including credit): Good
                              practice guidance

                              RG 244 Giving information, general advice and scaled advice

                              RG 254 Offering securities under a disclosure document


                              Legislation

                              ASIC Act, s12CA–12CC, 12DA–12DB, 12DJ

                              CLERP Act

                              CLERP Bill

                              Corporations Act, Ch 6D, s52, 231, 706, 707, 708, 708AA, 708A, 710, 711,
                              712, 713, 715, 718, 719, 721, 723, 724, 727, 729, 734, 736, 737, 738, 991A,
                              1041E–1041H




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission July 2020                                                     Page 39
