REGULATORY GUIDE 140

Strata schemes and
management rights schemes

April 2017


About this guide
This guide is for operators and promoters of properties that are, or are
proposed to be, managed for investors.

It explains:
    how the provisions of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act)
     relating to managed investment schemes apply to arrangements
     involving real property, including under strata or community title (e.g.
     units in a serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex), and
     certain freehold titles or leasehold interests (referred to in this guide as
     ‘strata schemes’); and
    the conditional relief we have given, in ASIC Corporations (Serviced
     Apartment and Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869, to operators and
     promoters of strata schemes, including management rights schemes,
     from the managed investment, Australian financial services (AFS)
     licensing, product disclosure and hawking provisions of the
     Corporations Act.

Note: From 27 July 2020, applications for relief should be submitted through
the ASIC Regulatory Portal. For more information, see how you apply for
relief.
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                                  About ASIC regulatory documents

                                  In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory
                                  documents.
                                  Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC
                                  is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance.
                                  Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by:
                                       explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under
                                        legislation (primarily the Corporations Act)
                                       explaining how ASIC interprets the law
                                       describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach
                                       giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such
                                        as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how
                                        regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations).
                                  Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or
                                  compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance.
                                  Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a
                                  research project.



                              Document history
                              This version was issued in April 2017 and is based on legislation and
                              regulations as at the date of issue. The note on the front page was inserted
                              on 27 July 2020. In June 2025, we updated references to reflect changes to
                              RG 1 and related guidance.

                              Previous versions:
                                     Superseded Policy Statement 140 Serviced strata schemes, issued
                                      November 2000, rebadged as a regulatory guide 5 July 2007
                                     Interim Policy Statement 140, issued October 1998, updated December
                                      1998


                              Disclaimer
                              This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your
                              own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act and other
                              applicable laws apply to you, as it is your responsibility to determine your
                              obligations.

                              Examples in this guide are purely for illustration; they are not exhaustive and
                              are not intended to impose or imply particular rules or requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                             Page 2
                                                  REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Contents
                              A      Overview ........................................................................................... 4
                                     Purpose of this guide ......................................................................... 4
                                     Who this guide applies to................................................................... 7
                              B      What is a strata scheme?................................................................ 8
                                     The scheme has characteristics of a managed investment scheme . 8
                                     The investor contributes their rights to the scheme ........................... 9
                                     The return to investors depends on the arrangement ....................... 9
                                     Common enterprise .......................................................................... 11
                                     Other indicators of a strata scheme ................................................. 13
                                     Ordinary residential or commercial letting arrangements ................ 13
                              C      Requirements that apply to strata schemes ............................... 14
                                     Registering a scheme ...................................................................... 14
                                     Giving product disclosure ................................................................ 15
                                     Holding scheme property ................................................................. 16
                                     Valuing scheme property ................................................................. 17
                                     Obligations under the scheme constitution and compliance plan ... 17
                                     AFS licensing and advice obligations .............................................. 17
                                     The hawking prohibition ................................................................... 21
                                     Investor’s right to withdraw from the scheme .................................. 21
                              D      ASIC relief for operators and promoters of strata schemes ..... 23
                                     Overview of our relief ....................................................................... 23
                                     Relief for management rights schemes ........................................... 24
                                     Relief where all strata units are sold for at least $500,000.............. 34
                                     Relief for closed schemes and well-advanced schemes ................. 35
                                     Relief from the obligation to value scheme property ....................... 37
                                     Relief for arrangements that incidentally involve a scheme ............ 37
                                     Other relief that may be available .................................................... 37
                              Appendix: Information in a PDS for a management rights scheme . 39
                              Key terms ............................................................................................... 41
                              Related information ............................................................................... 45
                                  Headnotes........................................................................................ 45
                                  Legislative instruments and pro formas ........................................... 45
                                  Regulatory guides ............................................................................ 45
                                  Legislation ........................................................................................ 46
                                  Consultation papers ......................................................................... 46
                                  Media releases ................................................................................ 46




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                                          Page 3
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




A          Overview

                                Key points

                                Some serviced strata arrangements have the characteristics of a managed
                                investment scheme.

                                In general, if you are an operator or promoter of a serviced strata
                                arrangement that is a managed investment scheme, you must comply with
                                the managed investment, Australian financial services (AFS) licensing,
                                product disclosure and hawking provisions of the Corporations Act 2001
                                (Corporations Act).

                                However, you may be eligible for relief from some or all of these provisions.




Purpose of this guide
               RG 140.1       Some arrangements for using strata units (e.g. investments in a
                              serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex) have the
                              characteristics of a managed investment scheme. This guide explains
                              how the provisions of the Corporations Act relating to managed
                              investment schemes apply to arrangements involving real property,
                              including under strata or community title (e.g. units in a serviced
                              apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex), and certain freehold titles
                              or leasehold interests.

                              What is a strata scheme?

               RG 140.2       Typically, the arrangements covered by this guide relate to units under
                              strata title. For convenience, we refer to them as ‘strata units’.
                              However, that expression includes a community title interest, or other
                              interest in real property (including a freehold or leasehold interest). In
                              this guide, we refer to these arrangements as ‘strata schemes’. Section
                              B of this guide explains the types of arrangements that we consider to
                              be ‘strata schemes’.

                              Corporations Act requirements that apply to strata
                              schemes
               RG 140.3       An operator or promoter of a strata scheme must comply with certain
                              provisions of the Corporations Act—in particular, various provisions
                              of Chs 5C and 7.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                             Page 4
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.4       Generally, the operator of a managed investment scheme, such as a
                              strata scheme, who is not merely acting as the agent of another
                              operator must:
                              (a)   be a public company;
                              (b)   register the scheme with ASIC;
                              (c)   hold an AFS licence to carry on a financial services business (e.g.
                                    deal in a financial product, operate a managed investment scheme
                                    and provide financial advice);
                              (d)   comply with certain disclosure obligations, including giving
                                    prospective investors a Product Disclosure Statement (PDS); and
                              (e)   comply with other relevant provisions, including those in Pt 7.8
                                    prohibiting certain conduct in selling financial products (the
                                    hawking provisions).

               RG 140.5       In this guide, we refer to these provisions as ‘the managed investment,
                              AFS licensing, product disclosure and hawking provisions’.

               RG 140.6       Section C of this guide gives a brief overview of selected provisions
                              of the Corporations Act that may apply to operators or promoters of
                              strata schemes.

                              Exemptions under the Corporations Act

               RG 140.7       In some cases, an operator or promoter of a strata scheme might be
                              exempt under the Corporations Act from some or all of the managed
                              investment, AFS licensing, product disclosure and hawking
                              provisions. For example, the provisions will generally not apply:
                              (a)   if the scheme is a one-off strata scheme with 20 members or less;
                                    or
                              (b)   except for the AFS licensing provisions, if all the interests in the
                                    scheme are issued in circumstances that would not need
                                    disclosure through a PDS under Div 2 of Pt 7.9.

                              ASIC relief from the Corporations Act requirements

               RG 140.8       We have given conditional relief, in ASIC Corporations (Serviced
                              Apartment and Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869, to certain
                              operators and promoters of strata schemes (including management
                              rights schemes, schemes where all strata units have been sold for at
                              least $500,0000, closed schemes and well-advanced schemes) from
                              some or all of the managed investment, AFS licensing, product
                              disclosure and hawking provisions of the Corporations Act.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                             Page 5
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.9       Relief is given when we consider that:
                              (a)   strictly complying with these provisions would be impossible or
                                    disproportionately burdensome;
                              (b)   people acquiring or holding interests in the strata scheme would
                                    still have the protection that Parliament intended they should
                                    have; and
                              (c)   there would be commercial benefit from such relief to the parties
                                    of the strata scheme.

               RG 140.10      This means that the operator or promoter of a strata scheme might not
                              have to comply with some or all of the managed investment, AFS
                              licensing, product disclosure and hawking provisions. Section D of
                              this guide explains the types of strata schemes that might be eligible
                              for relief, including management rights schemes (i.e. managed
                              investment schemes that involve holiday letting arrangements for
                              strata units) and the conditions of the relief.

               RG 140.11      If you are eligible for relief and comply with the conditions of the
                              relief, you do not need to apply for relief. However, you must still
                              comply with other relevant provisions of the Corporations Act and the
                              Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC
                              Act) (e.g. not engaging in misleading or deceptive conduct: see s12DA
                              of the ASIC Act). We recommend that you seek professional legal
                              advice to ensure that you fully understand your obligations under the
                              Corporations Act and the ASIC Act.

               RG 140.12      If you are not eligible for relief under ASIC Corporations (Serviced
                              Apartment and Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869, you may be
                              eligible for relief under another ASIC instrument or you may apply to
                              ASIC for individual relief: see RG 140.140–RG 140.141.

                              Property rental schemes

               RG 140.13      Some investors individually engage an agent or let out their strata unit
                              for residential or commercial purposes, but not as part of a serviced
                              strata arrangement. We consider that such an arrangement should not
                              be regulated as a managed investment scheme, and so to avoid any
                              doubt we have given relief to such arrangements in ASIC
                              Corporations (Property Rental Schemes) Instrument 2016/870: see
                              RG 140.40–RG 140.41.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                             Page 6
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Who this guide applies to
               RG 140.14      This guide is for operators and promoters of properties that are sold on
                              the basis that they can be managed for retail clients (referred to in this
                              guide as ‘investors’).

               RG 140.15      A person who operates a strata scheme as a ‘promoter’ includes a
                              person who offers to issue, or arranges for the issue of, interests in the
                              scheme while also offering a strata unit to which the scheme relates
                              where the scheme is to be managed by another operator.

               RG 140.16      A person who operates the strata scheme as a promoter may be the
                              ‘developer’ of the strata title property, even if the developer has no
                              further role in operating the scheme after all strata units in the
                              arrangement have been sold.

               RG 140.17      An ‘operator’ means a person responsible for operating a strata
                              scheme, and may include operating the scheme as a promoter. This
                              includes:
                              (a)   the promoter of the arrangement who promotes or markets
                                    interests in the arrangement;
                              (b)   the manager of the serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort
                                    complex; and
                              (c)   the on-site letting agent of a management rights scheme.
                                    Note: See RG 140.76–RG 140.78 in Section D for an explanation of what we consider
                                    to be a ‘management rights scheme’.


                              Who this guide does not apply to

               RG 140.18      This guide does not apply to real property transactions that are not
                              related to arrangements to manage the property, such as:
                              (a)   ordinary sales of standard, completed strata units; or
                              (b)   ‘off-the-plan’ sales (i.e. sales when the only money paid by the
                                    purchaser before they settle and take possession of the completed
                                    strata unit is a deposit held by a stakeholder).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                   Page 7
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




B          What is a strata scheme?

                                Key points

                                A strata scheme is an arrangement for using strata units that has the
                                characteristics of a managed investment scheme, as defined in s9 of the
                                Corporations Act.

                                We consider a strata scheme is particularly likely to exist if:
                                • the investor contributes their rights to the scheme (see RG 140.23–
                                  RG 140.24);
                                • the return to investors depends on the arrangement (see RG 140.25–
                                  RG 140.30); or
                                • there is interdependence and a common enterprise between owners
                                  (see RG 140.31–RG 140.38).




The scheme has characteristics of a managed investment scheme
               RG 140.19      A strata scheme is an arrangement for using strata units that has the
                              characteristics of a managed investment scheme. Section 9 of the
                              Corporations Act defines a managed investment scheme as a scheme
                              with the following features:
                              (a)   people contribute money or money’s worth as consideration to
                                    acquire rights (interests) to benefits produced by the scheme
                                    (whether the rights are actual, prospective or contingent and
                                    whether they are enforceable or not);
                              (b)   any of the contributions are to be pooled, or used in a common
                                    enterprise, to produce financial benefits, or benefits consisting of
                                    rights or interests in property, for the people (the members) who
                                    hold interests in the scheme (whether as contributors to the
                                    scheme or as people who have acquired interests from holders);
                                    and
                              (c)   the members do not have day-to-day control over the operation of
                                    the scheme (whether or not they have the right to be consulted or
                                    to give directions).
               RG 140.20      A serviced strata arrangement involves owners of strata units making
                              their units available to an operator for use as part of a serviced
                              apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex. In these arrangements there
                              is a scheme under which an operator pools the occupancy rights
                              attaching to strata units or uses those rights in a common enterprise to
                              produce a financial benefit for the owner of the strata unit.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                             Page 8
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              Pre-packaged sale of interests

               RG 140.21      Interests in a serviced strata arrangement might initially be issued to a
                              promoter or their associate before being resold to investors as part of a
                              pre-packaged resale. If that arrangement is a strata scheme and the
                              issue of interests in the scheme required a PDS under Div 2 of Pt 7.9,
                              generally the managed investment, AFS licensing, product disclosure
                              and hawking provisions of the Corporations Act would apply.

               RG 140.22      The exemption from registering a scheme in s601ED(2) would not
                              apply in this case because the term ‘issue’ as defined in s9 includes
                              ‘make available’ (for interests in a managed investment scheme). This
                              would include the first time such interests were sold by a promoter or
                              their associate to investors.


The investor contributes their rights to the scheme
               RG 140.23      Generally, an investor in a strata scheme contributes to the scheme:
                              (a)   a right to occupy the strata unit (e.g. a lease or licence); or
                              (b)   a right to let or license the strata unit (i.e. as an agent of the strata
                                    unit owner).

               RG 140.24      By making the rights to their strata unit available to the strata scheme,
                              the investor is making a contribution of money or money’s worth to
                              acquire interests in the scheme. We consider that this is the case even
                              though the freehold title to the strata unit is not contributed and is not
                              property of the scheme.


The return to investors depends on the arrangement
               RG 140.25      In general, we consider that an arrangement is likely to be a strata
                              scheme if an investor has a right (including by agreement or an
                              understanding with the promoter) to a return, which depends, in whole
                              or in part, on:
                              (a)   the use of other investors’ strata units; and/or
                              (b)   the use of their strata unit.

                              Proportionate returns

               RG 140.26      We consider there is a strata scheme where the investor might depend
                              on the arrangement to receive a proportionate return. In the simplest
                              case, the investor’s benefit is a share of the profit on the use of the
                              whole complex. In these circumstances, we consider there is a
                              common enterprise between the investors and the operator. This is


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                             Page 9
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              because the return to each is likely to depend on the success or failure
                              of the arrangement.

                              Fixed or indexed returns

               RG 140.27      In some serviced strata arrangements, an investor’s benefit might not
                              depend on the arrangement involving their unit. This is because the
                              investor’s return is a promised fixed or indexed amount that will be
                              paid regardless of how the serviced strata arrangement is operated. We
                              do not consider that such an arrangement is likely to be a managed
                              investment scheme. The example below illustrates when a type of
                              fixed or indexed return arrangement is not likely to be a managed
                              investment scheme.

                                Example of a fixed or indexed return arrangement that is not likely to
                                be a managed investment scheme

                                A person (buyer) is invited to buy a strata unit from a developer and to
                                lease the strata unit to another person (operator). The operator intends to
                                operate a serviced strata arrangement using the strata unit and other
                                property.

                                The lease is for five years (renewable at the option of the operator for three
                                further periods of ten years). The operator promises an annual rental return
                                to the buyer of 5% (CPI indexed) of the price paid for the strata unit. The
                                buyer understands that the operator has the financial capacity to pay the
                                rental return, and that this does not materially depend on the performance
                                of the serviced strata arrangement.

                                The strata unit’s value at the end of the lease is not likely to depend on the
                                strata arrangement.

                                The operator has day-to-day operating control of the serviced strata
                                arrangement.

                                The buyer has the right to terminate the lease on 30 days notice.

                                The buyer is told that the operator is a substantial company.

                                The buyer is told that the operator intends to operate a serviced strata
                                arrangement. However, the operator has no legally enforceable obligation
                                to operate a serviced strata arrangement.

               RG 140.28      We consider that an arrangement is likely to be a strata scheme if
                              investors have been given to understand that returns from a strata
                              arrangement will be materially supported by the operator using the
                              investor’s property as part of the scheme.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 10
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                                Example of an arrangement we do consider is likely to be a managed
                                investment scheme

                                A person (buyer) is invited to buy a strata unit from a developer and to
                                lease the strata unit to another person (operator). The operator intends to
                                operate a serviced strata arrangement using the strata unit and other
                                property.

                                The lease is for five years (renewable at the option of the operator for three
                                further periods of five years). The operator promises an annual rental return
                                to the buyer of 5% (CPI indexed) of the price paid for the strata unit. The
                                likelihood of the return being paid to the buyer in its entirety will be
                                materially affected by whether the strata arrangement operates profitably.

                                The strata unit’s value at the end of the lease is not likely to depend on the
                                strata arrangement.

                                The operator has day-to-day operating control of the serviced strata
                                arrangement.

                                The buyer has the right to terminate the lease on 30 days notice.

                                The buyer is told that the operator is a substantial company.

                                The operator knows that buyers have come to an explicit (or implicit)
                                understanding with the developer (through sellers acting on behalf of the
                                developer) that the serviced strata arrangement will be operated to help the
                                operator pay the return to buyers. However, the operator has no legally
                                enforceable obligation to operate a serviced strata arrangement.

               RG 140.29      To ensure that investors do not have this understanding (i.e. they do
                              not expect their return to depend on the operation of the serviced strata
                              arrangement), the promoter needs to make this clear to investors from
                              the nature of the serviced strata arrangement, the marketing
                              documents and other disclosures.

               RG 140.30      The promoter should make sure that they do not make false and
                              misleading statements about the arrangement and provide
                              explanations of how the return will be paid. In our view, investors are
                              unlikely to have an understanding that their return depends on the
                              strata arrangement alone if they are given reason to believe that:
                              (a)   if necessary, all of their return is likely to come from an entity of
                                    sufficient financial substance; or
                              (b)   the arrangement is a non-material part of the operator’s overall
                                    business operations.


Common enterprise
               RG 140.31      We consider that one way in which there is likely to be a strata scheme
                              is if an investor has a right (including by agreement or an
                              understanding with the promoter) to a return that depends, in whole or


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                             Page 11
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              in part, on the use of other investors’ strata units in the scheme (as
                              opposed to common property).

               RG 140.32      There is likely to be a strata scheme if there is an agreement or
                              understanding that:
                              (a)   an investor’s return depends on a fair allocation of rent or
                                    prospective tenants between participating investors; or
                              (b)   the strata arrangement will operate on the basis that income from
                                    using the strata units will be pooled.

               RG 140.33      If there is no such agreement or understanding, we do consider that
                              there will be a strata scheme only because of the pooling of amounts
                              payable by owners to a body corporate of a strata title property:
                              (a)   relating to the use of common property; or
                              (b)   under the by-laws of the strata title body corporate.

               RG 140.34      An arrangement to use strata units can have the characteristics of a
                              managed investment scheme even if joining the scheme is voluntary
                              for people who own units in a particular location. When joining the
                              scheme is compulsory, it may indicate there is a common enterprise.

               RG 140.35      A common enterprise may exist if an investor’s money is, in some
                              way, used in common to operate the serviced strata arrangement to
                              achieve a benefit. There might be a common enterprise even if money
                              is not pooled in one bank account.

               RG 140.36      An operator may be regarded as being in a common enterprise with an
                              investor if the operator’s remuneration depends on the amounts
                              obtained through a strata arrangement.

                              Deferred pool or common enterprise

               RG 140.37      Sometimes a promoter and investor agree or come to an understanding
                              that a common enterprise or pool will operate at some time after the
                              strata unit is first made available. For example, a common enterprise
                              might start after a period where the return to the investor was not
                              dependent on the enterprise involving their units (e.g. where a fixed or
                              indexed return was paid regardless of the profitability of the operation
                              of a serviced strata arrangement).

               RG 140.38      We would generally consider such an arrangement to be a strata
                              scheme if the common enterprise or pool had started immediately. In
                              this case, the managed investment, AFS licensing, product disclosure
                              and hawking provisions of the Corporations Act would apply to the
                              scheme from the time the relevant agreement or understanding is first
                              promoted because an investor would be acquiring an interest in the
                              scheme even though it is prospective: see s9.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 12
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Other indicators of a strata scheme
               RG 140.39      We consider that the following characteristics may help support the
                              inference that one or more of the characteristics of a strata scheme are
                              present:
                              (a)   the strata units are not suitable for use other than as part of a
                                    serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex (including
                                    whether or not there are zoning restrictions on the use of the strata
                                    units);
                              (b)   nothing is stated about what will happen at the end of a period
                                    during which returns do not depend on the use of the units
                                    (particularly for short-term fixed or indexed return arrangements
                                    of up to five years);
                              (c)   there is an agreement with each investor that other investors make
                                    similar contracts;
                              (d)   there is pooling of expenses relating to the use of the strata units;
                              (e)   there is an understanding that the strata units will be used for
                                    short-term tenancies (e.g. less than three months); and/or
                              (f)   the investors place a strong reliance on the activities of the
                                    management for generating investor returns.



Ordinary residential or commercial letting arrangements
               RG 140.40      Some investors individually engage an agent to let out their strata unit
                              for residential or commercial purposes, but not as part of a serviced
                              strata arrangement. This could be a managed investment scheme that
                              requires registration. We consider that such an arrangement should not
                              be regulated as a managed investment scheme. This is because
                              investors in an ordinary residential or commercial letting arrangement
                              are less dependent on the skill, care and diligence of an operator than
                              investors in a strata scheme.

               RG 140.41      To avoid any doubt, we have given relief to such arrangements, in
                              ASIC Corporations (Property Rental Schemes) Instrument 2016/870,
                              from the managed investment, AFS licensing, product disclosure and
                              hawking provisions.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 13
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




C          Requirements that apply to strata schemes

                                Key points

                                Unless exempt under our relief (see Section D), the operator or promoter of a
                                strata scheme must comply with the managed investment and other relevant
                                provisions of the Corporations Act, including:
                                • registering the scheme (see RG 140.42–RG 140.44);
                                • giving product disclosure (see RG 140.45–RG 140.52);
                                • holding scheme property (see RG 140.53–RG 140.55);
                                • valuing scheme property (see RG 140.56);
                                • complying with obligations under the scheme constitution and
                                  compliance plan (see RG 140.57);
                                • holding an AFS licence with the appropriate authorisations (see
                                  RG 140.58–RG 140.61) and complying with product disclosure
                                  obligations for financial product advice (see RG 140.62–RG 140.66);
                                • complying with the hawking prohibition (see RG 140.71); and
                                • complying with obligations relating to the investor’s right to withdraw
                                  from the scheme (see RG 140.72–RG 140.73).
                                These provisions are intended by Parliament to ensure that different
                                investment opportunities are regulated in the same way as much as possible.
                                The AFS licensing requirements might also apply if you are a real estate
                                agent or developer and you promote or sell strata units that could
                                participate in strata schemes: see RG 140.67–RG 140.70.
                                This section gives only a brief overview of selected provisions that may
                                apply. You should seek legal advice and consult other relevant provisions of
                                the Corporations Act and our regulatory documents to fully understand your
                                obligations in operating a managed investment scheme.


Registering a scheme
               RG 140.42      Unless exempt under our relief (see Section D), a strata scheme that
                              has more than 20 members generally must be registered with ASIC as
                              a managed investment scheme.
               RG 140.43      A strata scheme with 20 members or less does not have to be
                              registered unless:
                              (a)   the promoter is in the business of promoting managed investment
                                    schemes (see s601ED(1)(b)); or
                              (b)   the scheme is aggregated with others because of a determination
                                    we have made under s601ED(1)(c) and 601ED(3).
                                    Note: For information on when we will make a determination under s601ED(1)(c) and
                                    601ED(3), see Regulatory Guide 136 Managed investments: Discretionary powers and
                                    closely related schemes (RG 136).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                 Page 14
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.44      A strata scheme does not have to be registered if all the interests that
                              have been made available in the scheme are through issues that would
                              not need disclosure under Div 2 of Pt 7.9: see s601ED(2).



Giving product disclosure
                              PDS requirements

               RG 140.45      Generally, unless exempt under our relief (see Section D), if an
                              interest in a strata scheme is offered to or acquired by a retail client (as
                              defined in s761G), a PDS must be given and other requirements might
                              apply: see s1012B(3) and Pt 7.9.
               RG 140.46      The requirement in s1012B(3) to give a PDS also applies to an offer to
                              arrange for the issue of interests. For example, a strata scheme might
                              be used in marketing campaigns by a developer to sell strata units. In
                              this case, the developer might be offering to arrange for the issue of
                              interests in the scheme in some circumstances.
               RG 140.47      Prospective investors must be given a PDS if they are invited to buy a
                              unit and at the same time join a strata scheme. This requirement
                              allows investors to make an informed assessment of the merits and
                              risks of joining the scheme.
                                    Note: For guidance on some disclosure that may be relevant to a PDS for a management
                                    rights scheme, see the appendix to this guide.

               RG 140.48      The PDS does not have to include information about the strata unit
                              that buyers would normally get as part of a conveyancing process for
                              real estate transactions (e.g. information in a contract of sale, or
                              searches or inquiries related to the sale).
               RG 140.49      However, it could be difficult for investors to assess the merits and
                              risks of joining a strata scheme as well as assessing the merits and
                              risks of investing in the strata unit.
               RG 140.50      Usually, investors will be making one decision (i.e. whether to buy a
                              strata unit that will be used as part of the strata scheme). They will be
                              assessing:
                              (a)   key factors that will affect the market value of the strata unit; and
                              (b)   how the market value may be affected by how the scheme
                                    operates.
               RG 140.51      As such, some information in the PDS about factors that could affect
                              the market value of the strata unit might be necessary as information
                              that is material for a reasonable person in making their decision: see
                              s1013E.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                   Page 15
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              Other Pt 7.9 requirements

               RG 140.52      In addition to any conditions of relief that apply to the strata scheme
                              (see Section D), the operator of a strata scheme must comply with
                              additional product disclosure and other requirements as relevant to the
                              scheme: see Pt 7.9. These include:
                              (a)   providing further information on request (see s1017A);
                              (b)   disclosing significant events (see s1017B);
                              (c)   confirming transactions (see s1017F);
                              (d)   being a member of an alternative dispute resolution scheme (see
                                    s1017G); and
                              (e)   meeting requirements for advertising (see Div 4 of Pt 7.9).
                                    Note: For more information on these obligations, see Regulatory Guide 168 Disclosure:
                                    Product Disclosure Statements (and other disclosure obligations) (RG 168) and
                                    Regulatory Guide 169 Disclosure: Discretionary powers (RG 169).




Holding scheme property
               RG 140.53      Operators of registered strata schemes must meet (among other
                              requirements):
                              (a)   financial requirements applying in respect of holders of scheme
                                    property under Regulatory Guide 166 Licensing: Financial
                                    requirements (RG 166); and
                              (b)   custody standards for holders of scheme property under
                                    Regulatory Guide 133 Managed investments and custodial or
                                    depository services: Holding assets (RG 133).

               RG 140.54      As set out in Table 9 of RG 166, different financial requirements apply
                              depending on the circumstances and nature of the assets held.

               RG 140.55      However, if the strata scheme property is limited to certain assets that
                              are ‘special custody assets’ as set out in RG 166, the requirement for
                              net tangible assets to permit the responsible entity to hold the scheme
                              property does not apply. This is because there is a lower risk of
                              custodial failure in holding these kinds of assets. Generally, the
                              property of a strata scheme is likely to be limited to assets that are
                              special custody assets. But operators should assess any scheme
                              property in light of RG 166 to ensure that they (or any custodian they
                              appoint) meet the relevant financial requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                    Page 16
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Valuing scheme property
               RG 140.56      Unless exempt under our relief (see Section D), the responsible entity
                              of a strata scheme must regularly value the scheme property: see
                              s601FC(1)(j) and 601HA(1)(c).


Obligations under the scheme constitution and compliance plan
               RG 140.57      There are other obligations under Ch 5C that apply to operators and
                              promoters of strata schemes, including obligations under the scheme
                              constitution and compliance plan. Some regulatory guides that discuss
                              these obligations are:
                              (a)   Regulatory Guide 132 Managed investments: Compliance plans
                                    (RG 132);
                              (b)   Regulatory Guide 133 Managed investments and custodial or
                                    depository services: Holding assets (RG 133);
                              (c)   Regulatory Guide 134 Managed investments: Constitutions (RG
                                    134); and
                              (d)   Regulatory Guide 136 Managed investments: Discretionary
                                    powers and closely related schemes (RG 136).


AFS licensing and advice obligations
               RG 140.58      Unless exempt under our relief (see Section D), or another exemption
                              applies, you must hold an AFS licence with the appropriate authorisations
                              (or be an authorised representative of an AFS licensee) if you carry on a
                              business that includes:
                              (a)   operating a registered strata scheme;
                              (b)   issuing or arranging for the issue of interests in a registered strata
                                    scheme or a scheme that is not registered (whether the marketing
                                    occurs at the original sale of the strata units or on a later sale by
                                    an individual strata unit owner);
                              (c)   dealing in financial products that are assets of the scheme on
                                    behalf of the members (e.g. an insurance contract) or holding a
                                    financial product or beneficial interest in a financial product for
                                    the members in providing a custodial or depository service; or
                              (d)   giving financial product advice about acquiring interests in a
                                    registered strata scheme or a scheme that is not registered (see
                                    RG 140.62–RG 140.66).
                                    Note: The requirements in RG 140.58(a)–(d) do not apply to interests in a managed
                                    investment scheme that is not registered because none of s601ED(1)(a)–(c) are satisfied:
                                    see s765A(1)(s).




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                      Page 17
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.59      For operators and promoters of strata schemes, the AFS licence might
                              include authorisations to:
                              (a)   operate a registered scheme (if the scheme must be registered);
                              (b)   deal in financial products by issuing an interest in, or arranging
                                    for the issue of an interest in, a scheme;
                              (c)   deal in, or provide a custodial or depository service, for financial
                                    products that are assets of the scheme; and
                              (d)   provide financial product advice (see RG 140.62–RG 140.66).

               RG 140.60      These requirements might also apply to real estate agents and
                              developers if they promote or sell strata units that could participate in
                              strata schemes: see RG 140.67–RG 140.70.

               RG 140.61      The following is a list of some regulatory guides that can help you
                              apply for an AFS licence with the necessary authorisations and
                              understand the various obligations you have under a licence:
                              (a)   Regulatory Guide 1 Applying for and varying an AFS licence
                                    (RG 1);
                              (b)   Regulatory Guide 36 Licensing: Financial product advice and
                                    dealing (RG 36);
                              (c)   Regulatory Guide 38 The hawking provisions (RG 38);
                              (d)   Regulatory Guide 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees (RG 78);
                              (e)   Regulatory Guide 98 Licensing: Administrative action against
                                    financial services providers (RG 98);
                              (f)   Regulatory Guide 105 Licensing: Organisational competence
                                    (RG 105);
                              (g)   Regulatory Guide 126 Compensation and insurance
                                    arrangements for AFS licensees (RG 126);
                              (h)   Regulatory Guide 165 Licensing: Internal and external dispute
                                    resolution (RG 165);
                              (i)   Regulatory Guide 166 Licensing: Financial requirements (RG
                                    166);
                              (j)   Regulatory Guide 167 Licensing: Discretionary powers (RG
                                    167);
                              (k)   Regulatory Guide 168 Disclosure: Product Disclosure Statements
                                    (and other disclosure obligations) (RG 168);
                              (l)   Regulatory Guide 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—
                                    conduct and disclosure (RG 175);
                              (m)   Regulatory Guide 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest
                                    (RG 181);



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 18
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              (n)   Regulatory Guide 244 Giving information, general advice and
                                    scaled advice (RG 244); and
                              (o)   Regulatory Guide 246 Conflicted remuneration (RG 246).

Giving financial product advice

               RG 140.62      Representations generally involve financial product advice if
                              recommendations or statements of opinion are made that are, or could
                              reasonably be regarded as being, intended to influence the user in
                              making a decision about a particular financial product or class of
                              financial product or an interest in a particular financial product or
                              class of financial product: see s766B. Whether representations involve
                              financial product advice (either personal or general) will depend on
                              the facts of the particular case.
                                    Note 1: ‘Personal advice’ is financial product advice given to a person when the
                                    provider of the advice has considered the objectives, financial situation or needs of the
                                    person, or when the person might reasonably expect that the provider has considered
                                    these matters: see s766B(3). ‘General advice’ is financial product advice that is not
                                    personal advice: see s766B(4). Table 1 sets out some obligations relating to the giving
                                    of personal and general advice.

                                    Note 2: For a discussion of the meaning of financial product advice, see RG 36.

               RG 140.63      Operators and promoters of strata schemes might make
                              recommendations to investors about participating in a scheme. In
                              some circumstances recommendations about buying a strata unit
                              might also be reasonably regarded as being intended to influence the
                              decision of a person to acquire an interest in a strata scheme. These
                              recommendations may constitute financial product advice.

               RG 140.64      If a person provides financial product advice, they are generally
                              required to:
                              (a)   hold an AFS licence or be an authorised representative of an AFS
                                    licensee (see RG 140.58–RG 140.59); and
                              (b)   if the investor is a retail client, give necessary disclosures under
                                    Pt 7.7 depending on whether the advice is personal or general
                                    advice.
                                    Note 1: For a discussion of the relevant disclosure obligations when providing financial
                                    product advice, see RG 175.

                                    Note 2: There are exemptions from these requirements.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                         Page 19
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Table 1:     Some obligations relating to personal and general advice

  Personal advice                                                 General advice

  If personal advice is given to a retail client, the             At the time of giving the general advice and by the
  provider (i.e. the AFS licensee or authorised                   same means as the general advice is given, the AFS
  representative) must comply with the personal advice            licensee or authorised representative giving the
  regime in Div 3 of Pt 7.7. This includes an obligation          advice must warn the client that:
  to act in the best interests of the client and to give           the advice has been prepared without taking into
  priority to the client’s interests (the best interests            account the client’s objectives, financial situation
  obligation). Meeting the objectives, financial situation          and needs; and
  and needs of the client must be the paramount
                                                                   they should therefore consider the appropriateness
  consideration when providing advice: see Div 2 of
                                                                    of the advice to their situation before acting on the
  Pt 7.7A.
                                                                    advice (s949A).
        Note: Section 961B(2) sets out a ‘safe harbour’ for
        complying with the best interests duty in s961B(1). The   When a person gives general advice to a client, no
        client must generally be given a Statement of Advice      SOA is required.
        (SOA) setting out, among other things, the advice and
        the basis upon which it is given: s946A.


               RG 140.65       Operators, as product issuers, have some scope to give general advice
                               without an AFS licence: see reg 7.1.33H of the Corporations
                               Regulations 2001 (Corporations Regulations). Generally, the issuer of
                               a financial product is the person responsible for the obligations owed
                               under the terms of the product to a client or a person nominated by
                               that person: see s761E(4). However, under reg 7.1.33H, a product
                               issuer who gives another person general advice about a product they
                               issue does not provide a financial service provided that they also:
                               (a)   inform the person that the product issuer is not licensed to give
                                     financial product advice;
                               (b)   recommend that the person obtain a PDS before acquiring the
                                     product; and
                               (c)   make certain disclosures about cooling-off rights.

               RG 140.66       As a general rule, AFS licensees and authorised representatives who
                               give financial product advice to retail clients must give those clients a
                               Financial Services Guide (FSG): see s941A and 941B. A product
                               issuer does not have to give an FSG to a client if the issuer is only
                               dealing in their own products: see s941C(2).

                               Real estate agents and developers

               RG 140.67       Unless exempt under our relief (see Section D), if you are a real estate
                               agent or property developer and you arrange for the issue of interests
                               in a strata scheme along with a strata unit, you must hold an AFS
                               licence.

               RG 140.68       This requirement applies if a person who buys the strata unit
                               automatically becomes a member of the strata scheme (e.g. because



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                      Page 20
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              the strata unit is subject to a lease in such a scheme). It may apply to
                              real estate agents if they promote or sell strata units that could
                              participate in schemes. This is because the real estate agent may be
                              making recommendations that are intended to influence the decision
                              of a person to participate in the scheme (as well as their decision to
                              purchase a strata unit). This may amount to financial product advice.
                              In other situations, you might not have to be licensed—for example, if
                              you are not:
                              (a)   issuing interests in schemes;
                              (b)   arranging for buyers to become members of a scheme; or
                              (c)   giving financial product advice about interests in a scheme.

               RG 140.69      The AFS licensing provisions apply even if you already hold a real
                              estate agent’s or property developer’s licence. The AFS licence applies
                              to the financial services aspect of your business.

               RG 140.70      You generally do not need an AFS licence if you merely undertake
                              administrative activities. For example, you do not need a licence to
                              distribute or display a PDS for a strata scheme, provided you do not
                              make any recommendations about that scheme that may amount to
                              financial product advice: see RG 140.62–RG 140.67.


The hawking prohibition
               RG 140.71      Unless exempt under our relief (see Section D), a person (including
                              their agent) must not offer financial products (such as interests in a
                              strata scheme) for issue or sale in the course of, or because of, an
                              unsolicited meeting or telephone call: see Div 8 of Pt 7.8. The
                              hawking prohibitions aim to prevent pressure selling of financial
                              products to retail clients (e.g. ‘badgering’ and ‘boiler room’ practices).
                                    Note: For a discussion of the hawking provisions and how they apply, see RG 38.



Investor’s right to withdraw from the scheme
               RG 140.72      Operators and promoters of strata schemes should be aware that
                              investors may have rights under the Corporations Act to withdraw
                              from a scheme and get their money back if:
                              (a)   interests in a scheme have been issued (or a person has acquired
                                    interests in a scheme); and
                              (b)   that scheme was not, but should have been, complying with the
                                    requirements for registration of a managed investment scheme
                                    under Ch 5C or the requirements of Div 2 of Pt 7.9 in relation to a
                                    PDS.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                    Page 21
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.73      The reference to ‘asking for their money back’ could include:
                              (a)   terminating the lease, licence or agreement that empowers the
                                    operator to grant leases or licences of units as an agent for the
                                    strata unit owners—this would happen if a strata scheme was
                                    offered to persons who already owned strata units; or
                              (b)   refunding the purchase price of the strata unit and any costs in
                                    return for transfer of the strata unit to the promoter—this would
                                    happen if the right to join the strata scheme was offered as an
                                    inducement to buy a strata unit.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 22
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




D          ASIC relief for operators and promoters of
           strata schemes
                                Key points

                                If you meet the conditions of ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and
                                Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869, you may be exempt from certain
                                provisions of the Corporations Act. The following strata schemes may be
                                eligible for relief:
                                • a management rights scheme (see RG 140.76–RG 140.117);
                                • a scheme where all strata units have been sold for at least $500,000
                                    (see RG 140.118–RG 140.124); and
                                • a closed scheme or a well-advanced scheme (see RG 140.125–
                                    RG 140.134).

                                You may also be eligible for relief if you operate an arrangement that
                                incidentally involves such a scheme: see RG 140.137–RG 140.138.

                                For schemes that relied on previous ASIC class orders before ASIC
                                Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869
                                came into effect, the older class orders continue to apply: see RG 140.75.

                                If you are not eligible for relief under ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment
                                and Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869 or under other ASIC relief (see
                                RG 140.139), you may apply to ASIC for individual relief on a case-by-case
                                basis: see RG 140.140–RG 140.141.


Overview of our relief
               RG 140.74      We have given conditional relief, in ASIC Corporations (Serviced
                              Apartment and Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869, to operators and
                              promoters of strata schemes (including management rights schemes,
                              schemes where all strata units have been sold for at least $500,000,
                              closed schemes and well-advanced schemes) from certain provisions
                              of the Corporations Act: see Table 2.

               RG 140.75      For schemes that relied on Class Orders [CO 02/245] Closed schemes,
                              [CO 02/303] Management rights schemes—amendment, [CO 02/304]
                              Management rights schemes and [CO 02/305] Management rights
                              schemes before ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like
                              Schemes) Instrument 2016/869 came into effect, the older class orders
                              continue to apply.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 23
                                                REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Table 2:     Relief available in ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes)
             Instrument 2016/869

  Type of arrangement                            Relief we have given                                   Guidance

  Strata schemes that are management             Conditional relief is available from the               See RG 140.76–
  rights schemes                                 managed investment, AFS licensing (for                 RG 140.117–
                                                 general advice and dealing only) and the
                                                 hawking provisions

  Strata schemes if all of the strata units      Conditional relief is available from the               See RG 140.118–
  (including real property and furniture         managed investment, product disclosure and             RG 140.124
  and fittings) have been sold for at least      hawking provisions
  $500,000

  Strata schemes that are ‘closed                Conditional relief is available from the               See RG 140.125–
  schemes’ as at 6 October 1998 (i.e. a          managed investment, AFS licensing (for                 RG 140.131
  scheme where all the strata units were         general advice and dealing only), hawking and
  sold and no primary offers to join the         some product disclosure provisions
  scheme were made after 1998)

  Strata schemes that are ‘well-                 Conditional relief is available from the               See RG 140.125–
  advanced schemes’ as at 6 October              managed investment, AFS licensing (for                 RG 140.127 and
  1998 (i.e. a scheme established before         general advice and dealing only), hawking and          RG 140.132–
  6 October 1998 but we accepted was             some product disclosure provisions                     RG 140.134
  quite advanced when we issued our
  initial policy in 1998)

  Registered strata schemes                      For registered strata schemes, relief is               See RG 140.135–
                                                 available from the duty to value scheme                RG 140.136
                                                 property where there is no obligation to pay
                                                 members an amount related to the value of
                                                 scheme property when investors leave the
                                                 scheme

Note: You may also be eligible for relief under another ASIC instrument (see RG 140.139), or you may be able to apply to ASIC
for individual relief: see RG 140.140–RG 140.141.




Relief for management rights schemes
               RG 140.76       Management rights schemes are a type of strata scheme. The term
                               ‘management rights’ refers to the advantage in offering property
                               management services arising from the practice of buying that part of
                               the complex that has the fittings and location that enable it to function
                               as a front office for the complex. A typical management rights scheme
                               involves an operator who resides in a holiday accommodation
                               complex and who:
                               (a)   provides short-term leases or licences to visitors;
                               (b)   markets the complex;
                               (c)   manages the common property;
                               (d)   provides an office and caretaking facilities;


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                        Page 24
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              (e)   collects the rent or licence fees; and
                              (f)   pays expenses out of the rent or licence fees collected and then
                                    pays the proceeds to the owner.

               RG 140.77      Serviced strata arrangements that involve an operator who has
                              management rights are generally managed investment schemes under
                              s9 of the Corporations Act. This is because investors make their strata
                              units available to the operator to manage so that they do not have day-
                              to-day control, and the strata units are made available for letting, with
                              the income used to provide benefits and operate the strata scheme. The
                              following example illustrates a type of serviced strata arrangement
                              commercially known as a ‘management rights scheme’.
                                Example of a management rights scheme

                                An investor is invited to buy a strata unit from a developer. They are told
                                that they can give an on-site letting agent the right to let or license use of
                                the strata unit.

                                The investor is told that the on-site letting agent will operate a serviced
                                apartment arrangement using the strata unit and other strata units made
                                available in a similar manner. The investor will not be involved in the day-to-
                                day operation of the arrangement.

                                The investor is given to understand that the letting agent will seek to find
                                tenants or licensees for the unit and what the on-site letting agent pays
                                them will be based on the rent and licence fees received for use of the unit
                                after the agent deducts costs and fees.

                                The investor might decide to live in their strata unit or use their own off-site
                                letting agent. Therefore, joining the on-site letting agent’s serviced
                                apartment arrangement is voluntary.

                                The investor has a right to terminate participation in the serviced apartment
                                arrangement by terminating the operator’s right to enter new leases or
                                licences for their unit on 90 days notice.

               RG 140.78      Generally, in such management rights schemes, all investors come to
                              an explicit (or implicit) understanding with the on-site letting agent
                              about how strata units will be allocated to visitors looking for
                              accommodation. The understanding is that the operator will allocate
                              units on the basis of what the visitors prefer. However, they also agree
                              that this will be done, as far as possible, in a way that fairly allocates
                              income between investors in strata units who join the arrangement.

               RG 140.79      If you operate a management rights scheme, you might be eligible for
                              relief from the managed investment, AFS licensing (for general advice
                              and dealing only) and hawking provisions of the Corporations Act. To
                              take advantage of our relief, you must meet the conditions of relief in
                              ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes)
                              Instrument 2016/869: see Table 3 and RG 140.82–RG 140.117.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                             Page 25
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.80      We have given relief for management rights schemes because we
                              consider that compliance with all aspects of the managed investment,
                              AFS licensing (for general advice and dealing only) and hawking
                              provisions would be an unreasonable burden for these schemes. These
                              schemes are usually small, and there would be limited benefit in
                              requiring registration or licensing.

               RG 140.81      Members in management rights schemes are unlikely to be materially
                              disadvantaged from participating in the scheme because they have the
                              option to withdraw their unit (on short notice) and arrange for it to be
                              managed separately. If owners join, it is voluntary. They are not likely
                              to have been induced to join on the basis of the management expertise
                              of a particular operator who manages the letting of the strata units.
                              This is because the operator can also withdraw on limited notice.

                              Overview of conditions of relief

               RG 140.82      We consider that it is appropriate for our relief for management rights
                              schemes in ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like
                              Schemes) Instrument 2016/869 to be subject to the conditions in Table
                              3. These conditions restrict our relief to schemes where it is
                              appropriate in the circumstances, and set reasonable operational
                              obligations for these schemes.

Table 3:     Overview of relief for management rights schemes under ASIC Corporations
             (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869

  Condition                  Summary of condition

  Promotion of the           Operators who are AFS licensees or are licensed under state or territory law to manage
  scheme (giving             real estate and persons acting on their behalf under the exemption can give general
  general advice)            advice about a management rights scheme: see RG 140.83–RG 140.86. Persons
                             licensed under state or territory law to sell real estate who are not operators and
                             persons acting on their behalf can give general advice about a management rights
                             scheme under the exemption.

  Product disclosure         An operator must provide a PDS to an investor before an offer is made: see
                             RG 140.87–RG 140.91. Referring to the possible disclosures in the appendix to this
                             guide may assist in preparing a PDS.

  Participation and          Joining the scheme must be voluntary. Owners must not have to pay any money either
  investor liability         to join the scheme or during the scheme, except for amounts covering fees and
                             expenses: see RG 140.92.

  Cash held on trust         An operator that manages the letting or licensing of strata units must ensure that any
                             part of the property of the scheme that is cash is deposited with an Australian ADI in a
                             trust account that is audited annually: see RG 140.93.

  Withdrawal rights          An operator or owner may withdraw from the scheme on no more than 90 days notice:
                             see RG 140.94–RG 140.96.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                 Page 26
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




  Condition                  Summary of condition

  Restrictions on            Where there are restrictions on the use of any of the strata units as a residence the
  alternate use              exemption is available if the operator provides a written statement to ASIC from an
                             independent real estate agent that the agent is willing and able to offer the unit for
                             letting at a reasonable rate and expects a reasonable degree of occupancy: see
                             RG 140.97–RG 140.99.

  Rental guarantees          The relief does not apply if the operator, either directly or indirectly, offers rental
  by operators               guarantees to owners that could apply after they are no longer the operator: see
                             RG 140.100–RG 140.101.

  Furniture, fittings        Operators may require upfront payments from owners for a furniture, fittings and
  and equipment              equipment fund (FFE fund) as long as the purchased items become the property of the
                             owner and any money in the FFE fund is returned to the owner if the owner withdraws
                             from the scheme or if the scheme ends: see RG 140.102–RG 140.105.

  Periodic reporting         The operator must give a periodic statement as soon as practicable and at least within
                             six months after the end of a reporting period, detailing any transactions affecting the
                             owner’s entitlement in the scheme during that period: see RG 140.106–RG 140.109.

  Transferring rights        The terms of the agreement between the operator who manages the letting of the strata
  and property to a          units and each owner must allow a majority of the unit owners in the scheme to make
  new operator               the operator transfer any rights and property it uses for operating the scheme to a
                             nominated new operator: see RG 140.110–RG 140.113.

  Dispute resolution         Generally, requirements under the Corporations Act for internal complaints and external
                             dispute resolution processes must be complied with: see RG 140.114–RG 140.115.

  Breach reporting           Breach reporting requirements must be complied with: see RG 140.116–RG 140.117.



                              Promotion of the scheme (giving general advice)

               RG 140.83      A person who operates a strata scheme, including a promoter, and who
                              expresses opinions about a management rights scheme or strata units
                              that can be used in a management rights scheme that might reasonably
                              be regarded as intended to influence the decision of a person to
                              participate in the scheme (as well as their decision to acquire a strata
                              unit) will generally be providing financial product advice, which
                              requires an AFS licence: see RG 140.62–RG 140.66.
                                    Note: For a discussion about the meaning of financial product advice, see Regulatory
                                    Guide 36 Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing (RG 36).

               RG 140.84      Under reg 7.1.33H of the Corporations Regulations, operators and
                              promoters have some scope to give general advice without an AFS
                              licence if certain disclosures are made. In ASIC Corporations
                              (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869, we
                              have given further relief so that operators and promoters, as well as
                              real estate agents in some circumstances (see RG 140.67–RG 140.70),
                              can give general advice about a management rights scheme without a
                              licence if the scheme meets the conditions of our relief.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                      Page 27
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.85      Our relief applies only if the provider is:
                              (a)   the operator and holds an AFS licence or is licensed under state or
                                    territory law to manage real property or if they are only a
                                    promoter licensed under state or territory laws in relation to real
                                    property; or
                              (b)   not an operator, but is licensed under state or territory law to sell
                                    real property; or
                              (c)   a person acting on behalf of a person covered by paragraph (a) or
                                    (b).

               RG 140.86      Our relief is limited to general advice. We recognise that general
                              advice on interests in a management rights scheme may be given in
                              the context of a transaction to purchase real estate, and primarily focus
                              on the merits of the real estate. As the real property industry is
                              regulated under a different regime from financial products, a degree of
                              consumer protection provided in state and territory licensing regimes
                              will apply. However, state and territory laws do not regulate AFS
                              licensees or the provision of financial product advice and, in light of
                              the protections intended under the Corporations Act to apply to
                              personal advice, the exemptions do not apply to personal advice.

                              Product disclosure

               RG 140.87      A PDS must generally be given to each investor when they receive an
                              offer to participate in a management rights scheme, or an offer to
                              arrange for them to participate in a management rights scheme that is
                              to operate in relation to their strata unit: see Pt 7.9 of the Corporations
                              Act.

               RG 140.88      The PDS ensures that investors can get relevant information about the
                              significant features of the financial product (including its risks,
                              benefits and costs) so that they can make an informed choice. The
                              PDS must be given in addition to any disclosure about the scheme or
                              strata unit required under state or territory legislation.

               RG 140.89      Generally, the issuer of a financial product must prepare the PDS. This
                              person is known as the ‘responsible person’ for the PDS: see s1013A.
                              The product issuer is the person who is responsible for the obligations
                              owed under the product to the holder of the financial product. As such,
                              the operator who is responsible for the letting of the strata units for a
                              management rights scheme has the obligation to issue a PDS under
                              Div 2 of Pt 7.9.

               RG 140.90      Strata units under development (that might at some stage participate in
                              a management rights scheme) can be sold before an operator is
                              appointed to manage the letting of the strata units. Promotion for those


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 28
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              strata units should not promote the management rights scheme in these
                              circumstances. Under s1018A(2) a person should not advertise or
                              issue a statement reasonably likely to induce people to acquire a
                              financial product that is not already available for acquisition, unless
                              the issuer is identified.

               RG 140.91      When the operator offers the letting agreement, which will issue an
                              interest in a managed investment scheme to the investor, a PDS must
                              be given, if no previous PDS has been given. If permitted under
                              reg 7.9.15DA of the Corporations Regulations, a PDS prepared by the
                              operator could incorporate by reference information in a written
                              disclosure that the developer has already given.
                                    Note: For guidance on how to prepare a PDS, see RG 140.45 and the appendix to this
                                    guide, and Regulatory Guide 168 Disclosure: Product Disclosure Statements (and other
                                    disclosure obligations) (RG 168).


                              Participation and investor liability

               RG 140.92      Owners of strata units must not be placed under an obligation to pay
                              money either for:
                              (a)   joining the scheme (as opposed to buying the strata unit); or
                              (b)   during the scheme—except for amounts covering fees and
                                    expenses for up to three months to acquire furniture, fittings and
                                    equipment, or to be held in a fund for the repair and
                                    refurbishment of furniture, fittings and equipment for their strata
                                    unit.

                              Cash held on trust

               RG 140.93      An operator that manages the letting or licensing of strata units must
                              ensure that:
                              (a)   any part of the property of the scheme that is cash is promptly
                                    deposited with an Australian ADI on trust for investors in a trust
                                    account; and
                              (b)   the account is subject to audit—as to whether the money has been
                                    dealt with in accordance with the terms of the trust—by a
                                    registered company auditor at least annually.

                              Withdrawal rights

               RG 140.94      Each owner of a strata unit and the operator who manages the letting
                              or licensing of the strata units (i.e. the person who grants leases or
                              licences to visitors of the serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort
                              complex) must be able to withdraw from the scheme on no more than
                              90 days’ notice.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                   Page 29
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.95      When an owner withdraws, the withdrawal can be made subject to any
                              rights to occupy a strata unit that a person, other than the operator or
                              its associate, was given before the owner gave notice that they were
                              withdrawing from the scheme. When an owner withdraws they must
                              not be restricted from appointing another person to manage their unit.

               RG 140.96      These requirements are to restrict relief to cases where the investor’s
                              reliance on the operator is likely to be limited.

                              Restrictions on alternate use

               RG 140.97      To ensure that there is only limited reliance by the investor on the
                              performance of the operator, it must be commercially practicable for
                              the investor to use their strata unit if they withdraw. To demonstrate
                              this, a condition of our relief is that either:
                              (a)   there must be no restrictions on the use of any of the strata units
                                    as a residence (e.g. imposed by the local authority under zoning
                                    restrictions or a development approval) that might affect an
                                    owner’s participation in the scheme; or
                              (b)   ASIC has been provided with a written statement from an
                                    independent real estate agent that, in relation to each strata unit to
                                    which the scheme relates, the agent would:
                                    (i)    be willing and able to offer the unit for letting at a reasonable
                                           rate having regard to the value of the unit; and
                                    (ii)   expect that there would be a reasonable degree of occupancy
                                           of the unit at that rate.

               RG 140.98      An independent real estate agent is a person licensed under state or
                              territory law to lease real property who is not the operator or an
                              associate of the operator.

               RG 140.99      To ensure that the scheme operates consistently with the premise that
                              participation is voluntary and there is limited reliance by investors on
                              the operator, there must be no obligation for owners of strata units to
                              agree to join on the same or similar terms.

                              Rental guarantees by operators

               RG 140.100     Our relief for management rights schemes does not apply if the
                              operator who manages the letting of the units, either directly or
                              indirectly, offers rental guarantees to owners that could apply after
                              they are no longer the operator. This is because there should only be
                              limited reliance by an owner on an operator and this is ensured by the
                              ability of the operator to withdraw at short notice. This underlying
                              principle would be undermined if operators were to provide rental



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 30
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              guarantees that they have to honour even after they stop managing the
                              scheme. The following example illustrates an indirect relationship.

                                Example of an indirect relationship

                                A developer undertakes to make any necessary payments to investors in
                                the management rights scheme to cover any shortfall in rent reaching a
                                specified amount.

                                The letting agent indemnifies the developer for any amounts that a
                                developer had to pay to meet this obligation.

               RG 140.101     This means that our relief for management rights schemes will not
                              apply if:
                              (a)   the operator who manages the letting of the strata units is
                                    obligated, either directly or indirectly (e.g. by indemnifying
                                    another person who provides a guarantee), to make payments in
                                    relation to the use of the strata units (e.g. provide a guaranteed
                                    level of rental payment to owners); and
                              (b)   this rental guarantee is required to be fulfilled by the operator
                                    even after the operator ceases to operate the scheme because the
                                    operator has exercised their power to terminate their obligations.

                              Furniture, fittings and equipment

               RG 140.102     We recognise that having standard furniture, fittings and equipment in
                              strata units participating in a management rights scheme might be
                              commercially appropriate and advantageous to both owners and
                              operators. Our relief allows operators to require upfront payments for
                              furniture, fittings or equipment for an owner’s strata unit as a
                              condition of participating in a scheme set out in the agreement with
                              the operator as long as the purchased items become the property of the
                              owner. Our relief also allows the operator to require payment to
                              indemnify themselves for the expected expenses in acquiring these
                              items over the following three months at any time if they are buying
                              items on behalf of owners.

               RG 140.103     We consider that it is appropriate to permit the agreement between an
                              owner and the operator to allow the operator to require payments into
                              a furniture, fittings and equipment fund (FFE fund) by withholding
                              payments from amounts due to owners as rental income to allow for
                              the accumulation of owner’s money for the repair or replacement of
                              the owner’s furniture, fittings and equipment within a certain limit.
                              This applies only if the money is not pooled and is held in trust for
                              each owner, to be returned if the owner withdraws from the scheme or
                              the scheme ends before the money is expended on the owner’s
                              furniture, fittings and equipment.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 31
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.104     Under our relief, operators can only withhold money for furniture,
                              fittings and equipment from money they hold as net rent. The limit on
                              the amount an operator can require a member to pay into an FFE fund
                              is 3% of the annual gross scheme revenue attributable to the member,
                              up to a limit of $10,000 per strata unit. An owner can make payments
                              of an amount exceeding this limit if the operator agrees to accept such
                              payments where, for example, the owner wishes to save for extensive
                              refurbishments of their strata unit.

               RG 140.105     The FFE fund and other property held in relation to the scheme that is
                              cash must be deposited in an Australian ADI on trust for investors, in a
                              trust account, and must be audited by a registered company auditor at
                              least annually.

                              Periodic reporting

               RG 140.106     Generally, operators of schemes that rely on relief from the
                              requirement to register a scheme with ASIC must comply with the
                              periodic reporting requirement in s1017D: see Regulatory Guide 169
                              Disclosure: Discretionary powers (RG 169) at RG 169.24. This is an
                              important consumer protection requirement and generally reflects
                              good commercial practice for managed investments.

               RG 140.107     However, state or territory legislation already requires some form of
                              periodic reporting to owners by operators who manage the letting of
                              strata units. For this reason, we have imposed a limited requirement
                              for periodic reporting, which provides sufficient flexibility for
                              operators who manage the letting of strata units and avoids regulatory
                              duplication.

               RG 140.108     Under our relief for management rights schemes, a periodic statement
                              must be given as soon as practicable, and at least within six months
                              after the end of a reporting period, by the operator who manages the
                              letting of the strata units to the owner of each strata unit detailing any
                              transactions affecting the owner’s entitlement in the scheme during
                              that period. A periodic statement might include:
                              (a)   rental receipts for the owner’s strata unit;
                              (b)   letting agent’s fees; and
                              (c)   FFE fund transactions.
               RG 140.109     As a matter of good practice, it might help an owner understand their
                              investment better if the following information is also provided:
                              (a)   the number of owners participating in the management rights
                                    scheme;




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 32
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              (b)   the collective average achieved rentals and average achieved
                                    occupancy; and
                              (c)   information about the allocation of visitors to strata units.

                              Transferring rights and property to a new operator

               RG 140.110     It is appropriate that members of a management rights scheme have
                              the right to decide to replace the operator who manages the letting of
                              strata units. This right reflects a key aspect of the managed investment
                              provisions that allows members of a registered managed investment
                              scheme, by a majority, to replace the operator of the scheme: see
                              s601FM.

               RG 140.111     We have maintained this right by requiring the operator to agree to
                              transfer any rights and property they use for operating the
                              management rights scheme to the new operator if owners collectively
                              decide to replace the operator who manages the letting of strata units.

               RG 140.112     We consider that the right of owners in a management rights scheme
                              to collectively, by majority, replace the operator of the scheme cannot
                              be substituted by:
                              (a)   any rights that the body corporate of a strata property has under
                                    state or territory legislation to remove an operator of a
                                    management rights scheme in circumstances of misconduct; or
                              (b)   the rights of each owner in a management rights scheme to
                                    terminate their arrangement with the operator.

               RG 140.113     To limit how affected they would be by any forced transfer, operators
                              who manage the letting of the strata units could negotiate so that any
                              property rights they use to operate the scheme are by leasehold or
                              under licence rather than freehold.

                              Dispute resolution

               RG 140.114     Under the Corporations Act, there is a minimum requirement for
                              internal complaints and external dispute resolution processes to
                              protect retail clients acquiring financial products: see s1017G.

               RG 140.115     We have not given relief from this requirement for management rights
                              schemes because the required dispute resolution processes are an
                              appropriate means to ensure that retail clients can have disputes about
                              the financial product they acquire resolved. In particular, this includes
                              disputes about the PDS or other representations that might induce a
                              person to become a member of a management rights scheme.
                                    Note: For a discussion of the internal and external dispute resolution requirements, see
                                    Regulatory Guide 165 Licensing: Internal and external dispute resolution (RG 165).



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                        Page 33
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              Breach reporting
               RG 140.116     Failure to comply with certain conditions of our relief for management
                              rights schemes will not automatically exclude relief as long as the
                              breach is reported to us in writing promptly (within 15 business days)
                              when the person relying on the relief becomes aware they are in
                              breach. We may exercise our power to exclude a person from relief
                              after receiving such a report. This will depend on the circumstances.
               RG 140.117     You can lodge a written breach report:
                              (a)   at any ASIC office (but preferably the office in the state or
                                    territory where you live—see www.asic.gov.au/asicoffices)
                                    addressed to ‘Stakeholder Services, Misconduct and Breach
                                    Reporting’; or
                              (b)   by email to fsr.breach.reporting@asic.gov.au.


Relief where all strata units are sold for at least $500,000
               RG 140.118     In some strata schemes, all interests are offered to investors who
                              already have or, if they take up the offer, will have strata units for
                              which they have paid or will pay at least $500,000 (taking into
                              account any real property or furniture, fittings and equipment acquired
                              or purchased with the investment-based financial product costs).
               RG 140.119     Under ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes)
                              Instrument 2016/869, these investors are conferred the status of
                              wholesale clients for the purpose of Pts 7.6 (except Divs 4 and 8), 7.7,
                              7.8 and 7.9 of the Corporations Act. This applies to investors if they
                              would be wholesale clients under reg 7.1.18 of the Corporations
                              Regulations if the price paid to invest in the scheme included the value
                              of any real property or furniture, fittings and equipment acquired or
                              purchased with the investment-based financial product. This applies
                              when the total of the price and these amounts is at least $500,000.
               RG 140.120     We treat these investors as if they were wholesale clients to the extent
                              that the operators of such schemes are given managed investment,
                              product disclosure and hawking provision relief so that requirements
                              do not apply if they would not apply if these investors are wholesale
                              clients, consistent with s761G(7)(a) of the Corporations Act and reg
                              7.1.18(2) of the Corporations Regulations.
               RG 140.121     Our relief also applies to a later purchaser of real estate if an earlier
                              purchaser of that real estate, either from the operator, developer or
                              promoter or their associates, paid at least $500,000 for the real
                              property or furniture, fittings and equipment acquired or purchased
                              with the investment-based financial product acquired or purchased
                              with it.


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 34
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




               RG 140.122     Affected clients will not be treated as ‘retail clients’ for the purpose of
                              requirements that apply to retail clients in relation to the terms of
                              authorisation in an AFS licence, requirements for a dispute resolution
                              system complying with s912A(2), having compensation arrangements
                              complying with 912B or providing an FSG required by Pt 7.7.

               RG 140.123     As they will not be treated as retail clients, it is not necessary to
                              provide investors with a PDS required under Pt 7.9 and the offer of an
                              interest in the scheme will not give rise to the requirement to register
                              the scheme.

               RG 140.124     If there is any change in the amount of investment required to qualify as
                              a wholesale client in reg 7.1.18, the changed amount will also apply for
                              the purpose of offers and issues of interests in those strata schemes
                              affected by ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes)
                              Instrument 2016/869.


Relief for closed schemes and well-advanced schemes
               RG 140.125     In ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes)
                              Instrument 2016/869, we have given relief in certain circumstances to:
                              (a)   closed schemes—that is, strata schemes where all the strata units
                                    in the scheme were sold, and no primary offers to join the scheme
                                    were made, after 6 October 1998 (see RG 140.128–RG 140.131);
                                    and
                              (b)   well-advanced schemes—that is, strata schemes established
                                    before 6 October 1998 that we have accepted were quite advanced
                                    when we issued our initial policy on strata schemes in 1998 (see
                                    RG 140.132–RG 140.133).

               RG 140.126     Our relief applies only to those strata schemes that had never been
                              registered as managed investment schemes or did not have an
                              approved deed under the Corporations Law that applied before 1 July
                              1998 (non-complying schemes).

               RG 140.127     We have taken a special approach to regulating these schemes due to
                              the uncertainty about how the earlier Corporations Law applied to
                              arrangements involving units under strata, community or similar title
                              before we issued our policy on strata schemes on 6 October 1998.

               RG 140.128     We consider that requiring operators of closed schemes and well-
                              advanced strata schemes to comply with the Corporations Act would
                              be disproportionately burdensome and likely to disadvantage
                              investors.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 35
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              Closed schemes

               RG 140.129     We have given operators of closed, non-complying, strata schemes
                              conditional relief from the managed investment, AFS licensing (for
                              advice and dealing only), product disclosure and hawking provisions.
                              Our relief applies only to strata schemes that involve units under
                              strata, community and similar title.
               RG 140.130     For closed schemes, relief is conditional on there being only limited
                              new issues (i.e. no more than 20 new members can join the scheme in
                              any 12 months) made after 6 October 1998 subject to certain
                              exclusions for issues that do not require a PDS. All offers made after 6
                              October 1998 within the 20 new member limit must not be primary
                              offers in the sense that they must relate to strata units in the relevant
                              complex that have been sold by 6 October 1998. At that date, the
                              relevant strata units must not have been held by:
                              (a)   the promoter or its associates; or
                              (b)   the operator and its associates.

               RG 140.131     The offer of an interest in the scheme may be made to:
                              (a)   a person who already owns a strata unit but is not a member of the
                                    scheme; or
                              (b)   a person who is newly offered a strata unit for sale who might
                                    wish to participate in the scheme.

                              Well-advanced schemes

               RG 140.132     We have given certain operators of certain well-advanced, non-
                              complying, strata schemes conditional relief from the managed
                              investment, AFS licensing (for advice and dealing only), hawking and
                              some product disclosure provisions. The relief applies when ASIC
                              had, before 2016, granted individual relief on the basis of Pro Forma
                              186 Well advanced schemes (PF 186).

               RG 140.133     Our relief allows for new offers of interests in these schemes to be
                              made provided that no more than 20 new members join the scheme in
                              any 12 months after 31 December 2000, excluding offers that do not
                              require product disclosure to be given under s1012B (e.g. offers to
                              wholesale clients). The scheme must be limited to strata units not held
                              on 31 December 2000 by someone who was a promoter or developer.

               RG 140.134     We provided the relief on the basis that certain information was
                              provided relating to the construction stage of the strata units, the
                              anticipated sales after December 2000, and the provision of marketing
                              and disclosure material available to investors and disclosure: see PF
                              186.



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 36
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Relief from the obligation to value scheme property
               RG 140.135     We have given relief in ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and
                              Like Schemes) Instrument 2016/869 so that the responsible entity of a
                              strata scheme only has to value an item of property when they have
                              reasonable grounds to believe that a valuation of that item is in the
                              best interests of members or is needed to be fair to all members. This
                              relief applies only if, under the terms of the scheme, there is no
                              obligation to pay members an amount related to the value of scheme
                              property when they leave the scheme.
               RG 140.136     We consider that it might be unreasonably burdensome for the
                              responsible entity of a strata scheme to regularly revalue scheme
                              property. Valuations are appropriate in certain circumstances (e.g. to
                              give relevant information for accounts, for calculating investors’
                              voting or withdrawal rights, for the consideration to acquire interests,
                              or for the proper management of scheme property).


Relief for arrangements that incidentally involve a scheme
               RG 140.137     Some arrangements might fall into the definition of a managed
                              investment scheme merely because they offer incidental rights of
                              personal consumption or use (e.g. rights to occupy hotel rooms at
                              discounted rates). We consider that, unless such benefits are a
                              significant part of the value of the arrangement to the investor,
                              regulation under the managed investment, AFS licensing, product
                              disclosure and hawking provisions would not be an appropriate means
                              of protection.

               RG 140.138     Such incidental benefits to a strata scheme may be an interest in a
                              time-sharing scheme as defined in s9. As such, we will exempt such
                              schemes from the managed investment, product disclosure, AFS
                              licensing and hawking provisions on a case-by-case basis.


Other relief that may be available

                              Relief under other ASIC instruments
               RG 140.139     In addition to the relief we have given to strata schemes in ASIC
                              Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes) Instrument
                              2016/869, other ASIC instrument relief may also be available—for
                              example:
                              (a)   for managed investment schemes where the interests are not for
                                    money (see Regulatory Guide 80 Managed investments: Interests
                                    not for money (RG 80)); and


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 37
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              (b)   for time-sharing schemes (see Regulatory Guide 160 Time-
                                    sharing schemes (RG 160)).
                                    Note: If you are eligible for relief under an ASIC instrument, you do not need to apply
                                    for relief.


                              Relief available to individuals (on application)

               RG 140.140     If you unable to rely on the relief available under an ASIC instrument,
                              you can apply for individual or case-by-case relief. To submit a relief
                              application, you should:
                              (a)   lodge an electronic copy to applications@asic.gov.au or a hard
                                    copy of the document to an ASIC office in your state or territory;
                              (b)   include the prescribed fee(s); and
                              (c)   ensure that your application addresses the criteria in Regulatory
                                    Guide 51 Applications for relief (RG 51) and this guide.

               RG 140.141     You can also call 1300 300 630 for information and assistance.




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                       Page 38
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Appendix: Information in a PDS for a management
rights scheme

               RG 140.142     The PDS for a management rights scheme must contain certain
                              information under s1013D and 1013E. The following information is
                              provided as a guide to some of the disclosures that may be
                              appropriate.

                                Information in a PDS for a management rights scheme

                                What is being offered?
                                • How would an owner’s property rights be affected if they hold an interest
                                  in the management rights scheme (scheme)?
                                • What key rights will an owner have on how their strata unit is used by
                                  the letting agent?
                                • What sort of serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex is being
                                  operated under the scheme? How will it be operated?
                                • What are the key terms of any lease, licence or rights that an owner
                                  confers on the letting agent and any person engaged by the letting
                                  agent to operate the scheme?
                                • The letting agent or any person they propose to engage to operate the
                                  scheme may own or have rights to property that is used to facilitate the
                                  scheme. What rights do they have? How would their rights adversely
                                  affect:
                                    – how the scheme would be operated by a new letting agent if the
                                      letting agent changed; or
                                    – the amount an owner is likely to receive for use of their unit if the
                                      letting agent’s property or rights to property ceased to be available
                                      (for whatever reason)?

                                What are the risks and returns?
                                • How, in general terms, will the serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort
                                  complex generate returns for owners?
                                • When and how are these returns to be calculated and made available to
                                  owners? For example, does the letting agent aim to achieve a particular
                                  return? Can owners expect any particular return? Are returns from the
                                  scheme uncertain?
                                • Returns from the scheme might vary from what is aimed for or expected,
                                  or may be uncertain for some reason. In this case, what are the main
                                  factors that will affect the return? If occupancy rates will affect the rate
                                  of return, what are the main factors that will affect occupancy rates?
                                • Do owners have a potential liability to pay money to the scheme in any
                                  circumstances? If so, what are these liabilities and what main factors
                                  will affect the amount of these liabilities? For example, how will any
                                  repairs, refurbishment or replacement of any part of the serviced




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 39
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                                    apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex and its furniture and fittings be
                                    paid for?
                                • Is there a suggested minimum period of time that an owner should
                                  remain in the scheme? If so, why is that period of time suggested?
                                  What are the qualifications (if any) on that suggested period?

                                What are the fees, charges, expenses and taxes?
                                • This information must comply with Sch 10 to the Corporations
                                  Regulations.

                                Who is operating the scheme?
                                • For each person engaged to take a material part in the operation of the
                                  serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex, who is that person
                                  and what credentials does that person need to perform their role?
                                • What are the custodial arrangements for holding the money of the
                                  scheme? This includes money for distribution to owners, for repairs and
                                  refurbishment in a furniture, fittings and equipment (FFE) fund, and to
                                  meet expenses of the scheme.

                                How can membership in the scheme be withdrawn or transferred?
                                • When and how can an owner withdraw from the scheme?
                                • Can the owner’s membership in the scheme be transferred? If so, in
                                  what circumstances? What legal requirements apply?
                                • How is money in any FFE fund for repairs and refurbishment returned if
                                  an owner withdraws from the scheme?

                                What other information is available?
                                • How can the letting agent or developer (if relevant) be contacted?
                                • Is there any particular information available to a prospective or existing
                                  owner if they ask the letting agent or promoter? If so, how can that
                                  information be obtained?
                                • When and how does the letting agent report to an owner on the
                                  operation of the scheme, including the scheme’s performance (e.g. in
                                  periodic statements)?
                                • What are the details of any dispute resolution processes the responsible
                                  entity has in place, including the contact details of the external dispute
                                  resolution scheme of which the responsible entity is a member?




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 40
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Key terms

                                 Term                       Meaning in this document

                                 AFS licence                An Australian financial services licence under s913B of
                                                            the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries
                                                            on a financial services business to provide financial
                                                            services
                                                                 Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                                 AFS licensee               A person who holds an AFS licence under s913B of the
                                                            Corporations Act
                                                                 Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                                 AFS licensing              The provisions set out in Pt 7.6 of the Corporations Act
                                 provisions                 and related regulations

                                 ASIC                       Australian Securities and Investments Commission

                                 ASIC Act                   Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
                                                            2001

                                 authorised                 A person authorised by an AFS licensee, in accordance
                                 representative             with s916A or 916B of the Corporations Act, to provide a
                                                            financial service or services on behalf of the licensee
                                                                 Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                                 best interests duty        The duty to act in the best interests of the client when
                                                            giving personal advice to a client as set out in s961B(1) of
                                                            the Corporations Act

                                 best interests duty        The obligations in Div 2 of Pt 7.7A of the Corporations Act
                                 and related
                                 obligations

                                 Ch 5C (for example)        A chapter of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                            numbered 5C)

                                 closed scheme              A serviced strata scheme where no further primary offers
                                                            (including offers to which s1012C applies) are to be
                                                            made, or were made after 6 October 1998, of interests in
                                                            the scheme, except for:
                                                             offers that did not require disclosure under the
                                                              Corporations Act; or
                                                             exempted offers and offers of interests in schemes as
                                                              described in RG 140.131

                                 Corporations Act           Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the
                                                            purposes of that Act

                                 developer                  A person who arranges for the building of a serviced
                                                            apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex, and for the
                                                            sale of the built complex or units in the complex




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                     Page 41
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                                 Term                       Meaning in this document

                                 Div 8 (for example)        A division of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                            numbered 8)

                                 FFE fund                   Money held for owners for the repair and refurbishment of
                                                            furniture, fittings and equipment

                                 financial product          A facility through which, or through the acquisition of
                                                            which, a person does one or more of the following:
                                                             makes a financial investment (see s763B);
                                                             manages financial risk (see s763C);
                                                             makes non-cash payments (see s763D)
                                                                  Note: This is a definition contained in s763A of the
                                                                  Corporations Act: see also s763B–765A.

                                 financial product          A recommendation or a statement of opinion, or a report
                                 advice                     of either of these things, that:
                                                             is intended to influence a person or persons in making
                                                              a decision about a particular financial product or class
                                                              of financial product, or an interest in a particular
                                                              financial product or class of financial product; or
                                                             could reasonably be regarded as being intended to
                                                              have such an influence.

                                                            This does not include anything in an exempt document
                                                                  Note: This is a definition contained in s766B of the
                                                                  Corporations Act.

                                 Financial Services         A document required by s941A or 941B to be given in
                                 Guide (FSG)                accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                                  Note: This is a definition contained in s761A.

                                 general advice             Financial product advice that is not personal advice
                                                                  Note: This is a definition contained in s766B(4) of the
                                                                  Corporations Act.

                                 hawking provisions         The provisions set out in Div 8 of Pt 7.8 of the
                                                            Corporations Act and related regulations

                                 investor                   A retail client

                                 letting agent              An operator who grants leases or licences to visitors to a
                                                            serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex

                                 managed investment         The provisions set out in Ch 5C of the Corporations Act
                                 provisions                 and related regulations

                                 managed investment         A scheme that is a managed investment scheme as
                                 scheme                     defined in s9 of the Corporations Act

                                 management rights          A strata scheme (i.e. a managed investment scheme) that
                                 scheme                     involves holiday letting arrangements for strata units




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                            Page 42
                                                 REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                                 Term                       Meaning in this document

                                 operator                   A person responsible for operating a serviced strata
                                                            arrangement, including:
                                                             the promoter of the arrangement who promotes or
                                                              markets interests in the arrangement;
                                                             the manager of the serviced apartment, hotel, motel or
                                                              resort complex; and
                                                             the on-site letting agent of a management rights
                                                              scheme

                                 personal advice            Financial product advice given or directed to a person
                                                            (including by electronic means) in circumstances where:
                                                             the person giving the advice has considered one or more
                                                              of the client’s objectives, financial situation and needs; or
                                                             a reasonable person might expect the person giving the
                                                              advice to have considered one or more of these
                                                              matters
                                                                 Note: This is a definition contained in s766B(3) of the
                                                                 Corporations Act.

                                 product disclosure         The provisions set out in Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                 provisions                 and related regulations

                                 Product Disclosure         A document that must be given to a client in relation to
                                 Statement (PDS)            the offer or issue of a financial product in accordance with
                                                            Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the Corporations Act
                                                                 Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                                 promoter                   A person who authorises, causes or allows the promoting
                                                            and marketing of a serviced strata arrangement

                                 Pt 7.9 (for example)       A part of the Corporations Act (in this example numbered
                                                            7.9)

                                 reg 7.1.33H (for           A regulation of the Corporations Regulations (in this
                                 example)                   example numbered 7.1.33H)

                                 registered scheme          A managed investment scheme (whether a strata scheme
                                                            or other scheme) that is registered under Ch 5C of the
                                                            Corporations Act

                                 retail client              A retail client as defined in s761G of the Corporations Act
                                                            and Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of Ch 7 of the Corporations
                                                            Regulations

                                 s601ED (for example)       A section of the Corporations Act (in this example
                                                            numbered 601ED)

                                 serviced strata            An arrangement that involves owners of strata units
                                 arrangement                making their units available to a person for use as part of
                                                            a serviced apartment, hotel, motel or resort complex

                                 strata scheme              A serviced strata arrangement that is a managed
                                                            investment scheme under the Corporations Act




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                        Page 43
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                                 Term                       Meaning in this document

                                 strata unit                A strata title unit, community title interest, or other interest
                                                            in real property (including freehold or leasehold interests)

                                 Statement of Advice        A document that must be given to a client for the
                                 (SOA)                      provision of personal advice under Subdivs C and D of
                                                            Div 3 of Pt 7.7 of the Corporations Act
                                                                 Note: See s761A for the exact definition.

                                 well-advanced              A strata scheme established before 6 October 1998 that
                                 scheme                     we have accepted was quite advanced when we issued
                                                            our initial policy on strata schemes in 1998




© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                                      Page 44
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




Related information

                              Headnotes

                              AFS licence, AFS licensee, Australian financial services licence,
                              common enterprise, community title interest, exemption, hotel, letting
                              arrangements, managed investment scheme, management rights
                              scheme, motel, property rental scheme, real estate agent, resort, retail
                              client, sale of interests, scheme property, serviced apartment, serviced
                              strata arrangement, strata scheme, strata title unit, strata unit, valuation

                              Legislative instruments and pro formas

                              ASIC Corporations (Property Rental Schemes) Instrument 2016/870

                              ASIC Corporations (Serviced Apartment and Like Schemes)
                              Instrument 2016/869

                              [CO 02/245] Closed schemes

                              [CO 02/303] Management rights schemes—amendment

                              [CO 02/304] Management rights schemes

                              PF 186 Well advanced schemes

                              Regulatory guides

                              RG 1 Applying for and varying an AFS licence

                              RG 36 Licensing: Financial product advice and dealing

                              RG 38 The hawking provisions

                              RG 51 Applications for relief

                              RG 78 Breach reporting by AFS licensees

                              RG 80 Managed investment schemes: Interests not for money

                              RG 98 Licensing: Administrative action against financial services
                              providers

                              RG 104 Licensing: Meeting the general obligations

                              RG 105 Licensing: Organisational competence

                              RG 126 Compensation and insurance arrangements for AFS licensee

                              RG 132 Managed investments: Compliance plans


© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 45
                                               REGULATORY GUIDE 140: Strata schemes and management rights schemes




                              RG 133 Managed investments and custodial or depository services:
                              Holding assets
                              RG 134 Managed investments: Constitutions
                              RG 136 Managed investments: Discretionary powers and closely
                              related schemes
                              RG 160 Time-sharing schemes
                              RG 165 Licensing: Internal and external dispute resolution
                              RG 166 Licensing: Financial requirements
                              RG 167 Licensing: Discretionary powers
                              RG 168 Disclosure: Product Disclosure Statements (and other
                              disclosure obligations)
                              RG 169 Disclosure: Discretionary powers
                              RG 175 Licensing: Financial product advisers—conduct and
                              disclosure
                              RG 181 Licensing: Managing conflicts of interest
                              RG 244 Giving information, general advice and scaled advice
                              RG 246 Conflicted remuneration

                              Legislation
                              Corporations Act, Chs 5C and 7, Pts 7.6, 7.7, 7.8 and 7.9, s9,
                              601ED(1), 601ED(2), 601ED(3), 601FC(1)(j), 601FM, 601HA(1)(c),
                              761G, 765A, 766B, 761E, 912A, 912B, 941A, 941B, 941C, 946A,
                              949A, 961B, 1012B, 1012D, 1013A, 1013D, 1013E, 1017A, 1017B,
                              1017D, 1017F, 1017G, 1018A
                              Corporations Regulations, regs 7.1.18, 7.1.33H, 7.9.15DA
                              ASIC Act, s12DA

                              Consultation papers
                              CP 81 Management rights schemes
                              CP 250 Remaking ASIC class orders on property, strata and
                              management rights schemes

                              Media releases
                              16-330MR ASIC remakes class orders relating to property, strata and
                              management rights schemes (29 September 2016)



© Australian Securities and Investments Commission April 2017                                            Page 46
